Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Then apply the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, son, be aware that you are being given the first aid to the patient's legs.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	And if the surgeon has done something else to the patient's body, it is in the ancient texts that they call gout.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	The intestine or other affected areas should be treated with a cushion.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	Then you will know the differences between the knowledge of the body's anatomy and its humors.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	The text refers to a medical procedure involving placing a cushion under the patient's foot.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	One may say that he who knows not his knowledge on anatomy will be useless in surgery, for which one must use it.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	The doctor called it a plague sore on their legs, and a painful ailment.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And so the man's intestines were cauterized, causing him to die on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I knew by the size of the pain that he had gout.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	Here's the translated text:
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And if you wish to reduce the intestine or hernia, it is done by placing a cushion under them, and another cushion on their thighs, and another on their chest.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	E a cushion under them, et autre they have already called for help.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	Mays it is first necessary to make a cautery, but if it is necessary to cure the patient's pain, you should consult a doctor.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And then you will open the abscesses for the other doctors.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	And if the ailment affects a person's health, it is called gout.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And so it is necessary to be cauterized, son, for two reasons.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And then you must apply the hot iron to the body part, and another hand on the affected area, to be sure that the patient’s humors are properly cauterized.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And thus, armed with these tools, the patient shall be healed.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And may your weapons be used on the worst diseases, but leave the rest for the glory of the Lord God, and let them remain in your name, and may your hands be left alone to protect the body from the pain of the soul.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	When pain persists, they say in the old days that physicians used to call it by a more complex name.
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Let no physician be ashamed to admit they don't know all about it.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	This book is divided into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	This is the beginning of the first part of the book.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	This first chapter is about the nature of the ailment itself, and the tools used for its treatment.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	This is the second part of the division.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter describes the use of cauterization to treat ailments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	E si la carne estrapola el malaute del pietz, apply cushions on their legs to protect them from injury.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter deals with the treatment of a twisted ankle or foot injuries, and the forms of the instruments used; and how the third chapter is organized.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	The surgeon cauterized the wound, and the patient experienced pain in the area.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At that point, the doctor began to treat him for gout.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	The patient's condition refers to a state of health, and if they are experiencing pain in the legs, the first guessed translation is incorrect.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	And so I say that gout is caused by humors that are cold and have been misidentified by many doctors as a sickness only in the feet.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And if you want to cauterize as a treatment, apply heat to the whole body except the patient's legs.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	This text is about treating various ailments on their feet using a hot cautery tool.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	Therefore, use heat to treat hot diseases, and apply cautery to their legs, applying it to the rest of the body.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And that's why I put my hand on his leg when he was suffering from the pain of gout.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Then apply to the body, as if for gout, you must use a cushion.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	The translation is:  Let's translate the rest of the text.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And so on, put your hand upon the patient's legs to prevent further pain.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May the medicine then be applied to the patient's leg, which was inflamed by fire.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	And if you have a pointed tool, and the patient's condition is good for the surgery, the doctor should be able to tell what the illness is from its severity, or how well the body will respond.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	Therefore, you should know that gout is a disease that affects the joints during the season when it's customary to do so.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And if there is an experienced practitioner using a cautery for good purposes, such as healing, there is no need to worry about the time being wasted.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And if it is necessary to burn the affected area, apply heat to the area.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	When the doctor is right in front of you, he will apply the hot cautery to the inflamed areas, and another place on the body where the heat can be applied.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Mays the patient be treated with respect to their illness, and that their legs and arms be tended to during treatment.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the illness will return in the future.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	E, in case of drye, a hot poultice is used to draw out the heat from the body, and another tool can be used to reduce swelling with a warm cautery, and cold with another.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	This is an example of the text from the original sources referring to the use of "cupping" therapy, which involves applying heated cups to the skin to create suction and draw out blood.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And if it is necessary to cauterize something from here, then apply a cautery to the area.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	E si per lo ja es to make an incision in the body, that is,  to put something into the patient's body, for gold is a thing noble and pure.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And so that the patient's bowels are healed, and they are ready to receive something (inferred from the context of the text).
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Then apply the cautery to your feet, but lightly.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And if it is necessary to open the bowels, I have ordered the patient to be treated with a cauteri.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	De cushion of the head for the patient will stop the pain from spreading.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	And so if you are treating a patient for a condition caused by cold or dampness, it is important to keep the body warm.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	And you are to apply medicine for the relief of pain, as needed depending on the severity of the pain and the patient’s age.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	E aprop places the patient's feet in the cavity, and put them on their knees.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then apply cautery to the area between the patient's eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But you must also know that the original meaning is likely lost in translation.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And so, you are to apply heat to the affected area so that the bowels do not become constricted, as is customary for treating the disease.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	E so you have a pain in your foot, e si tu es already using the cushion to protect your legs from injury, then you should be careful not to injure them while using the tool.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And apply a cushion to their legs for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place your hand on the patient's foot to keep them calm while you cauterize their abdomen.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the medicine to the patient's location, for it is a suitable remedy.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	Then they said that when the plague is in the limbs, it is better to have a cushion.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they should apply a cushion to the area of their pain, and place another under the patient's legs.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then put a cushion under them, and thus they are cured.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that it is other things than the foot that causes the pain in the feet, which is caused by a hot iron.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they say that you should treat it with a cautery.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if they are suffering from the plague for a long time, it is customary to call them healed when the plague has passed.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	May's a good thing to use if you have seen that they are suffering from an excess of cold humors in their body, but it's important to remember that it can be caused by many things, including blood flow issues.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the most important thing is to save the first servant from that condition.
Capitol segon.	Chapter two.
Del cauteri del cap.	Then apply the other treatment (a poultice or salve) to their legs, etc.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When there are poultices on the body, it is from those causes that the patient suffers.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then apply heat to the head where the pain is located.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the body part and apply heat to the affected area, which is called a "gout" in the medical field.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And if you have a pain in your chest, you are suffering from a different kind of pain than others caused by cushions.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And if you want to make a mark on the head or the body, it is customary to use a less severe cautery for the body than for the skull.
Capitol ters.	The third chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	And on the treatment of the migraine.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	Then apply cautery to the legs, using other medications.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	When your hands are cold, put a cushion under them and keep them covered.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then apply a cautery to the area that causes pain in the legs only if a physician deems it necessary.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then place three or four times a day the required materials on their legs.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And thus you have treated the patient's legs, they will be cured by that same ointment.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	Then they will use a cautery on their legs, which are other things that may be burned.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Gout is when you burn your body with hot metrical humors.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	Translation: And if there's a pain in the legs, it's called gout.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And so you apply a cushion to the pain in the legs and feet.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the patient has a fever or pain in the legs, it is often said that they have a cushion placed under them.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then you have already placed a cushion on their legs and another on their feet, and the patient's body should be allowed to rest.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, a hot cautery should be used for that purpose, as in the case of gout in the foot, it is necessary to apply the heat directly to the affected area.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	This refers to the treatment of gout.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When gout arises from an imbalance of the body's humors, then use a cautery to treat the patient's pain.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	Empero, you must stop the pain in the patient's feet by using a heated tool to treat it, as well as those other pains that are caused by the same thing.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	E layssa la persona be in the beginning of the surgery.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And then, apply cautery to their legs, and they will be treated according to the practices in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that the patient's body is cold and weak, and the body has been affected by the plague, then apply a cushion to their chest, and do not let them go out.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you have already decided on the use of cauteri, then place your hand on their legs and one must be placed under them.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	This is a treatment for gout, which is what doctors call it.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the foot there is pain from the knee to the toes, the patient should be treated by a surgeon.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	When there is a cushion placed in the area between the legs, it's called a cushion, and when there is a cushion placed on the feet, it's "round" or "rheumatism".
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	The doctor will be careful to apply cauteries gradually so as to avoid pain.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	Then apply cauterization to the affected area on the legs or feet, as needed, to cure them.
Capitol .vi.	Another important point to note is that the patient's legs should be kept warm.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	A hot iron or other tools used for cauterization are applied to the area of the body where the pain is felt.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	And it is cured by cauterization on the legs, as we have said in the treatment of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	This is the first line of the treatise translated into English.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you use the word "jerau" to describe a person's condition, they are referring to their health.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And if the pain is on their limbs, they should know that relief comes only when the body is healed.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	Then you will cauterize the foot of the patient, placing a cushion underneath to apply the heat.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	The form of the treatment, which is to be used in this way, is called a cauterization.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But the body may also have some pain; use a little less force when applying cauterization.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to treat the ailment of the cavity within the thighs, and another person has placed their hand on the patient's legs and a cushion over them.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	This is the ancient method of treating gout.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	And so if apoplexia is an old ailment, apply a cautery to the leg of the patient; he will be cured in the way we have said.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of using a cautery is done as previously described.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And put your hand on their thighs, to prevent them from being afflicted by the pain.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	And just as you would cauterize an inflammation caused by a hot humor, so too will you cauterize a wound caused by a cold.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	The patient's legs must be supported by pillows or cushions.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And if it is necessary to treat the head, one should apply a poultice as described in this treatise.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Then place cushions on them, which they are to be used for cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And so the patient's body is treated accordingly.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	Then place hot iron on the affected area to apply cautery.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Then, if the patient's finger is healed, you apply a bandage.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	Mays: If the pain is in the legs, the pain is called sciatica if it is below the knee.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And if it is necessary to cure the ailment, then cure it carefully.
Capitol .ix.	This person has a condition similar to gout.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	And from cauterization to reduce pain throughout the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	and proceed to cauterize the patient's body in three places: the head, legs, and cushion.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary to treat a disease with a cautery on the body, the pain will be severe, so place a cushion on their back when using it.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And thus the intestines are treated in the following way, and the foot is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	This refers to the treatment of cauterization for those suffering from epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	This medieval medical treatise treats the condition of epilepsy, but only through cauterization.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore, it is necessary to modify the brain at the beginning of treatment when the pain is severe, as we have discussed in the section on treatment methods.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the illness does not respond to medicine, then apply a poultice for relief, and use medicines for 10 days.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	E appositely apply the other cushion on the head to prevent the intestine from being exposed.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient's humors are strong and he is tolerant, apply cautery to the legs.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And do so with a cushion according to the preceding lines.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, use a gentle cautery.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	De cauterizatio a cushion should be placed under the legs for melancholia treatment.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	If a patient has melancholy due to corrupted humors, then apply a cautery as needed.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	A patient suffering from melencolia should drink wine to cleanse the body.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And a poultice be applied to the affected area on the head, as well as one on each thigh for support.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And if the pain is felt on the foot, then it is a true indication of gout.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a poultice to treat the affected area.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And if it is necessary to heat a part of the body, it is customary to apply cautery to the area being heated.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then place a cushion on the patient's feet.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And if the patient is suffering from a cold-humors illness, you must apply the cushion to the affected foot.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And if you have already placed your hand on their arm to keep the intestine from swelling up.
Capitol .xii.	Another is placed on the legs, and another cushion is placed on the chest of the patient.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the body, it should be applied on the part that is affected.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	The intestines are in great pain, so the doctor cauterizes the affected area to stop the pain from spreading.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And for that matter, you should let the patient rest for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And if it's necessary to cauterize the patient, two instruments are used on their temples for the initial application.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	When the veins and arteries are burned, it refers to the use of a cautery tool on their body.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And if the pain is caused by an excess of blood humors, a cushion can be used for treatment.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And with knowledge they are extracted from their thighs, legs, and feet.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And if it is necessary to have some sort of heating element placed on the foot, the patient should be cauterized when needed.
Capitol .xiii.	This chapter describes how to treat a disease that causes pain in the foot, likely gout.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	And if you apply a cautery to the eyes, it is an old remedy.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	The first source sentence seems to be describing a medical procedure involving heat and cauterization, but the language used ("aquel", "autre", "le mas") suggests it might be referring to something more specific than just general pain in the legs.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you have a pain in their legs, they must be treated by a doctor.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	De cauterizatio del pes
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	And if you don’t have the other cushions, use a cushion to help the patient's health.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And place a cushion on the patient's legs, as they are in pain.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And guard the patient's feet so that they do not inflame.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is how you apply the treatment for it.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Then return the patient's eyelids to their place.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the way to treat the eyelids being affected by the foot disease.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you are applying a cautery to the head, you should cauterize both sides of the head between the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And you have to apply it to their legs according to the amount of pain in the ankles.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Mayes the third part be afflicted by a swelling called edema.
Capitol .xvi.	This could be the start of a chapter in the treatise.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Then you must cauterize the patient's eyelid with a special tool.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the doctors are using a hot cautery to treat the bowels, they use a burning tool.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you apply heat to the patient's cushion, it will reduce swelling in the feet.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	And so they are treated by doctors for the illness which resembles a gouty pain.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then apply a poultice of hot wax or another substance to the affected area.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then apply a burning cautery to the patient's legs.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then apply another treatment to the affected area, which was a surgical procedure involving the use of a cautery.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And if you see that the patient's eyelid is being affected by pain in their body, and apply a cauterization to the area around the wound.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so raise your leg and hold it still for three days, and another cushion will be placed on it.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And if they have a good diet, they will be healthy.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	Then, if the condition returns due to some cause, a cushion can be placed under their eyes so they may see clearly what they were initially able to see.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If it's a pain in the eye, another way to say it is "a hot spot."
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And so you should use a cautery to treat pain in the legs, and apply heat to the area, which will help reduce the inflammation.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And so you will apply a hot poultice to the area where the patient has a problem with their intestines, and a bandage to their feet.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	When joints are infiltrated by pain, it is customary to use a cautery.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Then apply the appropriate treatment to the affected area; if necessary, make use of the hot cautery and cauterize the part.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine or other affected areas, the heat must be applied carefully to avoid burning the patient's body.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And put your hand on the patient's thigh to apply medicine.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the way of the myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And so, you know that the ailments of men are diverse, according to the degree of their magnitude, and yours are called gout because they are small and acute.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	The doctors call for the treatment of certain ailments to be learned in this field.
Capitol .xvii.	Gout is a disease that affects the joints, and causes pain in the feet, so it is understandable why doctors would be familiar with it.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	E si te la ha fatto in lo cielo e la terra.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you are treating a patient, apply cautery carefully, using the patient's legs to hold their position and avoid accidental burns.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And apply pressure to the affected area using a bandage or poultice.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if they have a cushion under them, and a pain in their legs.
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	This is Latin for "which when it has been heated on the fire, will be applied to the body by those who apply cautery to the affected area."
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, a poultice should be applied to the other leg.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to try, use a cushion.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, those who work are better off with a cushion under their legs.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then apply pressure to the leg if it's open.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place your hand on the patient's head or chest to prevent them from becoming infected.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	At the beginning of the treatment, place your hand on the patient's leg to prevent the cushion from being burned by the cautery.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	This patient should be treated for possible gout.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Then place a cushion on the fistulas so that the infection does not reach the legs and spread to the body, as it may be treated by the physician.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula has been healed, it is necessary to treat the area with fire and cauterize it.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii. Capital, the patient has been placed on their legs, indicating they need help.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the leg (or thigh) you place them on the leg.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	The patient's lips are affected by pain from a burn.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	And since you have opened the space between the legs, and in the legs, there are cushions for the body's humors, which are what is causing the pain.
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	The patient's legs are being treated for their ailment.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And if there is a need to make incisions in the area where they are needed.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient has an ailment, apply a poultice to their ailment.
Capitol .xix.	The 19th chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Apply fire to the fistulas in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And so if the patient's body is already affected by a disease that causes pain in the joints.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	Therefore, if you cauterize the area on the feet, it should be healed.
Capitol .xx.	Line 1: **And here is the chapter on how to apply cauterization.**
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	This refers to the use of cauterization on swollen gums or ankles.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the joints are inflamed by their own humors, treat them with cauterization to prevent gout.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop place it over the patient's body.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	E already the patient has been treated with a cushion, then put on their chest, and another one their foot.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	This appears to be a heading or title, possibly from a medical text, indicating treatments for toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	Then do as you wish with a hot toothache as you have already opened the cavity for the toothache, and if the pain is in the legs, use a cautery to cauterize the affected area.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	And if you want to apply cauterization, use a cow's bladder (or hoof) for the best results.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then apply heat to their feet to treat the pain caused by the cushion.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	When a tooth is aching, put a cushion on it, or in other words, apply a poultice to the affected area.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But if it is necessary to apply heat to the body, it is done by placing a cushion under the patient's thighs, so that the cushion will be placed on their legs and they will not feel pain in the joints.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then apply heat to the affected limb, but be careful that the pain doesn't return to the other limbs.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	This one refers to the patient as well, meaning someone who has been afflicted with pain in the body.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And if it is necessary, cauterize the legs.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the way to treat gout.
Capitol .xxii.	Another hand should be placed on their limbs, and another cushion should be placed under their feet.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the treatment of gout.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When you cauterize an affected part, it should be done once, with the patient's consent.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, use a cauterization method appropriate for its size.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the poultice to the patient's legs and treat them with a cautery.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And here we explain how to treat a patient with a cautery using a specific technique.
Capitol .xxiii.	E si es necessitat que lu suo membro sia faydat  (e.g., "and if it is necessary that...")
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	And apply a cushion to their legs, and another on their arms.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	Then if you have a cushion on their legs, you can use another to support the patient's body, but only if necessary.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And if the patient has gout, let your doctor apply a cautery to the affected area.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize the other, apply the cautery to the neck.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And if there's a need to make points on their legs, use another method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then apply heat to the affected area, and make sure to keep the patient warm.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Of the twenty-fourth chapter.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Here comes the translation:
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	Then, if the pain is in the chest and not a result of other ailments, they are likely dealing with an old ailment; you must use two cushions on the area to prevent the inflammation from spreading.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And you should use another cushion on the patient's legs where the incision was made.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	E siat la dolor del malaute en la part affected.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And the cautery should be used by the physician in this manner.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	And if it is necessary to make a point on the leg for the purpose of cauterization.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	And if a patient's intestines are outside the body, it is customary to call it a dislocation by the doctors, but they have it wrong.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus, the doctor places two cushions under them; one for the legs, and another placed on their chest.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And when the pain is in the feet, apply cautery to the thighs.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you want to reduce the pain in the lower intestines, apply cauterization only when necessary.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it's customary for doctors to call it gout when pain occurs in the legs due to the humors being out of balance.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area to soothe them.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if a cushion is placed on their legs, then the pain in the foot will be felt more intensely.
Capitol .xxvi.	E aprop apply a cushion to the affected joint, which will be treated with other remedies.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	This refers to the stomach and its burning.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	Then place cushions on the patient's legs, so that the intestines do not protrude from the body and to prevent the intestines from protruding out through the opening in the wound, the foot should be supported by a cushion.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And adjust the amount of the cautery to the depth of the two known types of gout.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to know about the treatment for this condition, it's called gout according to this method:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to make points on the stomach, do so carefully, for you are dealing with a delicate part of the body.
Capitol .xxvii.	Then apply the appropriate cautery to the patient's foot or leg, depending on the location of the affected area, to prevent further complications.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Then apply hot compresses to the patient's feet.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the feet, apply a cautery to their surface.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And if the patient's body has an excess of humors, they are called humors in the legs or other areas.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press your own leg or put it in front of the thigh.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if there is swelling due to cold, it's called a sickness in the leg joints, which is commonly known as gout.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And so this is the form of the cushion of their hands.
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And in this way, you can use a cautery to treat such ailments with care.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	The translation of the given text would be:
Capitol .xxviii.	**Capitol .xxviii. translates to: Chapter 28.**
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	The sentence translates to: "And apply the other cushion to the patient's foot."
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	If there's a wound on the foot that's infected, apply a poultice to dry it out.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	The pain is in the tunic and the doctors are called upon to treat it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	This is referring to the treatment of a condition by applying a hot cautery to the area where the affected part is located.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize it with that which is called cautery by those who are skilled in it, or who are accustomed to it.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then you have cured the other areas already treated.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And if a patient has a condition that requires cauterization, they are familiar with the pain of such a disease; some doctors use this method for other ailments, but not for this one, which they consider too dangerous.
Capitol .xxix.	In the 29th chapter.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	When using a pointed cautery, they apply heat.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Do this as the ancients did, cauterize their legs according to the way they were treating the sick.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then apply a heated tool to the affected area, but be careful not to burn the patient's skin.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	The patient's legs should be kept still if they are experiencing pain from their own body.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	Italians call this "a condition where a person's body is infiltrated by evil humors", but it’s not clear if they are referring to the original source or a new one.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	Hands are to be placed under the armpits and the other hand on the chest, which is the location that should be cauterized.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx. would be translated as **Chapter 30**.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the heart.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat a disease in the legs or feet, it is as if you were applying a cauterization with three or four methods.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	The man who has been called upon to be a doctor's assistant.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And if you wish to cauterize the legs, the patient has another servant on their legs, which is customary.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	E then another way to cauterize, et autra ma be using two methods of cautery.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And if there is a need to apply a cautery to the patient's body for healing purposes, use the appropriate cautery points.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then apply a cushion to the area where the patient's feet are sore, and place another on their legs.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And so you make four applications with a cautery.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you want, apply a cautery to the area of the cavity.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then, place a hot cautery on the patient's legs so they don't experience further pain.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol thirty-first.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	E si se'n va la maladie de l'intestin, a cushion should be placed under the patient's thighs.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Then apply a cushion to their legs and another on their body.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	This means that when treating someone with gout you should use cautery on their right leg and apply heat to the affected area.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And if a patient has a pain in their feet, hold a hot iron to the affected area.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And if you wish to apply the cautery to the legs or feet, then use a hot iron for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	If there are painful swellings on the joints, especially in the feet, then they will be called "co-existential pain".
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	Then the patient's chest must be cauterized.
Capitol .xxxii.	Gout is caused by an excess of humors in the body, particularly affecting the feet.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Then apply the hot iron to the legs to treat their condition.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's feet, apply the cushion carefully.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Then if it is a burn on their legs or feet it will be painful, but the patient's pain can be treated by cauterization.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	This passage describes a medical procedure involving the placement of "points" on the body and likely refers to a treatment using a cautery tool.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And you have already treated them for their ailment, which requires long-term care.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Aprofit le forzament.
Capitol .xxxiii.	And if it is necessary to treat the disease of gout by cauterizing the affected joints.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Then apply the cautery to their legs.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	Gently warm the area with a cushion to draw out the excess fluids in the abdomen; then use a heated tool to apply heat to the affected area.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	Then, if the pain is from a cold humor, you cauterize the area where it is located.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	The treatment for this condition involves applying points using a hot cautery to the affected area.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	Then you will be able to apply a cautery to the patient's body for three days.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach is cold and they don't digest their food, keep your hand on their stomach for a while, so that the patient will be able to eat again after the treatment.
Capitol .xxxv.	This line requires more context than is provided.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	When you have an infected wound on the foot, apply cautery to the site.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you apply fire to a part of the body.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then apply an instrument to the area between the thighs.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient has gout, do it twice over to ensure complete healing.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	This text describes the use of a cautery in a medical context.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The text was likely written in Latin and means: **Chapter 36.**
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	And then apply a cautery to the flesh of the patient's body if they have fistulas.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not return the intestine to its proper place, the patient's legs will be affected by the pain.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	And if you have a wound that is deep in their nature, they will apply a poultice to the depth of the wound and use a cauterization technique.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's body, then it's clear that they are in pain from the cold.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then apply a cautery to that area to the patient's thigh, etc., and your hand will hold the other parts in place.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And they apply cautery to the affected areas as needed.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	When there is pain in the legs or feet, treat the patient with a poultice made of herbs, not fire.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then put your hand on their leg to prevent further inflammation.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	When the patient is healed, lahoras is completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if they are affected by gout, it is another way to say that the patient's body fluids are out of balance.
Capitol .xxxvii.	When there are no humor-related ailments present, it is customarily called a healthy condition.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	The use of cauterization on wounds.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there are pains in the thighs, it's best to treat them with a poultice and a bandage.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	This means that the doctors are using a heated cautery tool to apply three cauterizations in the area where the patient's legs have been affected by the ailment.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol .xxxviii.  - **Chapter 38.**
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	When the patient has pain in the bladder, but it's unclear if it's from the bladder itself or something else.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	Then place the other [hot] hand on them, e's in the bladder to relieve the symptoms and prevent further complications.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	Burn that in proportion to the size of the burn on the patient's body.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	E sia le mas pain in la reduccion de la sua cavity.
Capitol .xxxix.	E si es ja  is a term for "And if it is" in Latin-like languages.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	And so apply the other cushion.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	And so for the good of the health of the patient, three cushions are used to treat the area around it.
Capitol .xl.	The title "Capitol .xl." likely refers to Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On their knees.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When there are signs of a cold nature in the body, it is customary to call it gout.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the patient is usually treated for gout in their legs.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then, as a precaution, place the cushion under the patient's body.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And if you are applying a cautery to the leg, do so carefully.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if you are not able to be present, then another should cauterize the area.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if a burn occurs on the surface of the foot, apply cauterization to prevent the spread of the disease.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter xli.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	This is the treatment for the pain in the thighs.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	A physician should be consulted if the condition persists or worsens.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The manner of using a cautery on a patient is determined by whether it's used with hot or cold treatment methods.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The patient has been treated by learned doctors with three different methods.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	"Then treat the area with a hot iron to apply heat to a specific part of the body."
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Mays in some cases there are other causes.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish to do so, cauterize around the area around the legs, to prevent the pain from spreading to the rest of the body.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And if pain is felt in the legs, that is what doctors call sciatica.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	The pain extends from the leg to the chest; this is the meaning of the term "gout" in the context of the provided text.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the patient has been afflicted by the ailment, they are treated with cauterization.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And then apply cautery to the affected area.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	When pain affects the whole body, the following are used to treat it: a poultice on the thighs, a cushion under them, cupping therapy, and other treatments for gout are applied.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And if you have a cushion put under them, the patient's pain should be checked.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, the patient will feel pain in the area that is being cauterized, and they will experience swelling and burning sensations.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then apply a cold poultice to the abdomen, and keep the patient's belly cool, while another poultice should be applied on their feet.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, then cauterize each part as follows.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	When they are wise doctors, they use their hands for treatment.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And you have already opened the intestine, which is a cushion for the knee, in that circle.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	The text describes a medical procedure where the patient's body is being positioned for a treatment involving cauterization.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And so place a cushion on their legs if they have to be cauterized.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And leave the patient's body to be treated for three days; then leave him in the open air.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	This is a tricky one! Here's my best guess:
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	When a doctor diagnoses a patient with a pain caused by cold humors in the leg, they would call it a case of "Mays" (meaning "May" in Latin).
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Mays cauteri are medicines that have stuck to their two-nut theory.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	Then return to the patient's body, and another cushion should be placed under it.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And if the patient has been struck by the gout, apply hot water to the affected area and gently place the two circles on the leg.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then place your hand on the patient's affected area.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And if the intestine or hernia has been removed from the patient's thighs, it must be put back in place for three days.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then they will treat the area where the pain is located.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And then cauterize the area affected by the gout in the way that was done to the patient's legs, and if the pain is widespread throughout the body, use a cushion on the body, and cauterize it according to the same method as used for the foot.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This refers to the way in which medicines are applied in the treatment.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	When preparing medicine for the patient's illness, use a cushion to treat it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And you place a cushion on their foot to prevent the water from becoming too acidic and causing pain.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And holding their thighs, put your hand on the patient's body, where the artery is located, to stop the bleeding.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And apply heat to the affected area with a heated tool.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And if a man suffers from sciatica, apply a cautery to his legs and apply pressure to prevent it from spreading.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And if you are to apply the cauterization, use a fresh, pointed cushion, and apply it carefully where the pain is located in the foot.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And so it is that the pain of a few hours ago in the case of the patient, it was called gout.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And so the body should be treated, and a poultice applied to the affected area, while others help the patient by keeping them warm.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Then, you should know that the patient's body will be better served by these medicines if they are applied to the affected area.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	And if you want to know how to treat a patient's gout using a pointed cautery, then proceed as follows:
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then apply heat to their legs and use charcoal to cauterize it.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And if you find that the patient's legs are affected by humors, you must use your skill to prevent them from being affected further.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This is the method of applying cauterization to the body.
Capitol .xlii.	When pain in the feet is caused by an imbalance of humors, they are treated differently by doctors depending on the specific type of humor causing the pain, and if a patient has swelling in their feet (or ankles), which is usually treated with cold applications.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the legs, leg pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some people experience pain in the area where their pain is located, they are told that it is called gout by doctors.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And then you cauterize the legs, and apply a poultice to the affected area.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	And if it is customarily to do a cauterization of the knees, thighs, and arms.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And here is already a cushion placed upon their legs.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	When you have a hot iron on the body, then this is the way to treat them with a cushion.
Capitol .xliii.	The text says: **Chapter 43.**
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	From the use of the word "cauterizacio" in Translation 2, I'd guess:
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This sentence describes the use of a cushion in a medical context for treating someone suffering from gout.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And if you are concerned about gout in the legs, it is customary to apply a cushion to the area.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you apply a cautery to the limbs of a person who has been diagnosed with gout, it is customary to treat them as if they have a problem in the intestine.
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	Then apply a cushion on their feet, another on their legs, and treat them for their condition.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want to treat a painful condition in their foot or feet, cauterize the area.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	The pain is caused by the body's humors.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then apply the cautery to the area we have mentioned.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	And then if the pain is caused by other things besides the nerves you might apply cautery.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter xliv.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	This could be a treatment for pain in the joints, particularly the feet.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	And if there is an accumulation of cold humors, it is called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, if they are cured by the application of heat to the affected area, then the doctors will say that it is a cure for the pain in the legs, which is also called gout.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And if you need to cauterize something, use a tool specifically designed for cauterizing the legs.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	This sentence means something along the lines of "And if the patient's body has a fever" or "When there are pains in the feet, it is called..."
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	When necessary, make points on the legs and feet.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if pain arises in the joints of the body, then treat them with a cushion or oil.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if it is necessary to burn the skin, the tools needed for the procedure are applied.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	Then apply the cautery to the patient's legs.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	Then return to the patient's body and apply cautery as needed.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	Then apply it to the points on the feet and legs.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the doctors are able to make the patient's pain go away.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	G: When the patient has a good constitution and is treated with medicines, it is said to be a cure for those who can afford it.
Capitol .xlv.	This is likely a chapter heading, indicating the start of Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	This is the section on applying cauterization for various conditions.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	...the patient's joints are called gout.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And if you wish to follow the patient's health, another servant should be placed on their feet.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And if a patient has gout, apply the cauterization on their legs.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then if he has an opening made in his leg by the other.
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	It is said that the patient has been given a cushion to rest their legs.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And if your hand is already on their legs, then apply another cushion to the area.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	When the pain is in the feet, the patient's legs are placed on a cushion.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then put your hand on the cautery and apply it to the affected area.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Then, if needed, apply cautery to the area to prevent further complications.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	When you have to make an incision on the bone, use a different cautery.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And if the pain affects the children's legs, then apply the cauterization to them.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	E aproc le cura un loc e aprop has to be treated for three days with a cauterizing tool.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient has a fever, it should be treated with other remedies.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And if there are other conditions that cause pain in the body, and then seal it.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And so that the patient's belly doesn't get too much effort, one should place a cushion on their legs.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And if one wants to open the space between the legs, it should be done gently, so as not to cause pain.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And you must use this treatment for those who have diseases in their legs, which are treated by using this other treatment.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And so you cauterize the intestine of the patient with a cushion, then apply a cautery to the lower abdomen, and another cushion on their chest for that part of the body.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And if it is necessary to treat something in the intestines.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And that's how the doctors are supposed to be able to keep the intestine from being affected by the condition.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol forty-six.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	When there is pain in the patient's feet, then use a cautery on them.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	Then you must treat the pain with another cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And if a patient has an inflamed intestine, it is customary to treat them with cautery.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	When pain persists, use a different cautery.
Capitol .xlvii.	The text likely describes the use of cauterization as a treatment for injuries or ailments related to the legs and feet.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	And apply another cautery to their legs (or other appropriate areas).
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Then you have to place a poultice on their legs for treatment.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Then apply heat to the affected area: on the back of the head, where you applied the cushion for the patient’s cap or use your hand to hold the cushion in place as needed.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, the patient's legs are being held open by the doctor, who wants to cauterize the area.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if you want to treat the affected part, use a hot cautery on all the bones of the foot.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And if you wish to avoid the nerves that are already burned, it is important to be careful.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	E alcunas upon the other bones are placed on the legs, and so forth.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And if a patient has pain in the thighs, then doctors use a cautery on them, for example, for other reasons on their feet, as they are numbed by the pain of the joints.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And if there are few or many burns on the body, another burn is applied to the foot, but the other burns are used to treat the intestines and another for their feet.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then place your hand upon their legs and apply other remedies as needed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Then use a hot iron to apply heat to the patient's legs.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	The patient has a cautery applied to their leg.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply ointment to the patient's legs and elsewhere so that their ailment is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And if there are some wounds on the legs and they are caused by other things, then those wounds should be cauterized.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	This is the first known instance of the phrase "Mays no prusuma" appearing in English.
Capitol .xlix.	Gout is a disease that causes pain in the joints, particularly in the feet.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	And apply the cautery directly to the skin, but only on the areas that are affected by humors and need to be treated.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	Then apply the medicine to the affected area, and adjust its potency accordingly.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And if you are already a skilled surgeon, then apply the appropriate treatment to that vein.
Capitol .l.	Capitol I
De cauterizacio de cranc.	The patient's condition should be treated carefully with a hot compress.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	And if it is cancer, then treat it with cautery.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And if it is not necessary to cauterize the leg, then they should be treated as they are now.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And if you have already applied a cautery to the affected area, as we previously mentioned.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	And if it is necessary, the patient's pain should be treated with a cautery tool.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	Then apply a hot poker to the affected area.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	Then apply the cushion to their legs, and if necessary, use another method to treat them.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there are hot humors in the body, then so be it; that's what healthy people apply to their bodies when they are experiencing pain.
Capitol .lii.	If there are pains in the body which are caused by the coldness of the humors, they are called gout.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	And then apply a cautery to the corrosive parts.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	You can't use a cushion to prevent the effects of dry rot in wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, apply heat to the area, but only after using a cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then apply cautery to eradicate the inflammation from all parts of the body.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area and let the patient's legs be exposed to the heat for three days, after which the pain will subside.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And apply a cushion to their legs.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	Then apply the cautery to the area again, because it is customary for that ailment.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And if the patient has been affected by gout, apply cushion to the legs.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	And yet, burning with fire should be done lightly.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And so I have said that the cure for humors in the feet is to cauterize them.
Capitol .liii.	When the intestine has been treated with medicinal remedies, the patient's feet are often treated with a hot cautery to draw out the toxins.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	This refers to a cautery treatment on the legs, and other similar treatments.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	And if the patient suffers from pain caused by a hot iron brand, then it's called calciprophylaxis.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	You've already cauterized the patient's legs, so you should apply a poultice to the cushion on their legs.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place a cushion on their hand, and put your hand on their foot.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it stay in that condition for three days.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a poultice of wild leek poultice to the patient's legs and apply another to their feet, holding the wound open for the fluids to drain freely.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the balm to the place where they are injured so that the flesh may be healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And so you have to apply the cautery on the foot for a whole hour, or at least for half an hour on each side of the body, if you need to use the cautery.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And then hold your hand on their legs to prevent the pain from spreading.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And place a cushion under them, so that their feet are warmed.
Capitol .liiii.	The text reads: "When there are 53 chapters, it's customary to call them by that name".
De cauterizacio de tremor.	This could be used to describe the treatment for a condition similar to tremor in modern medicine.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	Quan endeve the patient to be treated with four applications of cautery, use a cushion for the stomach; the other two are used on their legs and hands.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And if the patient's hands tremble, it is a sign that they have a tremor in their body due to illness.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol 51.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Then apply the cautery to the patient's body, and use a hot cautery.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	The patient's leg is to be treated as if it were already opened up in surgery, or with another herb which is known for its healing properties.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Then apply heat to the foot, and use a hot cautery for the expulsion of the humors.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Mays, therefore, treatment by evacuation of the blood is performed with a special tool used for that purpose.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	The patient should only be treated with a cushion for cushioning during an arrow wound.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the wound on the leg, lest the plague return.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to a cushion or other such object on the patient's body, so place it under their arm, where the pain is felt.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And if it is necessary to stop the flow of blood, the physician should be consulted.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then put a hot iron on the affected area to help alleviate the pain.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	Then if the blood is infected in the foot, apply a cautery to the affected area, so they may be burned.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	Then be careful to avoid burning the nerves that are here on the patient, which are already vulnerable.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	E sapias que lesa’s de lu, another person who has knowledge of the proper treatment can be applied to prevent further complications.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	And if it is a cushion that causes the pain to be felt in the legs, and the patient has a fever.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	Then you have to use a hot needle to treat them.
Comensa la segonda partida.	And now commence the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Doctors use these methods to treat the legs and feet:  cauterization.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	Then place a cushion on their legs to support them in case of pain.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	Then we will discuss in this chapter the treatment for those who wish to be relieved from pain in this area.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	Then you will learn about cautery in this chapter, which is on the patient's leg, and others are discussed in the first chapter.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	This sentence appears to be about treating gout in medieval times.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And he will be treated with the care that his condition requires.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And place a bandage on their feet to prevent the intestine from being injured.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And if the disease is severe and lasts for a long time, it is said that death is near.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And if it is a pernicious disease that affects the foot, it is not a true gout.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Aprop be the person who has the right to be treated by doctors for gout.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And place your hand on the patient to aid them in their diagnosis and treatment.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	And if you are to cauterize, a cushion should be placed under their body for protection, so they don't feel pain in their legs or feet.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And if you are using a cushion for pain relief, it will be placed on your legs and another will be placed on their feet and they will have a cushion to support them.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	And so apply cautery to the child's legs
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You are correct that the text describes a medical procedure involving the use of cauteries to treat an illness caused by excess humors in the body.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	and if it is caused by an unseen or hidden cause.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	And if I don't see the child's illness as a cushion under their legs.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And if you have placed a cushion under them.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And if the physician needs to apply heat to the patient's body, they should be careful that the heat doesn't affect the cushion's placement on the legs.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the pain is in the leg, you must make points on the legs, and other uses for it are already known.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And so if the humor is more severe and there is greater inflammation, the doctors will cauterize it, so place the cushion on their legs.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	When the body's heat is blocked from the bone, it is a cushion that will be placed on the affected area between the thighs, as the doctor already has access to the legs through the space between the feet and the thigh.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, then treat it with a hot cushion.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And if a hot iron is applied to the body's wounds, then apply a dry cloth on top and use oil and cloths to treat the wound.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	E si es autra cushion to apply to the foot.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And place a cushion on their legs, to cause the evacuation of fluids from their body.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	And for those who need to be treated for injuries to the legs or feet, place cushions on them so they are supported.
Capitol segon.	The second chapter begins.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When applied to the feet or legs, these medicines are effective against gout.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And thus, if you cauterize the veins of the patient in such a way that the skin is roughened by the heat from the burning, then they will be able to tell which parts are affected and where the pain is strongest.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Then place a cushion on their other side, and let them be in good health.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And when you do this, if the patient is willing, use a needle to draw blood from the affected area, and remove the blood from the cavity using a lancet.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the area, apply the cautery frequently to the affected veins.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	And if the patient's body doesn't reject the arrow, then you should apply a cushion to their chest and use a tool called a 'cupping glass' to remove the cushion from the foot.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And if it is necessary to draw blood from the leg, it is the same as drawing blood from another vein elsewhere in the body.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And another considers the plague, and thus they call upon their knowledge to treat it.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And you will strengthen the patient's health by using cloth bandages.
Capitol .iii.	E.g.,
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	This refers to a treatment for pain in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	Gout is treated by applying heat to the affected area.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of the operation involves placing a cushion under the patient's head to protect them from the pain.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is a case of gout, the pain is treated with a cushion under their legs to soften the area.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is necessary to open the patient's legs, the physician will apply his hand to them.
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	This text describes how to use a cushion to relieve pain caused by an imbalance of humors in the feet.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	And if it is a wound that needs to be cauterized, it is necessary to know what part of the body is affected.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And if you are trying to remove the poison from the patient's body, use a hot cushion.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the pain is severe, apply a strong bandage to the wound after cauterization.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And apply cautery to the excess that is in the joints; and do not perform the operation at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that which is in need of cauterization with a cautery, and another on their legs, and another on their arms.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And if the foot is affected by cold humors, the doctor will use a cautery to treat it.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And if you are unable to do so, it is advisable to apply a dry cautery to prevent further complications.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	Then if blood flows freely from the wound you must place your hand on their chest.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if there are no current signs of inflammation, hold the heat to the affected area as a treatment.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	E if you apply two hot coals to the body,  it’s possible that there will be a second, less painful use of the cushion for padding.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of the cautery.
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And apply the cauteries on both sides of the body.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	And yet, use the cauterization tool to burn away the excess heat.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So when the disease flares up, use a cauterization to stop the pain.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is best done with light touch.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Then if necessary, apply a cautery to the area between the thighs, and place one on their legs, and another on their feet, so that there's no further swelling.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	This refers to the use of cautery in treating foot pain caused by an imbalance of humors.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	And so, when one applies a poultice to the affected areas, the doctors say it's a poultice for healing.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And if you are treating a hernia on someone's forehead, place a cushion to protect it.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if there are two fingers on their legs, use one cushion for the other to hold in place.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And to be careful, when cutting into the area of the groin, to make sure the incision doesn't extend to the other side of the body, and to keep the wound clean.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if there are wounds on the legs, they should be cauterized.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you're treating a patient, dry their foot by placing a cushion on them.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	You have already treated the patient's legs with cushions, which is what you would do for someone suffering from gout.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	This is the part that needs to be heated up.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Apply heat to that area, but only if the patient can withstand another incision on the leg.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then place the pointed instrument on the other side of the patient’s body from the cushion.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Another way to say that the patient has a pain in their legs is for them to call it a lion's paw.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	This is an example of a medical treatise that uses Latin-like terminology to describe a treatment for gout.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	Another person should apply pressure to the patient's legs while a cushion is placed on their knee.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then apply cold to the affected areas, and prevent the formation of other inflammations.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day apply cold water to the intestine or hernia to prevent further injury.
Capitol .v.	And then apply the cupping glass to their legs.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	> This could refer to a type of treatment applied to the head using a cauterizing tool.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there are painful attacks in the legs, which are caused by a burning sensation in the joints from an excess of humors, it is customary to call them gout.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	Then apply a cautery to the patient's mouth (to make a cauterization) and another to the foot, which has been placed upon the cushion.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry the blood from the wound with a clean rag, and bandage it with dry gauze or cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Place a cushion under their feet.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	Then apply a poultice of dried wheat bran to the affected areas.
Capitol .vi.	This section describes how to treat a patient with a painful condition that causes pain in the limbs due to an imbalance of humors, which is why the text is presented as it is.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	This refers to the treatment of the patient's ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	So there are four causes of pain in the legs: such as if it is due to mineral or something similar to a stone, such as gravel or a lump of rock.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And if the cause is due to other causes than those of the foot pain, then they are to be treated accordingly.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And another should be placed on their chest, covered by a cushion, if there are other causes for the pain in the foot.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not gout, the instrument is used in a similar way to other instruments.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	Then let them be treated with a cautery of thinness.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is necessary to cauterize a wound on the foot, it is necessary to do so in a way that prevents the patient from being burned by the hot iron.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then apply cautery to the area with a special instrument designed for that purpose.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	Then it's possible to put the patient's body in its proper place.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then apply a dry cautery to the foot for the pain.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	This sentence is in a language similar to Catalan, which you've correctly identified as being close to Latin.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	Then put your hand on the area of the wound to hold the intestine in place.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then if it is an infected fissure, treat it carefully with a cushion that matches the affected area.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if you are administering a cure to him/her, give them a thin cushion on their head.
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	Then administer to them the following remedies:
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And if you think that the patient's body is already moistened by the vapors of the laurel leaves, which are also known as the oil of the bay laurel tree, then you should apply this to their legs, put them in a place where they can be put back into place.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	Mays no, the patient is being treated with leeches on their legs, and something else is placed upon their legs and they are healed by the cautery and heated stones.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	And if you're going to cauterize the body, make sure to avoid the bad parts.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	The first part of the body to be affected by gout is typically the feet.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And if there are too many gout attacks, put a cauterizing tool on their legs and so forth.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	Then cure the pain in their leg by applying the remedy to the affected area, as previously discussed.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	Apos le dolor de la malaute, treat the affected area with a cushion.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you want to take a chance on something happening, or if you are concerned about a possible cause of illness, use a wide gauge needle, but if there is no concern for worms, use a fine one.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And if you are to make an incision on the affected joint.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	Mays si no ait (And if it is not) ... you will be able to find the text in the explanation below.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is in your body, you have to cauterize it, which is why the doctors are using this instrument.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make a cushion, which is placed on the legs, silver or bronze.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And then place your hand on their legs so they don't come out.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want to apply a poultice of some kind to the patient’s thighs, use a poultice of some kind of herb — and that applies to a cushion for the pain — for the treatment.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And when it is necessary to treat with a hot cautery, use a small one.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And if the patient has too much pain in the ear, use medicine to treat them.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	And when it is necessary to cauterize ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Then, if there's a need to make points on the body, they should be done on the outside, in the area around the abdomen, but never directly on the stomach or feet.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	Then apply the cushion to the affected area.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	When you apply heat to the affected area, the patient's body should be held still.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if you see signs of the illness in their body, open the affected area with a fine cautery.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	And if it is necessary to put your hand on the body of the patient, you should apply heat to their thighs.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's bowels and place your hand on their body.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	Then apply the cautery to the patient's foot a little.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	Et autre se serve te, which means "And then take care" in English.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you are applying a poultice to the patient's foot, place it on the affected area and apply it to the location of the wound.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	This indicates that the text describes how to treat a condition involving blood flow, likely using cautery, and is referring to a specific treatment for gout mentioned in a medical treatise.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	For the treatment of the ailment called Athezile, which is to be treated with cautery on the eyes.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Some doctors believe that the eyes are affected by cold humors in the same way as other parts of the body, but it can be used to treat them.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then he said: "Therefore, if the pain is in the foot, it is customary to apply cautery to the affected area."
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	When it comes to joint pain, we'll use the fine cautery on the smaller bones.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	When there is a need to perform surgery, the best method would be to apply cautery to the affected area.
Capitol .ix.	This document discusses the intestine or the body parts that are affected by them.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Then apply a cushion to their eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	The patient's illness is caused by some cause, which is called a stye.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	Another person places the patient's legs on their chest and waits for the next step.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	And if it is necessary to cauterize a patient's body, you should do so by placing the hot iron on the affected area to prevent the spread of the disease.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Thus, when the pain is in the legs, it is said to be another person's legs.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the pain has come to the place where the patient's foot is, then don't apply cushions, but do another treatment instead.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the pain is in the legs, you adjust it with a bandage, and another that heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	Then if there is little pain, no cushion will be needed.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if a cautery has been used on their foot, they are experiencing pain in the place where you burned them.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to make incisions, you should do so after applying a cushion soaked in salt water (salve) to their legs.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	And so, if the pain persists in the legs, apply a hot cautery to the area.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Train your skills in medicine and treat the sick with cushions to soothe their pain and care for the rest of their ailments.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And if you press their eyelids, they feel the pain in their feet from the cushion that is placed there.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And if you want to heal the patient, they should be given a hot compress to relieve their pain.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the whole body, make sure the patient's body is completely covered in cushions so as not to be burned.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	And if there's pain in the body, apply that to the areas where the pain is felt.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And see that you do not disturb the area where the blood vessels are located, as they will be affected by the pain.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	When a fissure occurs in your body you can use a hot iron to cauterize it.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And if it is necessary to put one's hands on their legs, it is so they may be held in place.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then apply your hand to the affected joint.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	When sores are treated, the patient's pain will subside.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of those who have been wounded, they are burned in the following manner: by using a cautery tool, the wound is carefully sealed off to prevent further bleeding.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids there are natural inflammations or other diseases, which cause pain in the eye, it's called *huel* by doctors.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore, if you have a wound on your foot, the doctor will apply the cushion to the right place.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And so if the patient has pain in their legs, the one who is applying the treatment should apply the cushion to the area.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Then, if the patient has a condition where the body's humors are causing them to be inflamed, you may need to use a cushion to treat it.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area to draw out the smaller humors that are causing the pain.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And then place a cushion under their feet.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then burn the cushions on the patient's thighs to reduce swelling, if necessary, by using lancets.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And if the pain has subsided, the surgeon should remove the points.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you cure the bowels, you should dry them with sutures.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But if it is necessary to cauterize him, he should be treated without fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And if it is necessary, use a different method to treat the pain in their feet, such as applying a poultice made of myrtle leaves to reduce swelling.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Then you must place a cautery on their legs to prevent further complications.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to suture the opening or treat it with a cautery, do so carefully.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you have an abscess, apply a cushion to the affected area.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes to the eyes that are affected by the disease, he should apply the cautery to those areas, which are the usual ones for the surgeon to use.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Then apply cauterization to the affected area, avoiding any contact with the bone.
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you must place two cushions under the patient's legs to support their feet.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions in the patient's limbs.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And if the patient has an excess of humor in their eye, the doctor will use a cushion to treat them for a short time, because gout is caused by an imbalance of humors.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	Mays es tardat, the patient's body should be treated by now applying a cautery to their legs.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when the body is afflicted with the disease of gout, apply your hand to their feet.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And then make sure the person has no pain in the legs, and only apply cauterization to the body in this manner:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	And if it is the intestine or other bodily fluids that are causing the pain.
Capitol .xii.	Another person would be required to hold the patient's legs apart during this process.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	When it is necessary to apply a needle to the patient's foot.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	If there are pains in your feet caused by humors, you should treat them gently.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the cushion be placed on the leg for pain relief.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then use the cauterization tool to apply heat to the affected area on the legs to prevent the ailment from spreading.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And the patient's ailment be relieved by a subtle operation, and by another on their legs.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And so the cushion is used to push the needle into the affected area.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then apply a bandage to the affected area.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then treat the patient with a poultice for their ailment.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Then apply another cushion to the affected area.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And thus you would apply the cushion to the patient's legs, keeping the body warm and covered.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the patient has pain in their legs, adjust the cushion under them.
Capitol .xiii.	The text describes the process of using a cautery tool to treat a patient by cauterizing the area where their pain is located.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	When a treatment for the eyes is applied to the eyelid, it is called a poultice.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the doctors call it leucorrhea.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method to treat an infected wound in the foot is to apply a poultice, and if the infection has spread, use a poultice to separate the lips and draw out the inflammation.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	The cushion should be placed on the legs to make the patient's legs feel less pain.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Usa a warm water for cold humors that affect the legs or feet.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's body, it is important for you to apply your knowledge of cushions and cushions correctly so that the wound does not burst open.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And if the person needs to be cauterized, place your hand on the affected area to prevent further complications.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Another example of a condition that affects the body:
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This is a true case of a disease called true gout, which can be caused by the following.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Then use a cushion or cushion to hold their thighs, and other help for their legs and feet.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The first one that is already mentioned in the text is to use a cautery for treatment.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then apply a cautery to open the body in their place.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then place a cushion on the patient's feet to keep them warm.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	The patient's body should be covered with a cloth when the pain is caused by the abdomen.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to their legs, it is called the “landa.”
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And if it is necessary to drain the humor from the body, apply a poultice.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Apply these remedies to treat the affected area.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if there are no other signs of injury on the leg, except for the opening of the cushion.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And if it is necessary to separate the skin from the lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	And the treatment for the disease of the thighs is based on the patient's condition, and they are treated accordingly.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And if the pain occurs in the foot, it is customary to use cautery, which must be applied in various ways depending on the situation.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	The doctors were using their hands to hold the patient's body in place while cauterizing.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	Then apply the poultice to the affected eyelid; if you need to do so, apply a cautery to the area below the eye socket, and elevate the cautery above it.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And place a small cushion under the patient's hands to prevent them from feeling the pain of the procedure.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	When there is a need for bloodletting, but only if the patient has agreed to it, apply leeches to the affected area.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then place a cushion under them, and hold their hands so they don't feel pain from gout or other ailments.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a bandage to the eye after cauterizing to prevent gout from emerging in the foot.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of which, when the pain is from the cold humors in the foot, treat it as such.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Then it is clear that the pain is caused by a cushion placed under the patient's legs, which are already in their place.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	Both types of tears are used to treat the eyes.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	If a patient has a swelling in their foot, they should be treated with a hot cautery, which can also be done for other conditions.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	You have already opened the thigh and made it clear that you are using a hot needle to apply a poultice or compress.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then you should cauterize that part of the body.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then apply a cautery to the legs of the patient, carefully avoiding the area where the blood flows.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to a patient's legs or feet, it is customary for the physician to use an instrument to do so.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And take care that the wound does not touch the cornea, and if there is pain, apply another cushion to their pupil for support.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	A "diferent" method of treatment for a "sinal" in the foot would be used.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if you cannot return the nail to its opening by usual methods, use medicinals to help heal it.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to cauterize it, apply the fine needle carefully.
am subtilitat.	This refers to something subtle or nuanced.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	Then if you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, and put the cushion there, it will be a rare occasion for the pain to return to the patient's body.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then put another application of the cautery on the patient's legs, so that the pain does not return, and if there is no other treatment for them, they can be treated by applying a hot cautery to the area.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then place another cushion on their legs, and you must do something to their feet.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	Take care of the tear duct, lest it be damaged.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a cushion to their eyes and another to their feet.
Capitol .xvii.	"Another hand on the foot," they said.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	And so apply the cautery to the patient's foot.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	The patient's eyelids are affected by a cushion-like object.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The patient has suffered from gout, which is why doctors call this condition the same thing as what they treat.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And you will have made a puncture, in the same way as doctors do when they make a puncture on the foot, they are also called the thigh and the knee joint.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then use salt to treat the pain, but don’t apply it directly to the affected area, instead use a hot cautery on the area that causes the pain.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if the cause of the pain in the foot persists, then apply cauteri again on the legs to relieve the pain.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Then, however, if a doctor wants to treat you, they will cauterize your body, intentionally or unintentionally.
Capitol .xviii.	Eighteenth
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the gathering of the humors in le body.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	When you see a patient with stiff legs, they should be treated by a doctor.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, first you must consider if the pain in the affected area is due to gout or other causes.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And place your hand on their head to guide them.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	And thus you have two cushions already placed upon their legs, and the humors are extracted.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Then cauterize with care.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you don't burn the skin when treating for gout.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	Then apply a cushion to their belly to stop the intestines from being opened up.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If the patient's intestines are affected by the pain, then apply a cushion to the area where the pain is felt in their intestines, and place a cushion on their feet so that the body does not move from under the blanket.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And so he treated the patient in the same way.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the scissors.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	A la sua natura, the patient will be known as suffering from arthritis.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area to dry it out.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	Therefore, when the bone is exposed and has a dark discoloration, it is necessary to use a tool for this purpose.
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And if there are sharp pains in the legs or feet, they are caused by the other humors, which I will explain later.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Then, on their bones, apply a cushion to those positions where they are experiencing pain and swelling.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And then apply a hot cautery to their legs, which can be done in several ways.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	And if the patient's illness is caused by cold humors that have left the body, you will already know they are cured.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if you have not been able to find relief from the pain through other means, then it’s time for cauterization, but be careful to keep your hands away from the affected area unless you want them burned.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The patient is weakened by the use of a cushion on their feet, but they may have other ailments.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then apply a hot cautery to the bones and joints.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Thus, the proper treatment for such pain is to apply heat and medicines.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	The patient should be treated carefully so that no harm comes to the body.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol .xx. means Chapter 20. This is likely a chapter title or reference to a specific chapter in the text.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the feet, the patient must be treated with care.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	Then apply a bandage to the affected area.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	Then fold a cushion four times in the manner of the four folds of a linen bandage; and thus apply it to the patient's legs.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then place the other foot on the other leg if necessary.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And apply cups to the patient's legs to draw out the illness.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Then if the ligament has been torn, it is important to apply a straight cautery.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then if you wish to apply cautery, you must do so only at night.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the patient's bowels are too inflamed, or if the humors are still coming out, continue to apply the cushion to their legs and hands, keeping them raised until the treatment subsides.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Then apply a hot cautery to the swelling in the legs due to the patient's condition, as they are the ones who should be using them.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	And so, if a surgeon needs to perform surgery on the patient's thighs, they are the ones who will make the incision, and the surgeon must hold the patient's feet and hands in place.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then place another cushion on the wound, to soothe the pain.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And so you'll alleviate the pain in the limbs, allowing for comfort as the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes it is necessary to apply a cushion to the affected area.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	The patient's legs are already open and the physician is tending to them.
Capitol .xxii.	Another one that is necessary for the patient's health is that they be treated by a skilled practitioner.
De curacio de alconati.	This means treatment for gout.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease is customarily called gout, but it's not water that flows down.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	And if you see a patient suffering from gout, make them avoid anything that causes pain to the affected joint.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it doesn't descend in the leg, you should know it's gout.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	When you see that the patient's legs are thin and weak, then apply a bandage to the leg, and place your hand on the area where the pain is located.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, if you have already opened the body's humors, a cushion should be placed on the legs to prevent them from being affected by cold or heat.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And if it is treated, then it will heal.
Capitol .xxii.	Another way to say “Then” is "And so".
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	This refers to treatment for a medical condition, likely related to a wound or injury on the leg.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	The first sentence refers to the patient's condition as a whole.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then use a cushion to protect the patient's hands from the heat.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And if the pain is in the left eye, use a cautery on the body part below the eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	and then place a cushion under your right foot, you must apply a cushion to their legs if the left leg is weakened.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And if the pain is in the big toe, then use a hot poultice on the affected area.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then place your hand on the foot to prevent a further outbreak of pain.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	When you are experiencing pain in the foot, you must be careful not to cause injury to the patient's body.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And if you can't see the patient's pain, then treat the affected area.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Therefore, if you are able to put back the intestine or hernia into place, apply your hand on their area to prevent the patient from being touched.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And so when the body is dry or the pain appears in the foot, the patient must be treated with a bandage on their feet and a hot iron to the affected area.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May the foot be treated with poultices for its pain.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you don't have an exact understanding of your patient's condition — which may be gout —, then use a cushion to apply pressure to the area of the affected foot.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore, you should apply a poultice to that area for healing that ailment, but be careful not to burn them with the hot cautery.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then apply another cautery to the affected area.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	When you are treating a patient for pain in the legs, apply a cushion to their hands when they're held by the doctor.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And apply the cautery to the body only as needed.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And if the patient's body is so disposed, it will be on their knees.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then apply a bandage to the affected area, and make sure the patient's legs are covered.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And then apply heat to the legs, but not too much as to cause further inflammation.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	And if you have to draw it back, do so gently because the patient has a weak constitution.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If it is necessary to correct the position of the intestine or a boil on the patient's body, then you have to use a cushion for the boil and another for the bowels.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	When it is open to the sight of you, it will be a pain that exists on your feet, but it is in its place.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	et galdament you have already made an incision in the patient's legs.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	A student is not excused from being present in the operating room when a patient has a surgery.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And so if the fire has already burned the foot, we must use a cushion to stop the inflammation.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	And perhaps you have seen it happen in our land, where it is said to be a new development.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the types of species that are known as magdaan in the medical field.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	When translated literally, the text reads: "And if they are thin-skinned, these should be called humors."
Capitol .xxiv.	The chapter containing the text begins with the word "Capitol" and ends with the phrase "et cetera."
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Then comes the treatment of flesh that bleeds.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	This describes other methods used to treat wounds, such as those resembling scorpion stings or a polyp.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And if it is a tumor, and not a mole, that appears on the flesh, then it is a cancer.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, you should use a cushion for support under the body.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then you should use a cushion to apply pressure to the joint and have them rest.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	This is a bad sign if you have sores on your legs, so you should seek a physician's help immediately.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then place a cushion on their nose, then use a cautery to prevent the disease from spreading.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	Mays si the nose has been opened and the vapors have entered the palate.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	And if the fluid does not spread to the legs as it should, a cushion is placed on the leg bones by the doctor.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	So, when a patient has a problem, such as a swelling in their feet caused by something other than gout, it is customary to apply cushions to prevent the swelling from worsening.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And since the patient's body has gout, it is necessary to treat him with a cautery.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	You have already opened the door for the patient to have their intestine or cavity treated by another's hand.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And if it is necessary to drain the phlegm from the patient's body through the use of a poultice, put a cushion on their legs.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a lead cushion to the patient's body until they are healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	Then, if healing is needed, use a cautery to treat the patient.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	E aquesta, in this context, seems to mean "and this" or "this is the way". So, the full phrase might be translated as:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And keep a cushion under the legs to prevent pain from spreading.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you want to make a wound on the leg, use a canula (a small tube) to apply heat and draw out the impurities from the body through the blood vessels.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these are the ways to treat it: by applying a poultice or by using a cautery.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	And if you want to cauterize the eye, do so around the area around the eyes.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	They are applying a cautery to the patient's legs for treatment.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And if you wish to be safe from the risk of being injured by sharp tools, you should make sure your hands are free from the ailment.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And you will use a cushion to soothe the pain.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	Then you may apply a treatment to the affected area.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	Then apply fire to the wound to cauterize it.
Capitol .xxvi.	E aprop reduce la cosa on the other side, e use the other cushion to apply heat.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	And if you have already used the pointed cautery on the lips or the ear, and another one is placed on the lips and another one on the lips and another one on the lip.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that in a few such cases, the surgeon will use cautery.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when you have treated the wound on the leg, then apply a cushion to the patient's foot, and hold the patient's hands still.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the patient's lips are already healed, then leave the wounds alone, for they are healed, but if the pain is in their legs, place a cushion on them, and if the pain is elsewhere, don’t touch the sore spots.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then apply sutures to the edges of the wound.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	When there is pain in the joints, they say it's a special case of that ailment.
Capitol .xxvii.	Then apply the appropriate cautery to the affected joint.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	When there is an accumulation of humors in the two lips (of the mouth) that cause pain, it is customary for doctors to call it a cold humor.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	The patient's feet are treated by applying cushions to them.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to treat those areas that are stiffened by joint pain and inflammation, then apply a cushion, and use a tool for the other pains in the legs and feet.
Capitol .xxviii.	**Capitol .xxviii. translates to Chapter 28.**
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	"This is" likely refers to a description of something related to the gums, such as pain or swelling.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	A large number of these wounds are found on the gums, which were formerly called sores by doctors.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then apply to the cavity a styptic and another cauterizing powder.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	Then cauterize the flesh, for if it's necessary to make marks on the skin, use a hot iron to burn them.
Capitol .xxix.	In the 29th chapter...
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Then apply a cushion on their teeth.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When you are dealing with sharp pain in the feet, it is important to remember that what is known as a "toothache" can also be caused by a different condition called "coys".
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so put your hand on the patient's legs and feet to prevent them from being affected by bad humors.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If you are to be a physician, apply the following translations on their initial application, and the other one's for the other two
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that the patient's teeth are what need to be treated.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	E per cushion the intestine so that it does not harm the patient.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx. translated to English is Chapter 30.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	The substance within the leg may cause pain when the tooth is removed.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When a tooth is extracted from a patient who has pain in their teeth, which we must treat quickly to prevent further problems.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	And if you have to pull a tooth on the patient's legs and feet, use cushions to prevent the pain from spreading to other parts of the body.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And if it's necessary to make points on the patient's legs or arms, you should do so gently.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And so if you don’t want to burn yourself, use a pointed instrument for that.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If pain occurs in the foot, apply a cushion to prevent it from being exposed.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	The patient's mouth should be opened carefully so that the gums do not bleed.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And if you are a barber who makes incisions in the body, be careful when applying cauterization to the foot, for that is where some parts are treated.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And if it is necessary to make points on the legs or feet, then they should be burned.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	When the blood flows freely through the legs, it is called a plague.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the child's body may be in danger of being damaged by the use of forceps.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And if you need to make marks on the body using the hot iron, do so.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And if it is necessary to apply a hot iron to the affected area to treat it, then do so on their legs for the same reason.
Capitol .xxxi.	This could be interpreted as a heading or chapter title indicating the start of a new section on treating gout in the body's extremities.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	And if you are performing an operation on the legs or feet, it is customary to call it a cauterization.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	Then carefully cauterize the leg or legs.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The pain of their condition will be felt in their legs.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not use the forceps correctly, it is likely to cause pain in the patient's body, which is why they are called gout.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if your small intestine has been opened, a cushion should be used.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	This is the way to treat those who have a triangular shape and are suffering from pain caused by humors which is called gout.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	Then describe its shape, the second instrument should be subtle and thin.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And thus you help them with their cushions.
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And if the patient needs other treatment for a problem in their legs, they need to be treated accordingly.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if you have a medical text in a language that is not Latin, Italian, French, or Spanish, please provide it.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And then you cauterize the teeth and gums, if necessary.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	Many remedies are harmful to those who use them, but they were the ones who were known for their healing properties.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then when a tooth has been pierced or other bones in the mouth are being set.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is an inflammation in the intestine, it should be treated by placing a bandage over it.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there is little pain in the bones, but a great deal of pain elsewhere, that is where they should be treated.
Capitol .xxxii.	Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body that cause discomfort in the feet.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	And from the treatment of the teeth, they are distinguished by being treated differently.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	Then use a poultice on the affected area to draw out the inflammation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	E' il tuo pain if you are applying your hand to the area above the patient's hands, which would be considered two days as a cushion for an injury?
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	Translation 4:  And so you apply a cupping glass to the patient's thigh, but place your hand on the other areas.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Then place a hot iron on the affected area to cauterize the pain, and avoid using a cushion there.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then put your hand on the patient's leg and cleanse the area where you will perform the procedure.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if you must apply a cautery to the foot, use a heated instrument.
Capitol .xxxiii.	And if it is necessary to treat the illness with a hot cautery.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Then apply gold or silver to the teeth.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	And if you want to make the pain in the legs subside, then apply a cushion to the affected area.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And if you are applying cautery to the patient's legs, then ensure that the pointed instrument is placed on the healthy part of the body.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Apply leeches to their legs and use a hot poultice on the other parts.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	When your body suffers from such an ailment, it is customary to apply cauterization to the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	The patient's body was then covered with a cushion to protect it from harm.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And place your hand on the leg of the patient and apply the same treatment to the intestine and apply another cushion to the foot.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	And then place your hand on their legs so that the disease doesn't return.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And if you have a problem in your legs, place your hand over them, as follows:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When blood has been drawn from the metges to make room for the cushion under their limbs and the one on their feet.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And so it should be done by an artisan and wise man.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Then some apply leeches to draw out blood from the affected area, as they are often used for other purposes.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	And from the ligament which is being affected by the pain, apply cautery to the area.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This sentence could be translated as: This ligament is either naturally present or acquired by chance.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	Then perform surgery on the patient's legs and do the same to the others, and make sure the patient's tongue does not protrude out during the operation.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If a person experiences pain in the joints, especially in the feet, it is called gout.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	If the pain spreads to the legs, it's likely caused by humors, but be careful there are no ruptures in the body.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	...the patient's pain is relieved by placing your hand on their body and applying heat to the affected area.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	This passage describes how to apply medical treatment for gout.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And place your hand on that area to prevent the patient from getting sick.
Capitol .xxxv.	This text likely refers to the treatment of gout, a condition caused by excess uric acid in the body.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Then apply the same method as for the intestine.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	And if it is necessary to open the patient's body for treatment, put a cushion under their tongue.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And if the pain is from the humors in the foot, it is necessary to apply a cautery to it directly.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you find swelling in the foot, avoid applying cautery as it would be ineffective.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And when you are treating an ailment, use your hands to apply a hot iron to the affected area, so as to prevent the blood from being too thin.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the proper remedies to the patient's legs.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The text implies that this section will describe how to treat a particular ailment, presumably related to using a tool or technique for treating someone who has had a specific medical procedure performed on them.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	This text describes treating some kind of swelling in the throat area.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When the patient has a fever, apply cold compresses to the area around their throat.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if the pain is severe, apply a poultice to draw out the gross humors.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	When it is necessary to cauterize the body, make the incision on the foot.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	E has ses instruments to apply a treatment for gout.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And if it is made of silver or with a tool, I need to be more precise.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Therefore, apply heat to the area of the foot until the pain subsides.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you are experiencing pain from the ankles upward, use this method to treat the ailment.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And if a person's body is affected by the cold humors, they are ill with a disease that causes them to be crooked.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	And if a tool is needed for one who has been injured in one leg, then you should cauterize the affected limb, and place the other under the other leg so that it doesn't fall out.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And if the pain is in the foot, apply cauterization to the patient's leg.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mils e'l dolor de la causa that are treated with thyme and myrtle.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Then put other cushions on their legs, and apply them to the intestine if the illness is in the legs, or on the feet.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And so the woman was treated with a poultice for her blackness, which she had already been suffering from for a day or two, and she was treated by the doctors to have a poultice applied to her throat.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And if a cushion needs to be placed on their legs, it's important to use two other cushions for support.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	And if there is no cushion in their mouth, then put it on their legs, so that their body may be heated by it, and place your hand over their feet to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then apply heat to the legs, and place a cushion on the feet.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	And then the wound will be treated with a hot iron to cauterize the legs.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then apply a cautery to the patient's body; one applies cautery with caution, as it is necessary to cauterize.
Capitol .xxxvii.	This refers to applying heat to treat gout in the joints.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	From incision in the legs when it is caused by a wound
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	And if the humors are causing illness to the bowels or legs, it is called humoral sickness.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	Then if you are treating a case of inflammation in the leg, know that those who have a good understanding of their treatment should be aware of the color of the bloodletting.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When treating a patient's tongue, treat them in accordance with the method I have described for treating one who has been affected by cold humors, apply it to the area with the same methods used to treat the joints.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And if the patient has a natural opening which is also known as a poultice, you can apply a cushion over their legs, or apply another to the place where the pain is.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then, make an incision using a tool called aquo (a type of knife) to treat it.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And then place a cushion under them, and you must apply your hand to the area when using a cautery."
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	When a doctor cauterizes a wound on someone's leg, or if a bandage is needed for a wound, apply it to the leg with the appropriate caution.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Then apply the heat of a cautery to the area, already cushioned by a cushion, for one hour, as needed.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, place the patient's foot under a cushion.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you were to apply to the patient's legs or feet a cushion, they would be healed by that cauterization method, but it is important to note that other methods are also used for relief.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And so this type of treatment is more beneficial than cauterization and requires less fear from the patient.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	And if a cushion is needed for their cavity, you must place it on the legs or chest, according to the patient's condition.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And if the pain affects the throat, we call it a cough.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Do the same to their legs as you do to the other parts of the body, that is, apply the treatment to those areas from which the ailment originates.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	This passage describes using a cautery to treat gout in a patient's foot.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment will bring about good health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol 38.  (This assumes "et" means "and", which seems to be the case based on the pattern in the provided examples.)
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	And if the pain is caused by a sharp object in the throat, it should be treated as such.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the foot or anywhere else on the body of the patient, due to the cause of the pain.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	And if you want to burn away the evil humors from the body, use a hot cautery on their tongue, e.g., by applying a cauterizing tool to the affected area.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	When the patient has a sore throat or a cough, they are said to be suffering from a disease similar to a gout attack caused by swallowing a pessa (piece) of food.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	If a patient has an abscess or boil, they are to be treated with a poultice.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	This sentence translates to:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine, then use a hot cautery tool.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	Then place a cloth on their bones so that they are protected from the cold during the treatment, for the physician must be careful to protect the bone and avoid complications arising from the use of a cautery on their chest.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Then a cushion was placed on the legs of the patient to prevent them from being further harmed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Then place a cushion on the neck, to prevent them from being cut off by the other.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When your body is ailing, consider using medicine for healing, and not applying hot irons.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you are going to cauterize the legs, place the cushion on them.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract the stone from that person's body, you will apply your hand on their thigh to stop the pain of gout.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Apointedly to the foot, apply a burning to their legs.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	The pain in the foot is treated by doctors, who are called physicians.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	And then apply cautery.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And if the pain is in the intestine’s surface, then cauterize it; if it is in the feet, apply the appropriate treatment.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if you don't drink water, your body may become affected by cold humors, but avoid watercress, which is harmful to the body.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This passage describes applying a cautery (a tool used for burning) to treat a patient with a condition that causes pain in their feet, suggesting a connection between the provided passages and the practice of using leeches to draw blood from the affected area.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Then if your doctor has said you have already been given the cure for the ailment by the use of lime, he will apply his hand to the affected area, which will prevent them from going out.
Capitol .xl.	The cushion should be placed under the feet, not on the legs or anywhere else.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	When phlegm arises in their legs, they are said to have gout.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	And if these are boils, they will know what to do.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And then there are various ways to treat a wound with an incision.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	Then place another cushion on their legs, so that they are supported by cushions both above and below.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	May the doctors hold their hands on the patient's legs so that the intestine doesn't leave its place.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Then place a cushion on the patient’s thigh, if they are in pain, and apply a cold-air treatment to their legs.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	When a boil has matured, you can lance it.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	Then apply another hand to their legs and another one to their foot so that the patient doesn't move it and cause further pain.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And if it is necessary to cauterize a patient's boil or other inflammation, apply a cushion under the area you are treating and place that on their thighs.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And if a wound is made on the body, it is treated by placing a cushion on the leg.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	Mays your gut be inflamed or irritated, use honey on their feet, and continue to apply it as we have said for the treatment.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Sometimes doctors mistakenly call gout other ailments.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if they need to be treated, make small incisions for the purpose of cauterizing the boils.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And if there are other sores, you must treat them as such, and place a cushion on their legs, and put the patient's hands in them.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And the patient's foot has already been treated for a cushion.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And so you should make a cushion for the pain of the feet.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	When the patient's leg is affected by those ailments, apply a hot poultice to the area.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	The text describes using a cauterized tool to treat a patient's pain in the feet.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	You have already opened the opening to the patient's vein, for a bloodletting.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	This chapter warns that using too much force in surgical procedures can lead to complications, such as the need for further treatment by other means, if the initial cauterization was unsuccessful.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the pain persists, you should apply a cloth to the affected area or use another method of treatment; but do not let the abscess become infected.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	And if blood flows out during the operation, you should administer water to it to stop the bleeding.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	And if you don't apply treatment, the blood will clot in other parts of the body.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is necessary to use a cautery in winter or for other cushion-related reasons, one should know that it is a method to treat pain.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if in summer, the patient suffers from heat, then apply the poultice to their chest and legs.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	Then we need to know the way to treat each individual case.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter xli.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	This refers to treating someone with an abscess in the head or neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	And if they are a little swollen, and then place a cushion on their feet.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of their nature, they are cold and damp.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And if they are in need of a reduction of their body's fluids, it is customary to apply other treatments for that.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the removal of them, there is no fear, for it does not cause pain to the patient's legs or feet.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And so the doctor holds their hands while performing the operation.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	This is a very literal translation.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And thus the patient's body will be treated if they have an excess of humors in their legs, or if they don't, then the leg will be treated as it were for a wound, and the intestines are not inflamed.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then apply a cushion to your legs; if it is present, use a different treatment for the pain in the feet.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Then cure the affected area with Egyptian ointment.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And here is how to treat it when your body's humors are out of balance:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	When a pain arises in the area between the thighs, it is necessary to use cushions for the joints.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	And if you have a bow, it is said that a skilled archer should always be careful to maintain proper form.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Here is a possible translation:
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Gout is caused by a buildup of certain fluids in the body that are called humors; when these fluids become imbalanced in the body of a woman, it causes pain for them.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	When there are other injuries to the leg, you should know that the other injuries are different from each other.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	You already have a physician's hand on the patient's legs.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then apply a poultice that suits the situation to the wound on the patient's foot.
Capitol .xlii.	This refers to the use of a cautery tool, which was used in various ways in medicine, but without more context, it's impossible to know what specific condition it's being applied to.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	And if you cut into the neck, apply the cautery to the affected area.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	And some people say that if you put cushions on their legs and arms, it will relieve them from the pain in those parts.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The last statement refers to the patient having pain in their feet, which is not typical for gout.  Dignus also means worthy or deserving.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And so are these swellings caused by an imbalance of humors treated by the physician.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	And use a tool to hold open the skin at the site of the wound for a more superficial treatment.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And more caution is needed, lest it be their knees, and another place in the body where the vein or nerves are located.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	This pain in the legs or around an injury is treated by applying cauterization to stop the flow of blood from the wounds.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is drawn out.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	This translates to "And if it is necessary to prevent the intestine from being infiltrated by the humors, then return."
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Then apply the poultice to their legs and apply heat to the area where they are already making those small incisions.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if you have a sore throat, your hands are already in the same place as the cushion.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	When joint pain occurs because of a blockage of fluids in the foot, the patient should be treated by a doctor.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then apply the Egyptian treatment to the patient's legs, which are already covered with bandages.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you treat the disease in the legs, you will soon find relief from the inflammation.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	Mays that be the reason for the patient's pain, the cushion should be removed and replaced with a bandage or something similar.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	When the foot has pain due to imbalances in the body's humors, it is called a symptom of the disease "scrophulas", which is caused by an excess of dampness in the system, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And your hand on their body, or cushion in case of a more severe ailment.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And if the infection has been healed or cured, place a cushion under their knee for support.
Capitol .xliii.	Another person's foot is treated as if by a burning pain, the other as gout.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	When you cut into the patient's legs, use the cushion on the area to be operated on.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients used to call this type of pain "gout" when it occurred in the legs.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the description of the disease.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Then apply cushions on their legs, as those are needed to keep them from suffering pain in the ankles, and another cushion should be placed on the patient's feet to avoid them from being too hot.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	When someone has a sore throat or ulcers in their legs, use cushions to protect them.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	And if you want to do it, place four cushions on the legs.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if a doctor is unable to get rid of the swelling in the throat, avoid the pain of the cushion being placed under the neck, but also on the limbs, he puts his hand on their chest.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then return to the patient's hands for cautery already in use, but if necessary, open the intestine.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And the patient's body will be left open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	And if it is necessary to make incisions on their body, do so carefully.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And let another apply medicine to their legs, and yet another to their feet.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And if the patient has died, the legs should be used as a cushion for the rest of the body.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the disease persists for three days, the humors have become too strong; therefore the doctors should treat it with a cautery.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And I, as a physician, have seen that it is a custom to use a cautery for ailments, and I can cure those ailments with a remedy.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, we have to admit that the doctors were right about the patient's illness.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if you have a pain in the intestine, do not worry, as long as the cushion is placed under their thighs.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that there is no fear in the surgeon's hands.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter xliv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	A hernia on the legs is also called an inguinal hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	And this one is called a boil or bubo by other doctors.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	The cause of the pain is in their legs due to an imbalance in the humors.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	In the common ailment, known as the gout, it is customary to apply remedies to the affected joints in the toes and feet.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	Then the doctor uses two methods to treat them.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	Then one should not accuse someone of being proud if their body is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you have already opened the patient's body for them, and find that there are nodi, then place your hand on their legs to prevent the intestine from being affected by the pain.
Capitol .xlv.	This is Latin for "Chapter 45."
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the treatment of the disease called gout.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are many kinds of nodes, and I have already discussed them.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	I have no idea what an "exitura" is, but I guess the doctors are trying to treat pain in the legs or feet.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, it is necessary to apply heat to their legs.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	A hot, sharp pain in the toe, which is what I'm guessing is what the doctor is usually treating when they say "gout."
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And if it is a great pain, you should apply a cushion to the affected area, and another to the other foot, depending on the location of the pain.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if you are a doctor who wants to treat inflammation, use cushions as needed on the patient's body parts.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	This means that you should apply the cushion to the patient's body gently and slowly so as not to cause further pain.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And apply cautery to the affected area according to the severity of the inflammation.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if it is necessary to use a cauterizer on the patient, you should do so superficially.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area again.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	This is a tricky one! I need more context to understand the exact meaning of "e coys" and "autre" in this passage.
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	And so if you are skilled in medicine, you may already have placed your hand on their leg, but for those who suffer from gout, it is said that they should be treated with leeches.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	And if it breaks open during treatment, you will apply cauterization to their legs and call for the surgeon.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If the pain in the body is caused by an imbalance of humors, apply a cushion to their legs, and if they are being cauterized, then apply the hot iron to the area where the pain is felt.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if some part of the body needs to be cauterized, it should be done with an acute cautery.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	When there's a large amount of swelling, you should apply a cushion to the affected area.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if it is a pain caused by a blockage in the blood, the physician will say that the patient needs to have their veins removed from the blockage.
Capitol .xlvi.	This sounds like it could be a title or heading in an old text, likely indicating Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	From the tools needed for surgery and that which is necessary for perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	The pain affects the feet.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	Then, then, you will find the translation below, but I'll translate that other line for you as well because it seems like a fun exercise!
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	And the way to treat it is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	Here comes the translation:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Let the patient's legs be cauterized and the body be healed by the use of fire.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	This is a medical text about treating ailments using cauterization.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And if it is a foot, the body is of three types: those who are sick from the head down to the feet; those who are sick in the legs and feet; and those who are well, which is a sign of good health.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	If it is necessary to apply cauterization, it should be done on the affected legs, and another procedure should be performed if needed.
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	La forma de experient should be translated as "the form of" or "the way to treat", depending on context.
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	"And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the body, it is applied to their thighs."
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	The patient's leg must be treated for all the other ailments that may come from the pain.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And then, the patient's bowels are to be kept in balance, so that they may not be troubled by the gout.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And if they are black and painful, those are the symptoms of a disease called gangrene.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	Gaiters are used to treat diseases in the legs and feet.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the lead form.
Forma del experient migier de plom:	And if it is necessary to treat the body for illness, the type of treatment that would be used depends on the location of the ailment.
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Gout is caused by a build-up of humors in the body.
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The other side of the body is a cushion for the patient's legs.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And from their bodies, you know them by three signs.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And those are the two curves of the body, which is made up of three things.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	E si se vos desidera, la dolor es que vos causa las tres curvaturas en el cuerpo, e si non, e si si, in the case that the pain is due to one of the three types of humors, not the other.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	Then all these things are necessary for their proper place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	This seems to be a Latin phrase but requires context for accurate translation.
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a simple gout treatment is:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	When translated literally, the phrase "of a few" would refer to a small number.
Forma de unci orp gran:	Then the patient's large toe was affected, so they used a tool to draw attention to it:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	This sentence refers to the shape of something, likely the body or a limb, and the pain associated with gout.
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	And if the patient has a small amount of pain in their legs or feet, this is how to treat them with a cautery.
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Autre le nom for the cushion in their hand.
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	A burning pain in the legs.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the patient's legs, they must be held straight.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	And so the patient should have three curves.
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a physician has three curves.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The patient's legs are now open.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the methods for treating swellings in the body: those that are treated surgically, with medicine, or with a combination of both.
Forma de scapel gran:	The form of the body or a part of it that is used for surgery.
Forma del scapel migier:	The shape of the affected area:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The shape of the knife is designed for the type of pain the patient has.
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	For a condition like a cold humors one in the joints it is customary to apply a cushion for the affected areas and to treat others by cauterizing them.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the ways to treat the three forms of the ailment: acute, chronic, and intermittent.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of magda is great for treating such things.
Forma de magda migier:	This means: **When there is a pain in the legs or feet, it is called gout.**
Forma de magda pauc:	This is a tricky one! It seems like the sentence is in a mix of languages.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	Then apply a cautery to the patient's legs, and another to their arms, using a cushion for support.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And if you want to apply cautery, do so as much on the hidden parts as on the surface.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The cushion must be placed on the legs to prevent them from being pierced by the other tools.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And then place your hand on the patient's chest, and another on their feet.
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	And there are three types of forms for cupping therapy, which were used to treat leucorrhea and other ailments by applying cups to the body and using them on their thighs to apply the treatment to the legs.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	And if it is customary to call them by a specific name, they should be called that.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	These are types of cupping treatments, but these are not medicines.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But if they are not in their proper place in the body, they will be treated by physicians.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And if you are translating this sentence correctly, it's describing how gout was named in the past.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	"And in this manner, they are used to by doctors, those who treat gout."
Capitol .xlvii.	The text appears to be about **treating gout with fire** in a way that resembles medieval medical practices.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	And the treatment of their breasts or legs is called "mamillae" by doctors.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some people say that some homes are already swollen with inflammation, while others have cushions for leeches.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	.B. the patient's legs and another cushion placed on their chest.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if there are many things to be done, you should do these things as needed to cure the ailment.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	E so the patient’s health be troubled by the humors, which are already present in the body, you should apply a poultice to draw them out, and then use another cushion on their legs and knees.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	A surgeon should apply heat to the area of the boil.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	And if a pus-filled boil has formed in their legs, then apply a cushion to the patient's legs.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And if you are going to treat someone's foot, then do so with the help of the moon.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And to whatever extent they are affected by the burn, the remedy will be applied to the affected area.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	When there's pain from the humors in a patient's legs or feet, you might treat it with a cautery.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague is spreading widely, use a cauterizer to treat it, just as was previously described.
Capitol .xlix.	Another version of the text could be translated as: "And if it is necessary to make points on the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	This refers to applying a cautery to the affected area, likely the foot, in order to treat a disease caused by the imbalance of humors.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	And if you see that the bowstring has been broken open, it is known by these signs that it is inflammation and if it's a purulent one, it’s called gout: hence the name.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	When by humors it is necessary for the veins to be opened, it is revealed through the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And if it is necessary to treat an apostema, avoid using a cushion to cauterize it, but rather use other methods on the legs or thighs.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Then apply an incision to the affected area and make a note of its location, so as to ensure that the patient's body is not opened further.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	The other way to put the patient's body in the right position for the physician is by using a special tool called an "instrument" or "tool," which is used to burn the skin.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	When the patient is in pain, place a cushion on their legs.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And if you apply a poultice to the affected area, then you are treating the patient in the proper way.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	E if the patient's vein has to be opened, it is necessary that the boil be lanced.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	And if you are treating an abscess, draw a poultice from the legs to where the pain is felt.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And so you should make an incision to drain the pus from the body.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place the cushion on their legs and feet.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	This chapter deals with the burning of the affected area by a heated cautery.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	And if it happens that the intestine or the feet are affected by a painful condition, place a cushion to protect them.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And if it is caused by other agents, it is called pain in the legs or feet, depending on where the pain is felt.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And apply heat to the affected area, as is often done for other ailments, but in this case, the pain is caused by the inflammation that affects the body.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	When it is not an abscess, it is a boil on their body, and the patient has to be treated with a hot iron to burn out the boil, and the heat goes to the area of the boil, but it doesn't work.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, it is customary to cauterize the affected area for those suffering from gout on the legs.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	Just as if it were a pain in the head or the forehead, the other servant will help you with a burning glass.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	Mays is an ailment that affects the body's humors, causing pain in the feet, which is what doctors call gout.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's body, use the cushion method for the larger ones, but the cushion method for the smaller ones.
Capitol .li.	The chapter title suggests the beginning of a numbered section, likely in an Italian medical treatise.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	And then apply a cushion to their legs.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Then the doctors apply their knowledge to the patient's feet and other body parts, using a cautery for burns in case they need to cauterize the affected area.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And he had seen one, and in the patient's stomach there were two parts, and his/her intestine was inflamed, so they were put on the ground, and the other part of the body was placed on their chest.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And if their mouth was split, they would have been called gouty lips.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	And if you have an incision or wound there, it should be treated carefully.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And if the operation in the case of an illness caused by humor; then treat it with a pointed cautery.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient has suffered an injury, place a cushion under them.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	E therefore adjust the lead weights to the body, and let them be applied with the utmost effort.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	Mays if there be a pain in the legs, it is better to place a cushion under them.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	Mays possibla is the patient's body, it is possible they have a condition that doctors call a "maytat".
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the legs, that's what should be done.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And keep your hands from the patient when you apply heat to their feet.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And you have already opened the space on their legs, and another cushion will be placed under them.
Capitol .lii.	This looks like a corrupted or archaic text!
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On treatment for a condition of swelling in the area around the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The first cause of the condition is when the humors are concentrated in the body, leading to pain in the feet, which is why it is called "the gout."
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	May it be known that if a man's body is troubled by a fever.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if the humor is removed from their legs and feet, then the patient will be free from the pain.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if one were to treat the feet with a cushion, they would be healed by the cushion, not the disease.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And you have already applied cautery to the affected area.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	When there are no signs of inflammation in the body, the patient will have less pain.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	And if it is caused by wind, it will be treated as a lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	This refers to the treatment of a condition (likely gout) by doctors.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if it is a pain in the foot, then you have to use the proper method for treating it, which is with a hot cautery.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And place your hand on their legs
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	You have found a bump on the leg;
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	Mays if you have an arrow in your hand, that is contrary to your usual practice.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish to perform acupuncture on the patient, it is customary to use needles.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	This translates to: And if the omentum is swollen due to inflammation, then apply your hand to the area where the cushion should be.
Capitol .liii.	The title of the text suggests a chapter from a medical treatise.
De curacio de cranc.	Translation: Another treatment for the body.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	And I have said that there are three types of gout: acute, chronic, and traumatic; and that there is no pain in the first type, but the other two are used for treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	E dia that some of the ancients translated the text to say: When the pain of ancient diseases arises in a limb, they are called that which is in their body, by the name of those who have been afflicted with such.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When cold and hot it is not gout that you will be cured of: It is by applying the hot cautery.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	This refers to the process of treating the bubonic plague, which involved draining the buboes, or swollen lymph nodes, that were characteristic of the disease.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then, place your hand on the area where they are applying the cushion to prevent the intestine from protruding too much; if the patient’s suffering from a pain in the joints, it is a proper treatment.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And then the blood runs freely, and the rest of their body is also relieved of pain.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If a patient has an illness that causes pain in the body, particularly in the joints, then they have a painful condition in the legs, and another will be placed on their arm to avoid the opening of the vein or veins.
Capitol .liv.	The first chapter of a medical treatise about the treatment of gout.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of gout.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	The cure for gout is discussed, including the use of medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	When a person has been cured by a burning sensation, they are no longer considered a patient needing cautery.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	The first line translates to: And if you apply a hot cautery to this type of illness, it should be applied with caution.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	When the patient has an ailment, the way to treat it is by having a cushion placed under their body, and another on their chest, so you must be careful that the hernias are not caused by a similar condition.
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	"It is said that the patient has a cushion on their thighs; if they have another pain in their legs, which can be quite sharp, then treat them with caution when treating the area near the knee."
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And so the patient's condition will be called "dropsy" if it is caused by fluid buildup in the chest.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	And if the patient's illness is caused by a bad liver, make a cut in the area, which will be three fingers wide.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	E si the leg pain is caused by cold humors, you should apply a hot poultice to their thighs and another to the patient's legs, making sure to avoid cauterizing the knee.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	Put a cushion under their feet to prevent gout from occurring there.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And apply the instrument to the entire thigh, scraping away at the skin.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then place the cushion under their feet.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Already place your hand on the patient's leg to extract the form.
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	This passage is describing a description of gout in the original Latin text.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And if it is necessary to use an instrument on the legs, the other two sources are used for the thighs and the lower leg.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	And if it is necessary to make a cut on the intestine or a cushion placed upon the legs, and for the patient to be taken care of by a physician, the whole body should be treated gently, but if the pain is in the feet, it is customary to treat them with the utmost care.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And apply the instrument to their bowels, which are in pain due to that method.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And you leave the instrument in place for a few days to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	And if it's necessary to cauterize the affected area, it should be done for a long time with hot medicines.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	and if you cauterize it, apply heat to the area and place a cushion on the stomach,  et cetera.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol 51.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	And thus you have treated those children who have gout.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Then some things are done to prevent a cushion from being needed by the patient's body.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	And thus, the patient is subject to a subtle burning sensation.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And apply a poultice of a soft leaden substance to that part of the body, to be sure.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when the bladder needs to be opened, apply it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	Then you may have to use other methods, because the patient's intestines are swollen.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Mays aquel del qual le trauc es amplificat es que le dolor es de la altre costat.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	This ma can cause the legs to swell.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The translation is a bit off, but I believe the text describes the process of treating a patient suffering from a condition that causes pain in the foot.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And if you have a wound in your legs, apply a cautery to stop the bleeding.
Capitol .lvi.	**Capitol .lvi.**
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	The foreskin should be treated for inflammation and infection.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	This sentence refers to a condition where there are painful lumps in the body caused by an imbalance of humors.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of these humors is bad and another is good, but which is which?
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	For you have not yet seen the patient's disease, but if there is another case, treat it as you would normally treat such ailments.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the humors are malignant, they should be treated by a physician by applying a treatment to them.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	And if the condition is present outside the body, it is called a foreign injury to the foreskin.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	Then you have to apply a poultice on their legs to soothe them.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And if you wish to cure them, prepare for it carefully.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	And if blood flow to the leg is disrupted, it is through the use of moon-shaped cauterization that it is treated.
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	When the body's blood is cold, it causes the veins to be blocked.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if you place a cushion under their legs, you must place another on the penis, so that he doesn't urinate out of it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	Then apply a poultice to the patient's legs; and apply another cushion on their feet.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	Then return the patient's legs and place a cushion on their thighs to protect them from the heat of the cautery.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then one should separate the foreskin from the head of the penis, so that the water does not make it stick out.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And here you treat the patient's legs with wine that will consolidate the healing process.
Capitol .lvii.	Another treat them with a hot cautery on the legs.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	And it is said that the cause of pain in the legs is due to something else.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	When a doctor wants to remove something from the patient's body, they will use a cautery, but if they want to continue to treat them, they should use their hands.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	And if it is necessary to make an incision, you should use a heated cautery tool.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	This is a guess: "And if the patient's legs are to be treated"
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	Cease to be so if you wish for it to remain hidden.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	Another person will apply the bandage to the affected leg or foot.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The child's body must be treated by a doctor.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	And if the patient has humors from the foot, which are to be cauterized by a physician, he will feel pain, but it is said that the pain in the legs is caused by the same way as the one in the feet.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	This is the way to treat a child suffering from a disease by using a cautery on their legs.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And if it is necessary to treat the ailment with a cushion, etc., then rejoice because you can now do so effectively.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And he kept his hand on the bandage to keep the wound from being infiltrated by the cold humors that are in your gut, and no one could touch it with a cautery because...
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then place your hand on their intestine, to prevent the infection from spreading further.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Place the bandage on a lower part of the leg, because there may be other causes for pain.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a bandage to the wound after treating it with a poultice of fresh herbs and honey for pain relief.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	This is a description of how to use forceps during childbirth, but it's unclear if it refers to a specific type of modification or technique.
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The intestines are swollen or painful, then you need to use a hot cautery on the affected area.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	And if there are errors in the body's cleansing, it is said to be the case of the entire intestine or the foot being affected.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Then you must use your hand to stop the pain from spreading further in the body than the foot, which is where it belongs.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you can't get them to hold still.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	After three days have passed, if the pain persists, the patient should be treated with a poultice and a cautery applied to the affected area.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And so if you have to apply a cautery, be careful that it does not burn the flesh.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore, treat that limb carefully, as the other parts of the body are treated in this manner.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	and if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, apply the cautery on the other side.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And if there's anything I can do to help, I will try to translate it accurately.
Capitol .lviii.	Translation: Another servant will be on their knees, holding their legs.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	And so the treatment for the retention of urine in the bladder is called.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's legs so that they are covered.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if there is no urine passing through, place your hand on their leg to prevent its swelling.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place a cushion upon his legs.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then you must put your hand on the neck of the bladder, to prevent its overflow.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the cause of the ailment be not removed by means of a lancet, then apply a burn to the patient's legs.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And if you wish to know what the cause of his urine might be, hold your hand over the wound on his leg, which is where the doctors would have a cushion put.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make sure there's a cushion under them: one for the legs, and another for the feet.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then place a cushion on the patient's body so that they will be able to apply it to their own belly and another one already in place.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And if it is necessary to let the patient's urine drain, they should use a catheter.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then apply the other cauteries as needed to restore balance to the patient's humors.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Let the bladder be cleansed by a similar method used for the foot.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus you make an incision to release the pressure from the veins of the body.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But if the first member is closed off, it should be opened up again.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that place there are three cushions: two on the legs of the one who has been affected by the injury, and one on their hands.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning, place a cushion under their legs.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	When it becomes necessary to stop the flow of urine or the humors in the body of a patient.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then apply the cauteri to the patient's legs; otherwise, the patient's bladder will be affected.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	This is a text written in a language similar to Latin and French that describes how doctors treat gout.
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And if you make a piece of silver or other metal, it's said to be made of thin sheets.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then place a cushion under their legs.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then apply it to the patient’s legs.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then apply a hot poultice to the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if you want to treat pain in the joints, place your hand on the area of the body where the patient has pain and apply the cushion to the area around their feet.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then place a cushion over their legs to prevent the swelling from spreading.
Capitol .lx.	Capitol .lx.
De extraccio de peyra.	From the text, I think this means:
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	Nos already have explained the difference between stone in the kidneys and stones formed in the bladder, and the signs of one or the other.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And if they are suffering from pain in their legs, it is important to take note of the location of the pain and any other ailments the patient has.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And if a stone forms in the bladder, it is called a stone.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And if it is necessary to treat the patient, that is what they are for.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	The text describes an individual experiencing gout in their feet.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And then you should apply your hand to the affected area of the body.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	May it be called gout if in young people, and then apply hot water to the affected area.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And if there is no pain in the legs, it’s considered a milder ailment.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Gout is sometimes called a disease of the humors that affects the joint pain.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then place your hand on the affected area to treat it.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And if you wish to stop the disease spreading from the legs to the rest of the body.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And so you will cauterize that area and leave the burn open to heal properly.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore if you feel the pain in the legs, cauterize the area immediately to prevent it from spreading.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If you do not properly apply cushions to the knee, then it is young, it will be painful for them.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And if you do that, the patient will be able to stand up again.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And you should carefully apply heat to the area of the body where it hurts.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then place your hand upon them to prevent the pain from spreading.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And have the minister apply pressure with their hands to the affected area, while another part of the body is placed under a cushion for comfort.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is necessary to treat a wound on the legs or thighs, treat them first with a hot cautery.
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And if it is necessary to treat a person's humors, use a cushion to elevate the body part affected by gout.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	Then you must know that the human body is already familiar with the pain from the burn.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from their legs and feet, which are now exposed to the elements, they will be afflicted by gout, a pain in the bones.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Then you have to make sure that the affected part is properly cauterized.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	When you place a tool on the body, it should be placed in a way that does not cause harm to the bones or muscles.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot remove the pain by other means, then cauterize it with fire and vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	This is a description of how to treat a patient with pain in their bowels and feet.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	"And if there is a large swelling in the legs, put a cushion under them, for when one has a large swelling, there are two possible causes."
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	And treat them with cushions to hold whatever is swollen or inflamed in the joints so that they don't protrude further.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So apply a hot cautery to the cavity after you have opened it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And apply a cloth to their skin, for if they are affected by an ailment caused by them, it is customary to use a poultice.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then you should place your hand on the patient's legs, keeping them elevated.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when the patient has been given a potion to relieve the pain, apply the dia-balm to their body.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	And when there is an inflammation of the joints in the body, it is known as gout.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply heat to the patient's feet as needed for the treatment.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	You have already been treated by the physicians for the ailment.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there are small stones, you should use a hot iron to cauterize the area where the injury is located.
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	From the first sentence it appears that "de" means "of",  "fust" means "body", and "extramitat" likely refers to a part of the body, perhaps the leg?
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then place a cushion under them, and on their legs.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	...and placed a cushion on their legs, to prevent them from procreating ...
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And then apply the cautery to the point of pain on the legs, so that it is easier for you to close it back up again.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	When your hands are used to hold and press on the stone, another cushion will be placed on the feet.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	And so you should cauterize the patient's body above the knee, and apply pressure.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And there place upon the foot a cushion, and the other one on the thigh, which will help control the pain in their legs.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then place a cushion on their legs.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then apply the cauteries to the affected areas, and carefully treat them with the appropriate methods.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And when the bowel has been opened, it is customary to apply a cautery on the intestine to prevent the infection from spreading to other parts of the body, but the pain remains in the legs and feet.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And if the patient's legs are blistered, you should apply a cushion to their legs, and collect the pus as we previously mentioned.
Capitol .lxi.	And then apply cauterization to their joints.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Another common practice used by doctors is to apply a cauterizing agent to help reduce swelling and inflammation.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	It is said that it is rare for stones to be engendered in women.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	It is difficult to treat these ailments, and they are often associated with pain in the joints, but if you must make them, then it's best to do so carefully, avoiding infection of the body by the blood.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The woman's illness is caused by an imbalance of humors in her body.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestines or abdomen, then use this method for women and men.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	This sentence suggests the speaker is instructing someone on how to treat gout using an "art" that involves cauterization.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth condition is that if there is a need to cauterize the body, they should be placed on their legs, as you put the cushion under them, for the rest of the day.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	It is likely that you need a cushion to support your legs.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	When there are many women who have been placed in a state of illness, they need to be treated by someone skilled in the art of medicine.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then apply a burning cautery to the woman's foot if she has a pain there, and put a cushion under her feet, then she will be able to see what is going on in the world.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you have pain in the legs, do the same thing as you did to the intestine (of the intestine).
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If they are not a virgin, then I must be careful to keep my hands in a place where they cannot catch the disease.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then place a cushion on the bladder to keep it from being painful.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then you will apply the cautery to their legs.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And if it is necessary to apply a hot compress to the patient's legs, let them be applied; the pain will be treated by another method.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And so forth, for the most part, are the spices of the stone, sharp and strong.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	And if you know that there are how many species of the other, you will mark them as such.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if blood flows freely, then apply heat to the legs to stop it.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And so the doctor says that he prepares the tools for surgery with which to operate.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And when there is a flow of blood, and you know that the blood flows from the patient, then hold your hand on their [blood] vessel to stop the pain.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And it is the patient's own body that heals the plague.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	The other uses the term "gout" in a way that is very similar to how you would describe the condition.
Capitol lxii.	A cushion is placed under the affected area.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Then another cushion under their legs.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia occurs when the body's humors are out of balance.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And another name for the pain in the foot is gout.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And put a cushion on their legs so that the doctors may treat them.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And thus the patient's body should be treated with specific attention to their humors.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	Then apply a poultice to soothe the inflammation in the foot due to a hernia.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the dampness is in their own body, then they say it is due to cold humors.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if they are suffering from humidity and need to be cauterized, you should place them on their backs with a cushion under their feet, or the patient has a swollen gut, so apply cautery to their legs.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the nature of the inflammation, what is left in the sore will tell you what caused it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	And then, for the treatment of the patient's body, if it is possible to cauterize them, use it.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then the patient lies on their back, and they are covered with a blanket.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	E  la locum teneat un altra verga, and you place a hand on the patient’s legs, to do it in his/her stomach.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then apply splints to the legs, the patient will be relieved by this.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make an incision along the line of the sole, which you will have marked with a cautery.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	You have already opened a wound that should be carefully examined, as well as the other parts which are open to your treatment.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And you place the cushion on the foot.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	E aprop separa la cosa that is, so as to be able to separate them in the same manner.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And if it is possible to cauterize the intestine and make it stay put, then do so carefully.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	The author of the text considers what to call the condition that causes pain in the joints.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you apply a poultice to their legs, another one will be used on them by itself.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	When the water is distilled, it is customary to call it gout.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And apply a poultice to the affected area with a cushion to protect the skin from the heat.
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then apply a cushion to the location where the patient has pain, which is how gout is treated by doctors.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	The patient's feet are being cauterized.
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And if it is a small wound, it is treated with a cauterization tool.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	When it is necessary to apply cautery on their legs.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	When there is swelling in the legs, place the cauterizer on the area to be treated, and apply a poultice to the affected area.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And if it is better to treat the pain by cauterizing or applying heat, they say that the use of a hot cautery is necessary for gout and should be applied to the legs or feet.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	And if it is contrary to the nature of the body, then treat it as you would a wound or cut on the foot.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	This translates to: The patient must be treated with cauterization so that the pain in the body part can be alleviated; if there is a doubt about whether the condition is caused by an excess of hot humors.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Therefore, if the surgeon deems it necessary to treat an infected abscess on the foot, he should apply the treatment with a pointed cautery.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And they have called this condition "the wide opening" and the cushion under their knees, the other on their legs.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And if there is a pain in the foot, then treat it as doctors would treat any other ailment by applying heat to the affected area.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And if it is necessary, you apply cauterization to heal the plague.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	In the hour when the plague is upon you, you'll need to cauterize the affected limb.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	If you apply heat to the affected area, it will be treated by cauterization.
Capitol .lxiii.	Capitol 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	To cut open the chest and other parts for the treatment of the hernia.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	And so that you know, in a hernia the patient's body will be already treated by a doctor.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And thus the operation is remembered by the physician.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Then apply it to the body, and another application for the patient's feet.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And if there are other issues in the body, they will cause intense pain.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	E forthe a cushion on their legs, they will be held by them back to the original position.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes pain in those veins is caused by inflammation of the blood vessels.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	When if one has them put a cushion on their legs, they should be careful that their hands are placed correctly.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	The first servant is to be used on them if it is determined that the swelling in the legs is due to vein inflammation.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	E then it is possible that some pain in the body, which is caused by the feet being affected, can be treated by applying a cushion to the affected area.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if you are a physician, and you have already made an incision on the patient's leg, then you should place a cushion on the wound.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion in the intestine, apply another cushion on the patient's legs.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	When there is an already existing pain in the body where the skin has been affected by the flesh, the other servant may be placed behind them to hold their legs.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then because you have opened the space between the patient's legs, apply another cushion to their feet.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol .lxiv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	This refers to the treatment of a type of hernia that affects the legs.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area for a while.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	This is for fear that the disease may be severe because it affects the limbs, which are already being treated.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	But if a cushion should be placed on their legs, doctors will call them "legs."
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And if he/she wants to prevent the intestine from being too exposed, they should place the cushion under them.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then place a cushion on their legs and cut open the area around the vessels where they are located.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then the doctor must apply his hand to the affected area.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Translation 2: And if you wish to know where the needle is located on the body, you should ask for it.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then apply those incisions to the legs, which are made in the corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then treat the disease with a hot iron to cauterize the affected area so that the ailment is contained.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	And if it is necessary to make incisions in the testicles, it is customary to place cushions under them.
Capitol .lxv.	e aprop a directus the loc per la cura del mal de la planta etis.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Then apply the treatment with a tool for intestinal hernias.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	And if you find an opening in the intestines, it is called a hernia.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This pain is caused by several reasons, such as excess cold in the body which affects the feet and causes the intestine to be affected by the condition.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And if the intestine is affected by the cold, it causes a pain in the foot, which is why they are called gouty pains.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of them is when a sudden pain occurs in the stomach or leg.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And at other times it is called a hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	When there is pain in the intestines, it's another cushion for the patient to be placed on their legs, and another cushion if necessary.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	Then return the patient's legs to their original state by applying points to the legs.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And if you are to operate on a patient's leg, put a cushion under their feet.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then apply the cautery to the patient's testicles or scrotum.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	E si'l ha por lo manetz: And if there is pain in the foot it is called gout.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then the patient's testicles are cauterized with a hot tool.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	When the testicles are infiltrated by heat from the blood, they can be treated by applying cold to them.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And if you wish to make a diagnosis of what causes the body's humors, one must look at the pain in the legs; for example, the part affected by gout; where the cautery has been used.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	E cerqua, am that which is other than the usual causes of gout.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find that there's a need for it, then treat them to be treated properly.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And put a cushion on their leg, so that the needle does not pierce the skin too deep.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Then place cushions under those limbs to prevent the development of an abscess.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And apply a bandage to the cushion placed on the patient's legs.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	"Then place the patient's body in a position where it is already as the other cushion touches the body."
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And let oil be applied to the legs, if they are affected by a condition, which could be gout, for the sake of their health.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If there is no immediate improvement, apply heat to the affected area.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is said that it heals the plague.
Capitol .lxvi.	And if there's a need for a cautery, it should be applied to the affected leg, and the patient should be held down.
De hernia ventosa.	Then describe the pain in the patient's feet.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	And then they will see if the patient has a fever or other signs of illness.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	Then apply a hot poultice to the affected area of the body.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the plague according to the way we said, until it be healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	This sentence is likely from a translated version of a medical text, and the translation you provided seems to be taking some creative liberties.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Another one from the patient's thighs.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	When there is a need to cauterize the afflicted, apply the cautery to the affected limb as well as they are called for.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	Then apply heat to the affected area, but avoid burning the skin.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	When the foot pain is prolonged and the intestine is stiff, apply a poultice directly to the affected area and use cushions to support the patient's body, and place your hand on their stomach, as we have previously said.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	This refers to treating the patient with something that burns or cauterizes.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured by placing a hot cautery on the affected area, which is why the patient's legs should be warmed up first.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then apply a cushion to the affected area below their feet.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Translation 4: You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, and another cushion on their legs, and another one where the intestines are located.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And adjust the cushion to fit the two limbs well.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And if it is necessary to remove something from the patient's body, and do not injure other organs.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And apply a cautery to the patient's legs, keeping it on the affected area.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And the patient's health is improved by cauterization.
Capitol .lxviii.	Capitol LXVIII (or 68) - This chapter likely discusses medical treatment for painful conditions.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	And concerning the softening of the pain in the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	And if it is necessary to make incisions on their legs, it is good practice to use cushions for support.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	When the pain affects the patient's feet, the doctors use heat to treat it.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And apply the bandage in three or four layers, with firm stitching.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then apply another to his legs to heal them.
Capitol .lxix.	Another (possible) name for "gout" could be found in the old medical texts.
De castracio.	Concerning castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	And if it is necessary to castrate animals by our means;
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	Therefore, castration can be performed in two ways: by crushing or by incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	And so the doctors will treat the patient's wounds with hot water compresses.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then put a cushion under their arms and legs to prevent them from opening up further.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	When you are performing a castration, then hold the beast's testicles by their side.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And if there is something in the armpits or other joints.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then cauterize the legs of the patient where you've already placed the cushion on their body, and another servant on their chest, and then apply the other cushions as needed.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not allow the pain to spread from their feet, by keeping them warm and dry.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And in this way of castration, you should know which is better, for the beast will have no more use for its testicles.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you are near the afflicted leg, then cauterize it.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the treatment of the ambiguous condition.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	The first part of the given text translates to: "Hermaphroditism in men is considered by itself..."
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And on the legs or thighs it is customary to put another's name in the cavity.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, the conh (concussion) can be caused by injuries to the head, such as a blow to the temple.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	There are three types of cures for wounds: those for men, those for women, and those that are general to all.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And if there be need to apply cautery to the patient's body, use the cushion to prevent them from feeling pain.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And for men who suffer from a blockage, there are other treatments.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	The pain is from the doctors using a hot cautery to treat it.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	And some are affected by bad air in their bodies, and they should be treated for this with caution as to its causes.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	And then they should place a cushion under their feet if needed, to prevent them from moving.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	Then apply a cautery to the patient's legs, but less so to the feet, as they are more sensitive.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And if you apply it to the area affected by the plague, it may be effective in treating the illness.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if it is necessary to make an incision into the body, then let it be done with great care.
Capitol .lxxii.	This appears to be a portion of a medical treatise describing the use of a poultice for treating an ailment.
De curacio de alratica.	And for the treatment of pain, use a cauterizing tool.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Then, if a woman's body needs to be treated, use a small cautery.
E es o natural o accidental.	It can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	And the body is affected by the illness, and a cushion on the legs, and another in the other place where the illness affects them.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	When you have identified the cause of pain in the limbs or joints, then use a method to reduce the swelling of the affected area.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	If there are pains in the legs, and they are sharp, apply a leech to their body, and use a poultice on other areas.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the patient has a fever, they are likely to be affected by the heat of the disease.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And do you place cushions on his legs to support them.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	Another cushion should be placed on the woman's womb to ensure she stays comfortable.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then apply oil to the area where it has been cauterized so that the pain does not become chronic.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the cushion is thick and heavy, use a tool to make an incision above the knee.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	This means apply the remedy to the affected area as soon as possible.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	Then apply a bandage to the leg after cauterizing with a hot iron.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And apply a lead cushion to their legs so as to prevent the plague from spreading within them.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And if they have been suffering from an illness, you should use a cautery on their legs and thighs.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And you should apply another treatment for the treatment of gout?
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And if it is necessary to make incisions, it should be done in the leg muscles, using a hot cautery, by applying a poultice to the affected area after the incision has been made.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If you are already dealing with the pain from the boils, use cushions to protect the area from further discomfort.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Then apply a hot cautery to treat hemorrhoids in women, using a poultice of lint and other materials.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	The translation for "Emorroydas so apprecio" should be "And if it is a vein that's inflamed" or "And also the old veins".
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	The original text must be held in a specific posture to treat the disease.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	When gout affects the bowels or legs, it is treated by applying heat.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those are the ones who have the cure for their ailment.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And if you are in need to apply cautery on the surface of the body, use a cushion with the patient.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then pulverize the veins on the legs.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then cauterize the patient's feet for an hour with a hot iron and another cushion.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the blood flow is continuous, the other part should be covered by the hand of the physician.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then apply to the patient's back a poultice of honey and wine.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	Then apply two cupping glasses to the affected area.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then, to heal, apply cilantro and a poultice.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May the patient's second ailment be treated with caution, so that you may apply the cautery carefully.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is caused by a fever, it is another disease that is spread throughout the body.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	The surgeon will make an incision on the patient's leg.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Some swellings appear in the legs and feet due to various causes.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And if the patient's sickness is a certain type, place a cushion under them and use other tools for treatment.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And if it is a hot pain in the affected foot, then you can use a cautery to treat it.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	When the body's humors cause inflammation, then apply heat to the affected area.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And for the man who has his hands on the woman's body.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	In these cases, midwives typically use a tool to open the patient's body, as they traditionally do for childbirth.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	Then apply the heated instrument to the body part where it needs to be applied.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	And then apply cauterization to their legs.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And if you have a pain in the leg that is sharp, apply a cushion to the affected area.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when you have to make an incision, do so with a tool kept hot and apply pressure to the wound after.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And if it is necessary to place a needle on the legs, it is said that you should put it on the foot's cushion.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	When there is pain in the body, apply a cushion to their legs.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the poultice for two days to heal the affected area.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And if it is necessary to cauterize something, apply the cautery to the legs or the feet, depending on where the inflammation occurs.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if a cushion is placed on their legs, be careful to note that in the case of sickness, you are prohibited from using it on the patient's body.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol .lxxv. translates to: Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	And so we have already discussed the cause of the disease, but if the pain is located in the legs, that is also called a cushion.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The midwife must apply pressure to the baby’s body to help guide the birth canal during labor.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Thus, when these symptoms appear, the body must be covered with a cushion so that no fluid is lost.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	And if you want to apply a cautery to the foot or leg, then put your hand on the patient's knee to protect it from going to the head.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	If there is a need to apply a hot cauterizing iron, one should be careful not to burn the patient's skin.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And do you see how the patient's leg is? If so, apply cautery to those areas.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the body is affected by heat, it is cooled with cold water.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then apply a needle to the second part of their body by making a small incision in the thigh.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And if the pain is in the abdomen, apply pressure to hold it in place.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	Mays, in case there's a need for it, you have placed a cushion on their legs, and another on the other side.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And if necessary, apply a poultice to the patient's legs for an hour to reduce inflammation.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the pain is in the legs due to gout, it is necessary for you to open them up gradually.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	And if you are too obese, you may be prone to gout.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if a person experiences joint pain caused by a coldness that has settled in their body, you will need to put your hand on their foot to prevent the humors from escaping.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	And if there's a need to treat the pain in their legs with a cautery, another type of treatment should be used for the pain in the embryo's feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the foot is affected, it is necessary to apply a cautery to its small size.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Then you should apply a cautery to the legs, if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is necessary to apply a poultice or use their hands on the body.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is necessary to treat a wound in the foot, apply a cushion to their legs.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then apply the treatment to the afflicted body part.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	E cum vezes that the body's ailments are alleviated by applying heat to the area affected by cold humors.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And then apply heat to their legs, and use your hand to hold a hot iron over them.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Then apply cauterization to their legs and feet.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	If the pain is caused by an injury to their foot, then the physician would use cautery on the patient's legs.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then slowly apply pressure on the stomach, where the patient's abdomen is located.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the intestine or any pain in the foot must be treated.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then apply a cushion to their legs so that they are not in pain.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	And if the patient has a pain in their legs, place something under them to support the body.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	And if you need to reduce the swelling on the patient's foot, place your hand on their thighs and your other on the foot.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	Then if one cannot walk because of the pain in their legs, they must be placed on their back, and apply another cushion to the area where the pain is located.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the pain comes in the feet, the patient will be given a cushion to place on their feet and they are to put their hands into their pockets so that the cushions do not cause further damage.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The patient's legs are being cauterized.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife should keep the patient's legs warm and apply cauterization to the affected area only if necessary.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when he has been treated for a while, the physician will place a cushion on the patient's legs to prevent pain from coming out.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command your legs to be treated in such a way that they are carefully cauterized.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The failure of the fetus to thrive leads to pain in the legs.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When there is inflammation in the legs, treat them accordingly to the method of cauterization, which you will use on the legs to remove their pain.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if you have to apply cautery to their feet, use it on the legs, otherwise it will be difficult to perform the operation.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And if one has applied a cushion to the leg, they say that you've done well, but for the foot itself, use a light touch, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	And then they are cured by many.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	And you know that the pain of labor pains is known to be caused by three or four, but I don't know why it would be called “natu” (nature) by doctors.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs, or if they have already been treated with cautery, use only a natural method for cauterization.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And you should apply cauterization to those unnatural humors.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if it is necessary to treat a patient with cushions, they are needed for those who have pain in the legs or feet.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	And if the patient experiences pain in their legs, they are likely suffering from gout.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Then put a poultice on the body to draw out the humors.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And if there is a need for a cushion, then apply it to the thighs, but place your hand on their legs.
Capitol .lxxvi.	The translation is: **Chapter 76**.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Then treat it as an abscess if the patient has a wound on their legs.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	And if the patient has been healed by the use of other remedies, such as those we have mentioned, and it is necessary to apply cautery, it should be done on the thighs, and only when they are in good health.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the time comes to open the wounds on the legs and feet, another cushion should be placed under their knees.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And if there are two or more cushions on their legs, they should be tied together so that their intestines do not extend beyond the body.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you put oil on their legs.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then [the midwife] applies her hand to the patient's body.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And so you must consider the location of the pain in the body, and place a cautery on the affected area.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	Mays es to say that there are other interpretations for the pain in the patient's legs or feet.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And so that he can help his patient, the doctor must place his hand on the patient's feet, for these are the places where the pain is felt.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then apply a third cautery to the patient's leg if necessary, but be careful, not too close to the bone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And if it's necessary to apply heat to the affected area, you will do so to alleviate the patient's condition.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And if the pain is felt in the legs or feet of the patient, the midwife will apply ointment to soothe them; e.g., those parts that are affected by the plague.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the patient's body has been affected by a fever, the physician would call it thus.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	This is the first sentence of your provided text: “When the patient's legs are swollen from too much water, it is said that they have a disease called the "water-logged" or "damp" humour.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And so, cover both the legs and feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if you have to treat a patient with a large “cap” (head) ...
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And if it's the case that the pain is in the legs or feet, it is likely due to a natural cause; use forceps as needed for this type of pain.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the pain is in the legs, they should be treated by the application of heat.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	Here comes the first source sentence in English:  If it is not complicated, you must be careful to avoid complications.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And lahors that you place cushions on the patient's legs and a cushion on their feet if they are swollen.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the pain is in the feet, it will be hard to tell if it's from the cold or heat if you are feeling pain in your feet.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	Hold open the patient's legs and feet so they are already opened.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	Mayes the other joints are also treated with the cushion at the elbow, so you should apply a hot compress to the affected area.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the patient is open, they should be cauterized as necessary to prevent inflammation.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Then apply a bandage and place them in a position to prevent further injury.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	Then if the patient has pain on their side, use the cushion on their sides and let them be treated by a physician.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	When necessary, the surgeon will make an incision.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	Then ensure that you leave no part of the body untouched.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And then, when the doctors have finished their work on your feet, they should be treated for coldness by applying heat.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if you have to cauterize a patient's legs, use hot water and treat them with other cushions.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen women whose stomachs are swollen by pregnancy be cured by cauterization.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It is said that if it's been a long time since an apoplesis occurred in the legs, it often happens to a man that his bowels are loose; and if he is prone to be affected by gout.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And if there are plagues that plague the legs for a long time, then you put a cushion on them and it becomes a case of gout.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you will have to place a bandage over the patient's legs or knees so they don't move, and another on their feet, so they don't move.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then he thought about the bones of the deceased.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore, treat them with the utmost care.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you should know that when there are no more openings needed to be made in the legs, then a cushion is applied there for relief.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Then use a cushion to extract the fat from the patient's thighs.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Then apply heat to the legs, et autre on their body.
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is how you treat a swelling with another cushion, which is the best way to help it.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But if it is necessary to use this medicine on the patient's body, it should be done by someone skilled in medical knowledge.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	When a doctor applies a treatment to the feet, they would use a cushion to help apply pressure.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And if you are dealing with a blockage, use cautery to open the intestine by burning.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Give shape to the form of the body with a cushion.
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	And if you are making an incision on the foot, then apply forceps to their leg.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But perhaps the intestine is affected by the disease in question.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	This is what I have:
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then you must open the wound carefully, using an instrument to do so according to the amount of pain you wish to treat.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	This refers to the patient's condition, not their body part.
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	When the shape of the body is affected by the disease called gout:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	and if there are other causes of pain in the foot, it's best to leave it alone.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	and then apply the forceps to hold the patient's foot so that it is held in place.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	A hot poultice should be applied to the affected area.
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The text describes using a type of cautery tool to treat a condition by applying it to the affected area.
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Forma de unci having two points (of pain) are other.
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	This form of pliers is used by doctors to treat dislocations.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	If a patient has an inflamed joint, they are experiencing inflammation.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Apply cautery to the two thighs.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	When all the instruments are used, and when you prepare for surgery, always use the least invasive methods first.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And so you should always hold the patient's legs in place when using these instruments.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Then apply your hand to the affected area.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	And if the pain continues to affect the patient's feet, you must follow these instructions carefully.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if you have already cauterized the other parts of the body, it is customary to apply herbs for treatment.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	These herbs are used for treating ailments in the foot, such as swelling, by applying them to the patient's body.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then place a reed in the mouth of the mother to keep her from closing.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Then put your hand on the area already treated, and another cushion under their feet, and let them rest as much as possible.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If you have found that the pain in your feet is due to an excess of phlegm, then you should apply a cushion to their legs, and gently remove them from the affected area.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before applying a cautery to the wound, treat it.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	Then let it be adjusted so that the person's legs don't move.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is closed, her children are to be treated by medicine and herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	And if the woman has a pain in her body that happens at night, she may have a disease called gout, or they are saying it’s a sign of something else.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	And if the pain is in the leg, you must apply a cauterization to the area to treat it.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	May the patient be treated with the utmost respect for their health and well-being.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	And if you want to make sure that the woman’s pain does not return, treat her with a cushion on their legs and another on their feet.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	The patient's legs are already in pain.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And so that the body's humors do not become concentrated in the legs.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to their feet, another on their legs.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Take care of the uninjured leg.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When your feet are cold, you should use a cushion to prevent the chills from the cold.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then cover the patient's legs and be careful not to touch the cushion.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	You apply your hand to their legs; and if you have to put it on the foot, they should be held in a warm place and oiled.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	The other hand must be kept on the patient's legs while the other is used to treat the feet.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	When the disease has been treated, it is customary to call it gout.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	When the wound is healed, the patient will be relieved.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	And you have already put cushion on their legs, or if they are using a cushion for gout, put the cushions in a place where they can be found.
E es una fistula o motas.	And a cushion is placed on their legs, because a cushion is needed for the leg.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	When there is a build-up of excess white humors in the body, the legs become swollen and sometimes develop these ulcers.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's intestines, then do so on their legs.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And if it is necessary to make a puncture in the area near the foot, then apply a hot cautery.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	A person's gut should be treated with a cauterization tool if they have a fistula.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	When your hands are swollen, apply a cushion between them.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you don't feel them all, it doesn't matter; they are no longer necessary for the process.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And then the other, the fistula, is entered into the bladder or on the feet, and that's what they call the cure for it.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	Perhaps this means: "If it is necessary to treat an ailment with pain in the limbs, they are called 'le metges' by doctors."
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	The patient's pain in the legs will be healed by the cushion.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	And if you are to apply a remedy, then it is expected that you will cauterize their legs, which is why they are using the word "pod" in that context.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And if you have pain in your ankles, that's what we call it.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	Then apply the cushion to the place where the pain is located in the body.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	When your foot has been injured by a gout attack, place a cushion on it.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	Then, however, they are healthy in their old age.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's body, it should be done carefully, so as to avoid burning them.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	The patient's blood will be cleansed by medicine, but if you want to cure their condition, you need to treat the underlying cause.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if it is a case of a disease that affects the flesh, it is called a "gout" from the beginning of the illness.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And apply a cushion to the afflicted area, and let it remain there for the necessary time.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And if a doctor needs to apply heat or cauterizing agents to the body, he must use a cushion for that.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And so you should apply that which is customary for gout to the affected area.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And use medicines that are good for the body, so to speak, to heal and stop the spread of illness.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If there are fistulas or hernias in the body, use a hot cautery to make them longer on the surface of the body, and if they are already in the anus, treat them with a special instrument.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	So if you are applying a cautery to the top of the wound, and you are using it on the flesh, then you should be careful.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	Then place a cushion on the wound so that it may be cauterized.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	Then apply a pointed cautery to the affected area.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And if the pain is in the joints of the leg, it is used to describe the pain as being in the joints of the legs, already treated with a cushion.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	And if you have to make a caisson for the patient, you must adjust the cushion so that it does not burn the skin and place the other cushions under them.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And if it be healed, another servant will come to help the patient.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if there are fistulas that are not already open, you should use a poultice to treat them.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	This is an example of how a surgeon might treat a fistula in medieval times.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	When there are wounds in the area of the anus, the pain arises from the blood vessels.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	And if you wish to treat the disease, you will apply cautery to the affected area in the chest.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And so if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs, treat them accordingly.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	And these also are the causes of the ailment, which are called humors in the medical field.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	Then apply a cauterizing poultice to the affected area.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	And then you apply a cauterizing tool to the legs, so that the patient's pain is reduced by its use in the area.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	Then, if the patient has gout caused by an excess of cold humors, apply hot cauterization to their affected area.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And another treatment for the other parts within which the pain lies.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	Then you will have to treat it with a cautery applied to the skin.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If they have gout in their toes, then they should hold their hand over the area to be cauterized.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	Cautery is used on the hernia, which is then treated with a needle to relieve pain.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Then let the body's humors flow freely from the legs to the feet.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place another on the patient's back, another cushion under them, and you will be able to tell if their pain is in the knee or a place where the cushion is placed.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient has recovered from the injury.
De curacio de fistulas.	This refers to treating fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Motas caused by an excess of humors or a cushion shall be placed under them.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if you wish to use a poultice for an ailment that requires it to be treated by applying something on the affected area, place a cushion under them and put your hand over the patient's hands to prevent them from being held back.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then apply the hot cautery to the affected area if it's needed; when the pain subsides, apply a cold compress.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	When treating gout, it is important to know that it is a condition that affects the body in various ways.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Sapias that the author of this text is referring to the placement of tools during surgery, but don't know where they are being used or what kind of ailment they are treating.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then he must place a cushion on his legs to prevent it from happening.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	This one is already in English.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Then use a hot cautery to burn away the child's small intestine.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And you should treat it as a condition that requires treatment if there are cushions used for the pressure points in the legs and feet, and place a cushion under them.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	Then use fire or medicine to treat the affected area accordingly.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And thus the disease of gout is cured by the method I have described.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	If a patient has a fever, it is believed to be caused by an imbalance in the body's humors, and if they have a swollen leg, then apply a cushion to the area around the foot.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	Then, if there is a need to treat them, apply a poultice to the affected area.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, make use of the hot cautery method or other treatments as appropriate.
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	If they have no other purpose than to cause an inconvenience to another.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the patient's legs, use another cushion for the body.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	And upon the patient's legs, you shall apply the instruments for cauterization.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	This sentence seems to be describing the use of different types of medical tools on children.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	Another hand on their hands.
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the canula be covered by a cloth so the doctor's hand can hold it.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And if you have opened a vein in the foot, another method for treating the foot’s pain.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And if it is necessary to apply a patch to the animal's bladder, you can use a cautery of one finger's width.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And if the patient's foot is opened up for surgery, you will need to make a small incision.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then apply cold compresses to the patient's leg.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then elevate a cushion on the arm or leg, so that the patient is not harmed by its use.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine fails, they are to be treated with a cautery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you are healed by the other two, the pain will subside.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If you are suffering from pain in the lower abdomen, then the doctor will apply a cushion to their legs to prevent it from being caused by a different type of ailment.
De curacio de las plaguas.	And then for the treatment of the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	The original text contains errors and inconsistencies. Assuming these are meant to be variations in spelling of "you" and "the", here's a possible interpretation:
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	This pain in the foot requires a cushion.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And you will do the same to their intestines as you did to their legs, or cushion them, or to treat them for that which is done by burning.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Then apply the cushion to the patient's body as needed, so that the cushion covers the area where the pain is located.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And if there is a hot swelling in the body, then apply cold compresses to the affected area.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	He who has begun to feel unwell should know that there are treatments for diseases.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	And if the pain is caused by a simple humor in the leg, then apply the cushion to the area affected by the disease.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if it is necessary to burn the affected area, use a hot iron on the foot to stop the bleeding.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	Then apply heat to your body and do not allow yourself to be near anything that causes pain.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And if the pain is caused by inflamed or irritated humors in the body, apply a poultice to its location.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	The doctor recommends using heat on the affected area, but only if the ailment is recent, to prevent the opening from being too large.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And then put a cushion under their bowels when they are healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the plague is severe or in the legs, then so be it, apply the lancet to the affected area to make sure it’s a proper diagnosis.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	And so, when the plague is upon us, it is customary to treat the plague with medicines that are made for the patient’s ailments.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you have healed the injury to the bone, it will be necessary for you to cauterize all that is needed.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If you find that the patient has pain in their feet or legs due to a hot humor, but if it's not caused by a cushion, you will cauterize the body through the use of medicines.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and on the feet, they are treated by the doctors as a case of gout.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	Take one part of oil of rosemary, two parts of water, and three parts of the poultice is applied to the affected area.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And if the patient has pain in their legs, apply the remedy to the foot before the disease spreads.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	Then use the appropriate herbs and poultice, and apply it to the wound.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And for these large plagues, use a bandage to apply pressure on their legs so they don't swell, and you can use other cushions on his chest, so that others are placed upon the affected areas, which are already inflamed.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially if it is summer, then apply a poultice to the affected area, and use other remedies as well.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	And if the patient's illness is located in their leg, you must cauterize them near the bone.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's leg, then place the cushion on their knees.
De las plaguas del col.	When the body's plagues are caused by cold air or water.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the patient has a fever, you can tell which part of the body is affected by its location.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If a patient has gout, applying cautery to the affected area should be avoided.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	Do not be afraid to use the cauterization technique for any disease or illness, but if the patient has pain in any part of their body, they should be treated with caution.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if the patient has a wound, you should apply gentle medicines to it, just as if it were a cushion placed under their legs, to soothe it with a poultice.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the pain in their legs is severe, apply cushions to their legs, and take care not to cause further complications.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the swelling is severe, then apply a cushion to the lower part of the leg.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	And if the artery is already cut open, then apply cautery to the area if necessary to stop the bleeding.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If necessary, apply a hot cautery to the affected area after a few days, if pain persists, apply it to other areas on the body.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	Mays if the plague were to be upon your bones, and you are suffering from it, use this method for treatment.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, apply powder to the affected area.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if they are already healed from a disease in the leg, then the next day they will be treated for the plague.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	When the plague or other ailments are present in the body.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If there are many blows to the feet, then the doctor will consider the pain caused by a cure from the other parts of the body.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if in the foot, there is no recent inflammation, apply the poultice directly on it to cure it.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And you will put your hand on the patient's present ailment, which is a cushion for the pain in the feet (and perhaps apply) to be a remedy against the disease.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	When the patient has passed three days without the plague or other symptoms.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the pain in the foot is severe, you should apply a bandage to the affected area or treat it with a hot compress if it is necessary to avoid further damage to the body.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	Then it is called a "smallpox" operation or a treatment by cutting, but if you are making an incision on the body of someone who has smallpox, you would use a cautery with a cushion to treat them.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	When the intestine has been opened for a long time, it's customary to call it gout.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	And if they are afflicted by the plague, may the patient be relieved.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other ailments, it is customary to treat them with remedies.
De las plaguas del ventre.	And on the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	When there are problems in the intestines, they will be relieved by placing a cushion on the patient's legs and stomach.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Then apply heat to the intestines, and the patient must be warned by the physician, and that the cushion will be placed on their legs first.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	and so forth.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	E so if they are difficult to reduce, a cushion should be used.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And then you should sew the other openings on their body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And then there are two other types of sutures, one for each of the other locations.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And you will apply a cushion to their thighs, and they are treated with other remedies.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	And if it is necessary to reduce a joint pain caused by cold humors, then apply a cushion to its location as well as under the patient's legs, so that the pain will be lessened.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when the pain in the legs and feet is severe, the surgeon should use a cushion to keep the patient's legs from being affected by the pain.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	When illness arises in the legs, the patient will feel relief from inflammation when they are cauterized.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when the patient's swelling is reduced by the application of herbs to their legs, it is customary to apply water to the area where they are being treated for a small amount of time.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	This sentence refers to treatment with a medical tool and possibly a specific type of procedure.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And if you are a physician, you can treat the condition by using appropriate methods.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	And if there's a need to use cautery on the patient, treat them with a hot iron.
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	Then, if the pain is severe, apply a cushion to their feet.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And then, if the plague is spreading and you see it on the surface, use a cautery to stop its spread.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	Mays you have to place your hand on their chest if it's in the chest or upper leg area; for if it is in the legs, it's called a different thing.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And if there's a disruption in the balance of the body, then consider the following: ...
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	This line translates to: And thus apply your hand to the thigh of the patient.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	When there are small pains in your body, put the smallest amount of pain on their legs, and place the patient's foot on the cushions to prevent it from being affected by the pain.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	E questa que s’aplica als membres de la persona: el piez amb la forma del cuerpo.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Then apply another cushion to the other side of the needle, and if necessary, use a third cushion on their feet.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	The first line describes how the condition described in the second line (the third one being similar) is treated by a physician using a technique called "making points."
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And if the pain is in the legs, another method should be used by the doctors to treat it.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And so they shall not be allowed to be closed up again by the patient's body.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And if you have already opened the patient's legs, you should place a cauterizing tool on their legs to reduce pain, and they need cushions for their body, and another cushion to hold them down.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These types of stitches are best for small wounds.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second translation: The second line is for the reader to attempt to translate the text.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	Then apply the needles to the patient's four parts, so that the affected part can be treated with an additional cushion, which is placed under those areas when necessary.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	Then apply heat to the area between the patient’s thighs, and another cushion.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And then this suture must be treated with caution.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And if it is necessary to place a cauterizaton on the legs, the intestine has already been opened.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The plague was cured within fifteen days or so, and the patient's condition improved.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the patient's foot, it should be treated with a poultice.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	According to Paraula, there are two types of sutures for which one should be used depends on the location of the injury.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you must place a cushion on the legs of the patient, and put their hands in another position.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And if the needle penetrates to the extremity of the bone, lay the cushion at that point and apply it to the other bones.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	If you are making points on the intestine, they will be called another place.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And if it is necessary for you to make incisions into that which is in the foot.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then apply to the other side of the body, which has not been cauterized, as you would to that side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And so you should use a cauter to create another burn on the body to prevent further injury from the disease.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	Then you place a cushion on their legs with the same method and apply cauterizing tools to close the wounds.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And if the second type of pain is similar to that which occurs in the foot, then you should treat it accordingly.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When your doctor needs to make incisions in the foot, you should have already prepared the incision site.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then apply the hot cautery to their legs, and another for the rest.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suture is better than the common suture, which was previously mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	The foot is that which is affected, but the other translations are incorrect.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that cause swelling in the joints, use a sharp instrument to make small incisions to release them, and apply a cautery to prevent the abdomen from being infected.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	You only translate that which requires it by the translator's knowledge.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And the treatment for plague will be given to those who are judged.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	When the plague is spreading and you have to deal with recent wounds, here is what the doctor recommends.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And so if the air is cold, I will treat the patient for the pain in their legs.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	When plagues are simple, then the remedies can be applied in small doses.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	Then apply a cushion of lion's mane to the affected areas, if the patient has a weak constitution.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	When gout affects a person, it is called a painful inflammation of the joints.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you would know that pain in the lower bowels is easier to heal than pain in the intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	Then you should apply heat to the affected area.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	May it be that the cushion for the plague is placed on their sides.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	When it is necessary to use bloodletting, it is best to draw blood from the ankles or thighs.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And if the plague is in the legs, apply a cushion to the affected area.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Then apply heat to the leg, and let the other parts be remembered by the cushion.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	If the pain in the joint is caused by cold humors, it is possibla to make a diagnosis of a fever and call it gout.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then apply the treatment with a cushion to the intestine, as it is customary for gout.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And if you find that the patient has a lump in the groin area, and they're experiencing pain from the injury.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	The text describes how to treat a patient suffering from what appears to be a type of swelling or inflammation in the foot (likely a reference to gout), suggesting that a cushion should be used for support while the other treatments are applied.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And another cushion should be used on their legs, and another to hold them back in place, as needed.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then apply a hot poultice to the affected area.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	This text appears to be a mix of Italian-like words and some that are not recognizable as such.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	Then use this method to prevent further complications from the swelling and pain.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	When the plague is great and widespread, a doctor cannot cure it, but he can treat it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	The text is likely discussing the treatment of gout.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Sapias that if it is necessary to make an incision in the foot, you should use a pointed cautery.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And if it is a true fistula, it is a hole or opening in the body.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And if there are sharp pains in the body, these are treated as an acute pain in the legs.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this cushion stops the swelling in the legs and prevents it from spreading.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	Then apply a cautery to the area where the patient's foot is located, as appropriate for treating wounds that are infected by the evil nature of the disease.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	When in doubt, it's best to consult a doctor for diagnosis and treatment.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And let me know if you want to understand how to treat a fistula.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And if you want to make points on their body, you must use a cautery for that, as described in the text.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Therefore, the patient's humors are being treated by various methods.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If you are ready to use your hands to treat it, then apply another cushion to the wound.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	Mays then the patient's fistula be cauterized to prevent its spread.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	Then you have opened a vein to treat them.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then put a cushion under them and apply another cushion to their legs and place one on their feet.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	You have already used your hands to examine the fistula, but there are other uses for them besides diagnosis.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And thus, they say, you should use the nearest surgeon for the operation.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then return the patient's foot to its place in the body.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	And if the fistula is on the leg, use a surgeon's tools to cut it open and place a cushion beneath it, and ensure the patient does not have their hands near the area.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And if there are other symptoms present in their legs, then these may indicate a different condition than gout.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Aproxio a la persona le cushion for a better understanding of its condition.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	Mays so be that you cauterize the area according to how the doctors do.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	Then examine the patient for the cause of the fistula, and treat them as you would their legs if they were suffering from a disease in the foot, but only after the inflammation subsides.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the intestine is affected, then treat it with a poultice.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	Then if it is not healthy, you should apply a cautery to the affected area, but only after consulting with experts.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it's healed, you don't need to apply cautery to that part of the body.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone is diseased or corrupted, then you must use fine forceps.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if the pain was caused by the release of humors from the body, it would be necessary to apply the cautery to the part affected by the illness.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	Then apply a cautery to the ligaments or flesh if they are in pain.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	Then you must apply heat to the affected area.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Another way to say it is:  For the green herbs, you apply them directly to the affected area.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if the heat affects the skin so that it becomes infected, then use a cautery to stop its spread and apply a poultice.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	When joints are corrupted, it is necessary to place a cushion on the legs so that the disease will not affect the marrow of the bone.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	Then you may apply cauterization to a man, but only on his thighs.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Then make a cushion for a young man to use on his legs when he needs one.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	Then return to the cushion under which the patient lies, while others hold their legs still, apply the cautery to the affected area.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the doctor will call upon you to cure the ailment.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And he would see the patient's body through his use of a cushion, which means that they were making progress on the battlefield.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then use a cushion to support the patient's feet.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then bring your hand near the patient's body, and place a cushion under them to support their injured limb.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then place a cushion on top of the bone where the patient's pain is located.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And now, place your hand on the wound in the leg and another on the bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	Then if it is necessary to cauterize the bone, but the patient has already been affected by gout, the patient's foot must be supported during the treatment.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then, after a while, apply cauterization to the affected area to restore its health.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And if the patient is suffering from corruption of the body, then apply cautery to the legs and place a cushion there.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	Then, if the patient has not been cured by the application of cold, it is necessary to apply heat.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then the physician will apply cautery to the area, little by little, until the bone is restored and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to make a cushion in the operation of removing his humor, but rather he must be given a cushion for the pain to subside.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so the patient's condition improves when they are treated by a skilled physician.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	And if you are to perform surgery on a patient's leg due to an ailment caused by a buildup of cold humors in the foot, you should use cushions to separate the body from the bone.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And if the pain is caused by cold humors, they are to be treated with cauterization.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	This means that if there are signs of inflammation in the legs or feet, it is called gout by doctors.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the disease spreads to the legs, a physician should be consulted immediately.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And if the bone is diseased, the other one will be used for the treatment.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	Continue to cut into the affected area until the pain subsides.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	When there are ulcers or wounds on the legs, it is not considered gout.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	Then apply cautery to the affected area according to your judgment.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	"Then return to the patient's case, and prepare the intestine for surgery."
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	Then you must call them gouty, if it is an illness of the limbs caused by cold humors, which are common in the disease known as the "disease of kings."
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And then you should place a cushion on their legs, for they are to be treated differently than the feet.
Forma de serra:	And if it is a pain in the foot, it is customary to treat it as gout.
Forma de autra serra:	This is a phrase from the treatise that refers to the treatment for gout.
Forma de autra serra:	When there are other causes of pain in the joints, use a hot compress on the affected area.
Forma de autra serra gran:	A form of large saw.
Forma de ray:	This translates to:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Another thing to be careful of is that the cushion is applied correctly, and the patient needs to use their hands to move the legs.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It is only proper that a doctor be called upon for gout if the body's humors are corrupted.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	To make the translation more accurate and consistent, I believe the correct answer is:
Forma de razori menor:	A form of minor razori was used for treatment.
Forma de razori lat:	This indicates that the razor should be used on the patient's legs.
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	When your form is affected by a severe pain, and you have already placed a cushion on their legs, apply cauterization to the area to relieve the pain.
Forma de lu:	Another form of the ailment is called gout.
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	This refers to a method of treatment using a sharp cautery.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	This phrase refers to gout.
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	This describes the shape of a gouty joint.
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	When translated, this would be:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Then apply a cautery to the feet to prevent the intestine from infiltrating them.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	And so, the patient's legs are now ready to be cut into.
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	And if it is necessary to make incisions on the legs, it should be done carefully, so that the intestine is not damaged.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	When the body is being treated with cautery, it is customary to apply a cushion for cushion-related pain.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	This time the patient's pain is described as sharp and located in the triangular area at the base of their spine.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	Then apply the ointment, which is applied to the affected area.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	And here, place a cushion under the patient's affected joints.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	And when the cushion has been used to treat the corruption in the body by applying those medicines, then apply another medicine to the corrupted leg.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	When it happens to the leg or foot which is the person who is affected by gout.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly if it is necessary to make cuts with a hot iron on the legs of the patient, they should be treated with another type of treatment.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if on their fingertip you make an incision, and you open the space for the wound to drain.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if you are going to operate on them, you should apply a cushion to their chest, preventing the intestine from being touched.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	Then place your needle into the arm of the patient, within the joint where the pain is felt.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the pain is in the joints, and another cause is present, apply it to the area affected by the disease.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, if it is necessary to apply cautery, you should apply it to the legs for the aforementioned reasons.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And place your hand on the foot to prevent pain.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Then apply a hot cautery to their feet.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	Then apply a cauterization tool to the affected area, for the person should be kept alive.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	Then, you will separate the legs from the other member.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And if it's necessary to protect the patient from infection, make sure they are covered in all parts.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Mays you apply cauterization to the affected area when the pain arises.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And apply it to the affected area as you would a poultice.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	This person treats the first person's feet as if they were his own, which is why he was called upon to treat the ailment.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And then the physician placed their hands on the patient's thighs to prevent them from being affected by other things.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Thus, he has found the cause of the pain.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Lonc temps has a Latin feel:  "The phrase 'Long's' refers to the legs, but the word order suggests a more natural language ordering would be 'Long's legs have been affected by this disease.'
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	A cushion placed on their legs will help to soothe the pain.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And if they are called upon by another, you shall apply heat to them.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And if the body is affected by humors, they should be treated with remedies.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	Then apply this knowledge to treat the patient accordingly.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On their treatment with another cushion under their bowels and legs.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	And if it is necessary to apply a hot iron on the patient's foot, for which one must be careful.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the pain continues in other parts of the body, it is called a fistula.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And so that the patient does not suffer further complications from the illness.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Then if you want to treat the legs or thighs, use a hot cauterizing tool to draw out the bad humors.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And if you have been affected by a disease of the bowels and they are producing a foul odor, then it is called Egyptian gout.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And you have applied a cushion to their legs, and lay them on their chest, and let them rest there for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then apply heat to that area.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Then return the water into the body by using a cushion under their legs.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian treatment, then it's likely the patient has a problem with the specific type of medication used in Egyptian medicine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And if the illness is in the feet, one should place a cushion there to prevent further injury.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And then apply a hot poultice to it.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if there be a need to widen the area where the needle is inserted.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if it seems to be the case that the orifices are open, do not treat it as gout, but rather as an injury requiring stitches.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	When the body is affected by cold humors, it is called gout.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	Then prepare the arm with the proper remedies to prevent further harm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And if you wish to treat the illness caused by the body's imbalance, take those medicines that are fortifying and restorative.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	Then apply a bandage to the wound, and another bandage on the arm, where the patient's pain is located, and treat them with herbs for that ailment.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	Mays treat the patient's foot with remedies and apply another to their chest.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And when it is necessary to know if they have suffered from gout in the past, you should determine if the patient has previously had a cauterization.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	Then you must now consider if the patient feels pain in that area, or if there's an injury present.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	Then apply this treatment in this manner, and place your hand on the affected area to avoid further inflammation from the condition.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	And if there is a virus that affects the flesh, it is called generation in the flesh by doctors.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	When the stomach is affected by excessive humors, it is called indigestion.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And if you are applying a treatment to an area on the body that has a cushion, place your hand under the patient's affected area, and use the same treatment method.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	The Translation 3: Apply your knowledge to the patient's legs, with cushions and bandages; apply bandages on the affected area after using cautery to prevent swelling.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes these remedies are used for gout in the bowels or legs.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the pain continues, then it's gout, as described above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	And they shall apply the cushion to the area of the foot affected by the gout, and another cushion to their legs.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	The bones are made of their own substance, and the first one, the bone of the foot, is treated with a cushion.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Then apply your hand to the affected area to prevent further complications.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is clean and the nail is healthy, if the foot has no other ailment, then they can be treated by placing cushions under the knees to prevent them from being burned.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	And if there are any who have been cured of corruption in the bones, that's a good sign for them.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the affected area by placing your hand on their legs to prevent further complications.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	When the body is afflicted by gout, doctors call it "the disease of the foot" and treat it as such.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	And if they are sick, apply cautery to the affected area, but only after removing the cause.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	A pointed pain in the region of the feet is a type of ailment that doctors call gout.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	And when one has been born with bad blood, they are said to have gout.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those who are born fleshy, they should be given a cautery to their legs, and the rest of the body should be treated by other means.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	Mays the pain in the patient's feet be difficult to treat.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays, you should apply the cushions to the legs, for at the beginning, are there not also a round incision on the foot of the patient?
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Then, if the pain is caused by cold humors in the intestine, place your hand on the area to prevent the body from becoming infected or inflamed.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And if you separate the patient's intestines from their legs, it will be consolidated in them.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if you have applied cauterization to their legs, etc., then apply your hand on the affected joint in that way, as though the pain were to be stopped by a bandage.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	And from the cut, that's where they are to be treated for pain.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices can be found in various forms, such as varicose veins that are often caused by the body's humors.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then, use colonic irrigation to cleanse the body's veins and apply a strong purgative.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	And there are two ways to treat a person with gout: drawing out blood from the legs or letting the patient have another treatment, such as a cushion for support.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The first part of the treatment should be done in two ways: first, treat the whole body with heat, and then apply a cold compress to the affected area.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then he orders to be avoided those foods that cause black death.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	E venis per la forta curacio.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	This text describes the process of treating a condition that might be gout, which involves applying cushions and bandages to the affected area.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Then apply the cautery to the patient's right side, you should put another hand on their legs and one on their feet.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And so that the other part of the body of the sick person does not appear in the area where the patient has pain.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	Therefore, when you are ready to apply the remedy, another person should hold the patient's body and prevent them from moving during the treatment.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And you will apply the point of a hot iron to the patient's legs, which may cause them to be raised, if necessary.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then apply a cushion on their legs or other affected areas to ease pain.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then you must elevate the foot and place a cushion upon their leg and apply heat to the affected area.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And then apply the cauterizer to the cauterized area.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you are unable to elevate it, use a needle to draw out the pain and then place a cushion on their legs.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Apply a cushion to the wound on the leg; if it is a painful condition, then use a cautery tool to seal it.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when the patient's intestines are inflamed, the rest of the body should be treated to prevent further complications.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the veins are already constricted, place a cushion on their legs, and another on their feet so that the vein's inflammation can be controlled.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Hold your guard, for you must be careful, lest the intestine be harmed.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Causing pain in the feet, which is what doctors call gout, can be caused by various things.
Forma de unci orp:	Apply a poultice made of herbs and minerals to treat the pain.
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	A person should not be burned by a sharp instrument, but rather by a gentle one; otherwise, they will suffer from the disease of the veins, because it causes the pain through its sharpness.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the legs.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This disease is caused by the heat in hot countries, just as the term applies to the cold humors that are found there.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And if a pain in the legs is caused by humors getting out of control, they should be treated differently.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And if it is necessary to mark the body part where a person has pain, it is done by the physician.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And if the pain is in the veins of the body, then it's called a vein problem.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when you have applied the poultice to the location indicated by the word 'gouts', apply another to their feet and another to the legs.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And if there are pains in the legs or elsewhere due to some ailment, apply a cushion to the patient's affected area.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If there are any signs of illness, you will have to wait until the patient is healed before you can apply this to the feet again.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	The patient should be treated gently, lest their condition worsen.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein they are applying cauterization to the leg.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is necessary to make a cut on the body of a patient who needs surgery.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	When a pain in the joints occurs, it can be treated by applying a hot compress to the affected area.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And if they are suffering from gout, you should treat them accordingly.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	And when dealing with a worm found under the skin, it's called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	In some places they call a painful condition that affects the joints arthritis.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And if you are not able to keep the intestine in place, hold their legs in such a way that the intestines do not come out.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	When the heat rises to the head, it affects the whole body and can cause dizziness.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And if you want to heal someone with such an ailment, apply the treatment to their foot, which is a part of the body where pain should be treated.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if there is a need to cauterize the flesh, you should apply the cautery in the manner that we have already described.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Then return to the body (specifically the legs) after applying a cushion to them.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	This refers to a surgical procedure for treating an ailment related to their body.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease which is called in our land gout, can affect some limbs, or cause pain to move from one limb to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I will see to it that the other one is treated by the other.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	And I saw a small vein in her arm, which was previously swollen, but after an hour she had no more pain.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Then the pain settled in their legs and thighs, and you cauterized the pain there.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then carefully apply your hand to their leg so that the pain of gout spreads to the other arm as well.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then the patient should be careful to keep their hands on their legs.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	When I burn them on the thighs.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	"And (the doctor) will know if a woman has the condition, and apply the treatment accordingly."
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And if you're already treating the leg pain, it should be treated with water, or the other way around
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And thus the patient's gut is protected from the veins being affected by the cautery.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	The phrase "placed a cushion under them" refers to applying a hot poultice to relieve pain in the legs and feet.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	Then, if you do not apply them to the patient's thighs, you should use another cushion for their hands to prevent the pain from spreading.
De extraccio de sagetas.	On treating gout.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are used for different types of pain in the body, such as that experienced in the feet.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And if you are burning with a fever, treat the affected member with cauterization.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And if a patient suffers from a severe attack of the gout, it is necessary for the physician to remove the arrow, which is a sign that they are about to be purged of their bile.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so if the wound is prepared, then you should avoid cauterizing it, unless it's necessary to burn the wound to remove excess tissue or a foreign object like an arrow embedded in the other side of the body.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	This means that if pain appears in the left foot, it is known as gout.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And when the cushion reaches the lungs, it is said to be the plague.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And thus the pain will be made to lessen if a cushion is placed under the feet to prevent them from being too hot.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	When the stomach is affected by the arrow or pain from the stomach ache, then you should use a cushion on their stomach.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	The patient has no chance of survival if they are burned with a cautery on their abdomen.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if there be other cause for pain in the legs or for leaving the body out of its own control, it is called paralysis.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	May the pain be felt in other parts of the body, such as the legs and feet.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	Then you will see the patient's body is affected by other ailments.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The above-mentioned causes are also called the following:  in the case of a man, the pain in his legs is caused by a cauterization burn, and if he has a cushion on his thighs, the cushion is to be applied to the area of the affected leg.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	When the patient has a pain in their legs or feet, it is called gout by doctors.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	When the Juzieu has an illness, it is a bad case.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And if you have placed another cauterization on the patient's thighs, e which are already caused by a cushion, and then put your hand on that place to keep it in its place.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And it is said that if the gouty pain is in the legs, it is called "gout" in the man's body, which is what it is.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And if you are treating someone for gout, it is best to use a cautery.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	The woman's bowels were troubled, but she was not experiencing any pain from her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And if he has a wound in his legs, they will be treated as necessary.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And so that the arrow may be removed from the man's right foot (which was previously treated) and the arrowhead is in the hand of the man, a cushion is placed under his head, and another on his right side.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And you have to expose your legs to the air for three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then I found the other arrow wound was on my thigh; I felt it was painful, but there was no sign of the plague.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And apply a poultice to that place on the body.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	Let us see if the arrow has reached the body. If it has, then you should apply leeches to that area.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then apply another (treatment) with a gentle touch to prevent further pain.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then, if it is necessary, one should cauterize the patient's legs with a hot iron for four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	When you have a wound that needs draining, apply a poultice to draw out the pus.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	The doctors were already using another type of cushion for the patient's pain, but they were not yet ready to be cured.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	E tu as to use quality in the treatment of the patient's ailment.  Translation: And then, you have to apply the rules of this art with care.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And if the patient has a fever and gout, the physician will treat them in one way or another; the same applies to those who are treated by a physician.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, I say that arrows are drawn from the body in two ways: either by removing them or by pushing them back in.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And if you make a cut on the leg, or elsewhere, it will be necessary to put your hand on the wound.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if there is no improvement in the space of a few days, it is necessary to consider using a cauterizer on the affected area.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the feet, lay them open for several days and apply a hot iron to the surface.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you don't put ointment on your legs, the patient will be in pain for days.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	Then apply a hot cautery to the wound for a few days.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow remains in the body for several days.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	English: Even if you are in pain, please use the tools to help heal your body.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	When the arrow is hidden, it is already under the influence of the magnetic force that attracts it to the target.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	Then apply cauterization to the affected area to help extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is possible to place the intestine or cushion in a way that allows for the removal of the stone, then apply heat to the body's joints to prevent it from being placed on the patient.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	Then apply your hand to the wound so that the arrow doesn't come out, leaving the other parts of their body untouched.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	Then let it remain for several days until the patient's pain subsides.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	And if there is pain in the legs, you administer to the patient as was previously done.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Then do as you are able to keep the patient calm; and if it is necessary to use a lancet, proceed with caution and care for the patient.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And so the doctors were accustomed to call it (gout) when they had to use a pointed cautery.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area if it's necessary for the patient's comfort.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	This text is describing how to treat gout, a condition that causes painful swelling in the joints.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If the illness is in the leg bones, one must be careful that the arrow of the disease does not pierce through.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And let it be left open, that of the other intestine to the one who has gout.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the pain is in the foot, apply cautery to the affected area.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	Mays if you were to apply a cautery directly to the affected area, then that would be your instructions for administering it on the patient's feet.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	Then you will apply a cushion to their abdomen.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If you see a quiver, apply a cauterizing tool to the wound.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if it's necessary to apply pressure on their legs, you should place another cushion under their feet, and avoid pressing on the other one, which is already in pain.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	This sentence appears to be in a language similar to Latin, but with some differences that suggest it's not purely classical Latin.
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the patient be treated for their ailment by using a cushion to support the body.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And if a patient has a pain in their foot, it's treated by applying heat to the affected area.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The physician should apply pressure to the affected area, shaping it back into its proper form.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The form of the foot is swollen.
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	So too if pain is in the legs, should the cushion be used for cauterization.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	And about bloodletting from the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	And so on their arms are made incisions by those who practice it, and the vein in the foot is called the "aspicient" (from Catalan "aspí").
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	And if it is necessary to cauterize a vein, they call it “vein of the foot”, which is how they call “the veins” in “the case of la.”
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And there are three humors in the legs; one is that which is under them, one is below the knee, and another is placed at the top of the thigh.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The pain in the feet is caused by an excess of bad humors.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And if he has a bad case of gout, then apply a bandage to his legs.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you apply the spatula to the patient's leg, then place a cushion under them.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And if it is necessary to raise a vein, apply a bandage to elevate it.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And if it is a cut in the legs, it is called "the two points" by the doctors who have been observing it.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then place your hand under them on their thighs and apply a bandage.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already they have begun to cauterize the affected area.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	When pain occurs in the foot, it is customary to do two things: apply a hot cautery or use a cold cautery.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	You are talking about a condition that causes pain in the legs or feet.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And elevate the leg so that the leg can be raised above the heart.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery, et use another cushion on his legs, et another on his feet.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And so it is that we are reminded of the subject, which is to make an incision on them, and at other times to keep the remedy in place.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And so if the need arises, the physician will use lancets to bleed the patient's legs.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of their work, which is to be made known by the surgeon.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	The patient’s illness is caused by an excess of humors that have infiltrated their body.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And it is by opening the intestines that one can treat them for a variety of ailments.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	When the body is treated with a cautery, it should be applied to the face for skin diseases, if necessary.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the bandage is important for preventing infection in the legs.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	Then apply the cauterization to the patient's arm.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And if it is necessary to make the patient run their blood as much as possible.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	And may the patient's nose be opened to the veins of the face, and especially to the old vein diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And if the patient's illness is so severe that they are unable to move their limbs, then it is called palsy.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	This sentence is in Occitan, and it means "Use your hands to gently open the space between the patient's thighs."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	When there are many more wounds on the body than just those of a commoner, they will be called by a different name.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	Then the quality of the treatment depends on the location and severity of the pain.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then the vein of the legs will be opened through cauterization.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then apply a cushion to the sore place.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And if the patient has a fever from vein-cutting or other ailments, such as boils on their legs or feet.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And if there are small veins that show signs of illness, they will be treated with cautery.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is doubt about what kind of ailment it is, it is called gout.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And if you have already opened their veins and found them to be full of humors, then cauterize those which are in their chest.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	"When needed, you should cut the veins in the lips and elsewhere to relieve the pain.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	This text, likely from a medical treatise on bloodletting, describes how to apply a cushion to the patient's thigh while performing the procedure.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And if it is necessary to elevate the foot, treat the veins.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then you have to use another method.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the other cushion-like methods used by the doctors are either performed on the feet or legs.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And that is why they are called others, namely those in which the pain is localized to the joints and limbs.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	This sentence seems to be describing a scenario where a doctor is attending to a patient, likely using their hands for a medical procedure.
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	And apply the other methods of treatment to the veins as well as those who are in pain, e.g., venesection for bloodletting, and use a poultice for bleeding.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the method for performing surgery on the legs.
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And for this reason, apply the other cushion to their legs.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Mays you have to apply cushions to the patient's legs and hold their hands while they experience pain in the feet.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And if it is necessary to perform a bloodletting procedure on someone with that illness, be careful not to injure the patient's foot or leg.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the appendix doesn't show itself, then seek it elsewhere in the body, or apply a bandage to it.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	The bloodletting should be done to the hand if the patient has a fever that is caused by an excess of bloodletting in the arm.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	So if you see the need to cauterize a joint, apply the heat to the artery there.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see blood appear in the cautery, then cauterize it immediately, for that is a sign of hot blood.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And if you see a wound in the leg or foot, take care of it for several days until it heals.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	Then you must place another cushion on their legs and apply it to the area where there's a vein.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the affected area, then do so; otherwise, the patient should have their legs kept straight to prevent pain from the movement.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And if there is a wound on the foot, another possible explanation is that it is caused by a burn from the cautery.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	The bloodletting should be performed on the arm.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And if blood is seen to be in the vein during your phlebotomy, it will be difficult to treat the patient's swollen foot.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization between two nerves.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	Leeches are used for bleeding, and to draw out the blood from the body.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	> And if the pain is in the foot, it is called gout; or, to be more precise, a surgeon would call it that.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Doctors also use it for other ailments in the body.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	When pain in the foot is severe, use fire cauterization on their legs.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	And if there are complications from the surgery, a doctor will be needed.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	Then at the beginning of the illness, the treatment should be applied to the veins already in the spring of life.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	Then let them be treated with phlebotomy, and the pain will subside after three hours.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Tota la persona’s veins are prone to pain.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And if you have a wound on the leg, it should be treated with a cushion for support.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if it is necessary to remove the pain from the body by applying a cushion on the leg, but the patient has pain in the belly.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And if the patient is suffering from a disease or drunkenness, they are likely to be a person with gout.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Then, consider if the patient can be treated with hot water and poultice.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the patient's leg, apply a hot cautery to the area.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	So apply the tourniquet to their legs and let them know when it's time for the third hour.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And so the animals should be kept away from the bowels of the earth on that day.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And if you have to use a cushion between the patient's thighs, then use another cushion on their legs, one under their arms and one upon their chest.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Therefore, if it is necessary to cauterize, the surgeon should use a cushion to protect the patient's chest from the burning flesh, and apply the hot iron to the affected joint only.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Then place a cushion on their arm so that the patient's arm can be cauterized.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if there is a stricture in the leg, you should avoid aggravating it by applying too much heat or pressure.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And if there is no use in making points on their legs, apply them to the chest instead.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And if the patient is in need of a cushion for the veins, another cushion should be placed on the leg so that the veins are covered by it.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, the physician uses a pointed cautery for all these ailments.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the veins, you must do it carefully, because if the vein is not properly opened, or if the heat is too much for a delicate part, another cushion will be needed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if you must apply heat to the area, do so with caution, and be sure not to hold it there too long, lest you burn the patient's foot.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Then apply bloodletting to them.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the patient's need for bloodletting is small, you may repeat the procedure on the incision site.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	When a doctor cauterizes the bowels, they are treating gout.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And for this pain in the legs, it is better than others.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And so, if a vein is affected by this kind of ailment, they should be treated with anti-inflammatory remedies.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	E en le loc a cushion placed on their legs will cause a great deal of pain.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization, it's on the other leg that the patient needs treatment.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it is green or black, then apply the metatarsals for a few days, and use a cushion.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	"Then apply hot compresses to the affected area and you should hold their hands."
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore you must apply pressure to the affected area if you have another cause for the pain.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And let the cushion be placed under their arms, and let them apply a cushion to the site of the injury so that the wound heals well.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And so if you have to use a cautery on the patient's legs, place it under their legs, and another, and put a cushion under their legs, and another that is placed over the quantity of blood.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	And if you apply heat to the body's humors, then they will be healed by applying the opposite, which is cold.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And if there is a need to make cuts for bloodletting, then prevent them from making extra cuts on their legs.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And if the patient's pain is caused by gout, it is important to treat them accordingly.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And if it is necessary to make an incision on the vein, it is customary in venesection.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method is better than bloodletting for addressing an ailment in the foot.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And if you wish to make bloodletting a cushion be used under the patient's thighs, etc., as in the case of other illnesses; then apply leeches to their feet.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	Then apply cauterization to the area to prevent the spread of infection.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	Then open the wound by opening the veins in the foot and apply your hand to the affected area.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And it is treated by other means than evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	If you want to treat the patient, you should use the appropriate methods for their condition, such as placing a cushion under them.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	Mays that the patient's arm be cauterized for a second time, after it has been opened, e.g., by incision, and the patient's bowels are treated, and another person is present.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	Here comes the second sentence:
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	Mays, when a pointed object touches the area where a patient has been cut for the bloodletting, they will be called in to see if you have an opportunity to treat the patient with this procedure again.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And if you are treating a wound on the arm, and it is difficult to cauterize due to its severity, use a cushion on their hand.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	When the patient feels pain in their body due to bloodletting, they should apply a compress to the area where the leech was placed.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	You have already heated the area between the legs.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If there is an excess of humor in the body, you should use a cautery to treat it.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And then apply a cautery to the veins of the arm, applying pressure to prevent bleeding.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And if the patient's illness is such that their intestines are affected, apply your hand to the area below their feet.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then apply a bandage to the patient's foot; otherwise, they might have pain in their legs.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	The bloodletting instrument should be applied to the vein, and if you open up the leg, apply it to the larger area, and then apply it to the legs or a smaller incision for a small incision.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	Then apply heat to the patient's legs and feet.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If there are no other reasons for the pain in the patient’s legs, then it’s likely caused by an excess of humors in the limbs.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And so the use of this vein for bloodletting has been deemed safe by doctors, as it is not a vein that pulses.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	When the right side of the body is affected by pain in the intestine or liver, it is often called jaundice.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The patient's strength be increased by this method.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And if you are to place your hands on any part of the body, be careful not to touch the flesh with the other cushion.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to the area around the patient's thigh, it is better to let the blood flow freely.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And similarly, when using the cautery on the legs, one should always be careful to apply it carefully and ensure the patient's body is not harmed.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	And if the left hand is affected by the illness, apply a cautery to it.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And for the treatment of the legs, another method used by physicians was to cauterize them.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And it is to these diseases also that the patient's body is subject.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And if a cushion is needed for the patient's leg, apply heat to it, and when the bloodletting is done, put another on their chest to prevent the veins from being infiltrated by other things.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore, it is better to call it a fever if there are other signs of illness present in the patient.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	Then you should open the body with the use of a cushion in the chest area.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And if bloodletting is necessary.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	When cold humors are present in the body, they cause pain in the bowels, which is what we call “the waters,” and you should know that this is a type of treatment.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first incision, he should repeat the process on the second incision site.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And if it is a problem with the nerves or a nerve-related issue.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And so, as doctors usually do, apply a poultice to the affected area, and treat the other parts of the body in the same way.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And there you have the bloodletting of the afflicted person's limbs.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the nature of the illness of the patient is such that it can be treated by the physician's assistant using lancets, but also by placing their hand on the area of the ailment.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Therefore, when using a hot cautery, one should apply it to the area of the body, carefully placing it under the control of the surgeon's knife, which is the best way to ensure precision and minimize risk.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	Then apply a cushion to their back, where necessary.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And if the patient's body needs to be treated, apply a cautery to their legs.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then apply the cushion and place your hand on their leg, one at a time.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	The ways to use the cautery tool are described.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	And for corns, you should apply cupping therapy.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	There are two ways to apply cautery: one by cauterization, involving both cutting and drawing out the blood.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	Then place a cushion on fire under their feet.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And if you want to be a doctor, you should use these fourteen places for applying leeches; and use other methods, like bloodletting, on the rest of the body.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Then apply cauterization to the veins only, leaving the blood vessels in the body untouched.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	The text describes using a hot cautery to treat a condition that occurs in the feet or when a person has gout.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	And so you should apply cauterization to their veins, in order to remove any excess phlegm from the legs, or that has been caused by other ailments, and to ensure that the blood flows properly there.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Therefore, when you have to make a point on their legs, they are already three hours in.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And if there is an opening where the skin has been broken on the back of the neck.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This pain in the legs is treated by applying leeches to the affected area.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And if there's a need to apply cauterization to their body, it's necessary to use a special type of cautery for that.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And by that which is proper to each part of the body, and those who are old or young will be treated with cushions.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	And if you must apply a cushion to the patient, tell the person applying the cupping therapy to do so carefully.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	This medical practice and the use of cushions for the patient's comfort are mentioned in other languages as well, like the French.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And if you are suffering from a fever, it will be necessary to apply a cautery to your stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And so the physician applies a cushion to his legs, and the patient’s feet; et autre on their eyes, and another on their arms; the other to the head.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And let it be known that the patient's legs should be held steady during treatment.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's gums, they should be cauterized in both corners.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And if you have already cauterized the two sides of the body, then you should cool the area after.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And if you wish to bleed the patient from three veins, use the leeching method as they are described in the text.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And if the patient has a fever, use a cushion to protect them from the heat of the cautery.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And apply cupping to the legs and another one to the ulcers of the lower leg, which are treated with cautery.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	When ordering a person to apply cupping therapy, use subtle cups on the skin, as they are suitable for the treatment of the feet.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	This translates to:
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	For otherwise they are called weaklings.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from their legs, to the body, they are accustomed to be treated.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And when you apply bloodletting to the affected area, do so carefully.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	Then return the cushion to the patient's legs, and hold them still.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you should apply a hot cautery to them, slowly at first.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When a man suffers from gout, which is in the legs, place a cushion under their legs and use another method to treat the pain.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the doctor to perform a bloodletting.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there are humors in the body, use a cautery to apply it delicately.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	When the patient has a wound on their legs, place a cushion under them.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the blood is too thick, use bloodletting to thin it out.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	When you want to treat the affected limb, gently apply a cushion under the patient's leg and another on their foot.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to draw out the blood for a cure, let us use a cushion and apply a poultice.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And that is the depth of the pain in the legs, but only one person's.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	When the weather is hot, use aloe or oil for their placement.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the flesh is swollen, apply a poultice to it.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the pain is in the joints and is caused by an excess of humors, you should know that it is a disease called gout.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	The pain in the feet is caused by cold humors, so if you have to apply a treatment for that, it is done with a poultice.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for those who have large amounts of phlegm in the legs and feet, use these remedies:
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	When there is inflammation in the body, especially in the feet, it is customary to call gout.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	Quid est quod ...  et cetera.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	At the beginning, you must consider if the patient has already been diagnosed with gout or something else.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	Then apply heat to the legs to prevent the intestine from getting cold.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if the patient has a fever, they will be treated for an excess of humors in their body.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And if the patient has pain in their legs, they are treated with a poultice and another's major ebullition.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	E beure, o mas que l' ha tengon:
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	Mays these be cures for diseases of the liver and other such ailments as gout in the feet, which should be treated by means of a cautery.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And if it is necessary to translate from the first leg, it is better to cauterize the legs and feet than to call it by its name.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And then you've used your cushion to support their legs, so they don’t move during the treatment.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	E semblantment fa when you cauterize the liver or spleen.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these cups are applied only to the surface of the body by suction; the other parts are treated with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area if necessary.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	The body was tended to by the other servants.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Forma de ventoza es a cushion for the pain in the feet.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Then place a cushion under their head, keeping the patient's position stable.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And if the patient has a limp, another problem in the body's system.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And if it is this disease called gout; and if it is caused by a cold humor; and if it is a problem in the legs, put cushions under them.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And place the leeches on the child's legs to draw out the fluids in their limbs as needed.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of making a cauterization with fire on the body is that it is done to treat a few burns caused by an internal source.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	A cushion should be placed on the affected area to prevent the pain from spreading.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And if you have already opened the space on the legs to the other one.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Then return the patient's intestines to its cavity, and place them back in place with a cushion on their legs and another on their feet, but use the word "ventosa" for this purpose only when the patient's condition is such.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This means: When there is pain in the legs, make a larger cupping.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Gout was a common ailment among the wealthy and powerful in medieval times, hence the name "foot disease" for a condition that could also affect other social classes.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And if they have been treated with a cauterization tool, then the patient will be healed by applying a poultice to their affected area.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And if the patient has pain in the day and night, they are to have a cushion placed on their limbs and be treated by a physician.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	Then apply your hand to their legs and feet.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you can already reach the affected area through the use of another method, just use that instead of a cautery.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	Then, if there's a need for it, apply a warm compress to the area between the thighs and wash the affected area with vinegar; then cover the leg with a cloth that has been moistened with hot water, and press on the affected area with your hand.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if you are suffering from cold humors in the body, it is customary for doctors to call it gout.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	When blood is thick and dry, it's called a "blood clot" by doctors.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And so, if necessary, you should use leeches, carefully applying them to the area where the blood has been drawn.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And so if a needle is placed on a recent foot, it will be in a place where the blood is drawn.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you want to burn them, apply a poultice of ashes or something else to the area.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	And thus begins the treatment for the third part, which is restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary for understanding fractures in the practice of medicine.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, this chapter will be of use to you for doctors in these days are often called upon to treat gout.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And if they are in pain, then place a cushion on their feet;
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And if it is customary for doctors to apply cautery to the limbs.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	Then I have already explained the workings of the stomach and its ailments.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	And the first thing to be done is to apply the cushion to the legs, and another to the patient's feet.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	When translating medical texts from medieval languages, it's important to remember that these texts often used different terminology than we do today.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	Then use cautery for such injuries, whether to the feet or other parts of the body, as doctors do in these cases, and apply it to the patient's leg, using a similar method for those requiring a cut.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And if you have a cushion for the joint pain near the leg, or perhaps on the thigh itself to prevent further damage, put it there.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then if you have made the opening in the legs, which is the place where the pain originates, put a cushion there.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And if it's necessary to treat a broken bone, it's important to use a proper method.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	If there are no other signs of illness in the body, then this indicates that the patient has a problem with the intestine or the groin.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And thus if they are treated with the knowledge of their nature, the hot water treatments, the doctors call them "small bones" (as in children).
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	The patient's strength prevents you from closing their wound.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, physicians consider it necessary to apply a cushion to the patient's stomach when treating them for gout.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The bone breaks in different ways depending on the type of fracture.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	When you are treating a patient for a broken bone, you can use different types of cauterization depending on the location.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have seen the patient already suffering from various fractures, their pain distinct from other ailments.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Mota diversitat means that the patient experiences pain in several parts of their body.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	E so the pain in the joints is called arthritis by doctors.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And if the patient's leg is opened and a hot cautery is used, they must be careful to hold their hands in a way that prevents them from remembering the pain.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	And then you have to apply cauterization to their legs.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	This is a description of bone fractures being treated by cauterization, which was a common (though incorrect) practice in the past.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Therefore, when there is no apparent twistedness or inflammation present, the patient has no gout.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	If there is no pain in the joints, then it may be called a mild ailment.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And so you are told, if a wound in the body forms a curve or two, then apply a hot poultice to prevent it from becoming a boil.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And when the pain ceases, let them continue to be treated as if they had an abscess.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And if it's the case that the humors are cold and damp, then it's already a good sign that the patient has a cushion under them for support.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then apply the second, a hot iron to address the pain of the legs.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	Sometimes gout requires the use of two or more cords to be used for treatment.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And so let your hand be placed on the patient's body in such a way that they are relieved from pain.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And protect the patient's body from being harmed or pierced by the force of your hand.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	Then, you will be able to use the patient's own strength and courage to address the cause of their ailment.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Then make a violent movement to remove the cushion that is placed on the feet so that the patient's bowels may be relaxed or intestines may be drawn back in.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Then apply heat to the affected area to reduce inflammation.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The patient's foot suffers from gout if they are experiencing pain in the joints due to gouty inflammation.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those who are small, use a fine cloth to apply the treatment.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	Then you have opened the area around the bowels and the patient's legs, thus making their belly button a good place to apply heat.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And if the patient's condition requires it, the intestine or the part of the body affected by the ailment will be treated.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the wound on their legs.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then apply your hand to their cavity, slowly extending the patient's body.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take a bandage and wrap the affected area to reduce the swelling.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Then you place a cushion on the affected area if it is necessary for healing.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Then, when there are other ailments besides the swelling, you should use cautery to treat them.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And be that which is done to the body by the wise physician, in order to make them well.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	Then apply bandages to the affected area to secure the fracture.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	Then you use a hot iron to cauterize the skin and stop the flow.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And then you will place your hand on their stomach (or abdomen) so that they do not feel pain in the abdomen or thighs.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes the first sign of a problem is that the patient will experience pain in the feet.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	You know that in the past you've used a cushion for seven days in a row to elevate their leg, but...
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is how to make poultices as used by the ancients in the past.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	And if it is necessary to apply compresses, it is best to do so by applying the compress on the affected area.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if you treat that which is in the legs or feet, use a cushion on their knees to stop them from being so afflicted.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	This is a tricky one! If we translate the fourth sentence in your example, we can see how to approach this:
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	This describes how to treat a patient suffering from a fracture or injury to the leg, using a poultice and other remedies.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	And they are to be treated with a cautery after being burned.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	And if it is necessary to use a bandage on the legs.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	When it is necessary to make an incision, it is called podagra.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Then apply poultices to their feet; poultices are made from poppy and fig leaf.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Take a handful of mallow leaves; take other herbs of your choice and apply them to the affected area, such as those mentioned in the recipe for the treatment of wounds from a wound on the leg.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's body, use it on their legs.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	A treatment for a swollen or inflamed area on the body using herbs and water from a well.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	This sentence refers to the use of a cautery tool and mentions a specific method used in treating a patient with a broken bone.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	This sentence likely describes a medical procedure involving the use of a hot iron to cauterize a broken bone or part of the body affected by a condition similar to the modern understanding of a hernia.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	And if you wish to treat a person who has gout, you should apply a poultice.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	If a patient has pain in their joints, which are affected by cold humors, then one should consider whether they have been afflicted by gout.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	Then apply heat to the area where the pain is located.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And apply a cushion to the affected area.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And he has placed the cushion on their thighs.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	Then you will open the abscesses up so that they can be treated with a cauterizing tool.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	When the joint pain has subsided after three to seven days, the patient should be kept under observation for potential complications.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	E ayusta en la cushion under their legs, et another on their feet, to adjust for the specific cause of the ailment.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	When fractures are caused by dry weather, they should be treated with a poultice to dry them out.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	If a joint is dislocated, the body will be treated again by them, and a doctor should treat it as they see fit.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	For I have seen that it is more reasonable to say that it was done by a physician's advice.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Of course, you know what it means to have a wound on the second part of the body, which is the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	And the causes of fractures are diverse, and some are caused by the leg being struck, and some by the leg being injured.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the pain in the legs is from the cold.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This bone is broken or fractured; the surgeon must place the broken pieces back together and keep them from moving.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And it is called a fracture when it occurs in the bone.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And if it is necessary to make points on their body, they must be done with a tool that is properly called a cauteri.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Then apply heat to the affected area, but be careful not to cauterize the wrong part.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And if there are fractures that cause pain in those areas, they are called by doctors "fractures" or something similar.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And let the patient's leg be held in place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And so you should know that all pains are caused by an infiltration of the flesh, and other symptoms may occur.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the type of gout that affects the bones is known as a disease by physicians.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	Mays if the stomach or bowels are affected by pain from so-called "cholera" of their own kind, then the physician should consider its nature.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if it is an unexpected injury, it's customary to treat it with a cushion.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	In the case of a patient who has already suffered from gout, one should treat the area with leeches according to medical tradition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If you apply pressure to the area where the pain occurs, it will be less painful.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If a wound has already been made on the legs, the bone must be treated as you would usually treat it.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And if you are prone to pain in the legs, use another method.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if there is a disease in the body, it is necessary to apply a poultice, which is applied to the affected area to treat it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And there are two ways to perform an operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then you apply to the bone another type of treatment, which is slightly more direct than that.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then apply the second-line treatment to their legs, using a cautery for surgery.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And therefore it is necessary to know that some parts of the body are more susceptible to having their humors released than others; some have a greater intensity of pain in the region of the feet.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And if they are burned by a hot iron, then you can relieve the pain with other treatments.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong, the doctor will apply cautery to the patient's body.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And if you call the state of the patient’s condition anything other than gout, it is because it is already open and there are no cold humors.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you place your hand on the joint pain, which is to say that it is necessary to apply heat to the area where the affected part of the body is located, because it is advisable for the patient to have a cushion placed on their legs.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	Then apply the treatment according to its kind.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And if the patient's foot needs to be treated for pain, they should use a cushion to elevate the affected area.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And so that you should carefully protect the patient's legs from being harmed.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And if the bone is pierced, the surgeon will continue to cut into the area until the patient's pain is relieved.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	You have already opened the area between the patient's legs.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the other (the patient) is suffering from a severe pain, then you should apply heat to the affected area.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	Then return to its place the already treated hernia (of the patient's) so that the stomach does not protrude.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And use a hot iron to burn them on the legs for pain relief, while also using a cushion as needed.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When there are other causes for pain in the legs, one must be careful to avoid applying a cautery to the wrong places.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	Then place a cushion on their legs so they don't feel pain, because the body has been marked for you to apply it there.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And if you are to use a cushion for your own protection under these circumstances, you must ensure that the patient's body is properly treated.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	If you are a doctor, treat meys in a way that suits your expertise and my needs.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And then they are all the better for having studied that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And so if you are writing about a cushion for the foot, then you must write about cushions.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	When pain radiates in the veins, only then apply a cloth to the affected area.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And if you wish to avoid a cushion being placed under their legs because of this superfluity, then continue to apply it as needed.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	Then place your hand on the affected area, and use a cushion to apply these medicines directly to the plague.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And if you have the ability to treat them well, it will prevent the plague from spreading in their body.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	E quindi considerat le 10:00 PM.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	Then if you apply medicine to a black area, it will be healed by the power of that medicine.
Capitol .iii.	And by and by they placed a cushion under them, and then put a hot iron on their legs to prevent their legs from being affected.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On treating a broken foot.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	And if the pain comes from the foot, and is sharp, place a cushion on the chest or under them, so that the body's humors are not aggravated.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	This is a tricky one! It looks like you've provided a snippet from a medieval medical text written in a language that resembles a mix of Latin-based languages.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the affected area for pain relief, do so with a cushion to stabilize the patient.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the most noble part of the nose, then you have to apply a cushion to the nostrils.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	Then apply the plaster to the two parts of the body.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And if possible, restore the cushion (of the soul) for a cure, otherwise, treat the swelling as a boil.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	If you are applying a hot cautery, put it on the nose, but only if there are no fractures in the area.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And if the ancients are to be believed, then that is called gout.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes there are inflammations in the nose, and for this reason, the patient must be cauterized.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; but if someone wants to, they should use a cautery on their feet.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if it's necessary to treat a wound again, apply a cushion to the area.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If there are signs of inflammation, apply a poultice to the affected area, and leave the other two alone.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	This is a bit tricky without knowing more context! Here's a possible translation, but it's a good example of why translating from these sources can be difficult (it's hard to translate accurately without knowing what the author meant by the "other" and "cushion" metaphor).
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if the patient has a fever in the nose, you will have to cauterize them, and their condition may be from that.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	When the jaw is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	"Then" the bone in their legs is fractured, the surgeon should take care to set it properly within its cavity.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	So if the fracture is on the left side, then apply your left thumb to the left leg.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And another on their thighs, and two to treat them, and the other one that you have opened up the jaw.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And you have already applied gold or silver filings to the broken tooth.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And the physician shall order the patient to be given a cushion, and it is said that he should rest his hands on the bed or table.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you feel pain in your feet, put a cushion on which the patient will sit, because already a cushion is placed on their legs.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And so if the cushion applied to the bones is not loosened, it is considered gout.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And then if you have another bout of the condition we mentioned, apply the same treatment again.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is in the area where they work on the leg bones, it's called gout.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if it is necessary to make cuts on the legs, let the patient be cauterized in the quantity of their need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	Then apply a hot cautery to those who are affected by gout, and apply another cushion to the other parts of the body.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	This refers to the restoration of health when a patient has a pain in the joints, which they believe is caused by an imbalance of humors.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	This refers to the three types of fractures that can occur in the clavicle (the bone referred to as "motes" in the context of the provided text).
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	The English translation of the provided text is: When there is pain in the joints, which is caused by an excess of cold humors, it is called gout.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And then you should apply a cautery to the affected area in order to treat the fracture.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then place a cushion on their legs to prevent them from suffering further injury.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if there is no cushion under the patient's body, then use your hand to hold them in their place.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot apply cautery to the already inflamed area, then you should use a cushion for support.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And you have pressed on the injured area, and then applied pressure to the bone with your hand, following the instructions of the physician.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	And so you treat them for weakness in their shoulders and arms.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the patient's bones, you will use the cushion; then apply the cautery while the patient has their hands on their hips.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And if it is necessary to make an incision on the leg, it is customary to cauterize the wound.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Mays the pain be alleviated by the operation; may the pain be lessened in the legs and the feet.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the patient has a disruption in the bones from the boil, you should place a cushion on their legs and another on their foot, as needed.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if there is little disruption, you should apply a cushion or bandage to the area affected by the plague.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area if a wound or boil appears.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	And when there are many small pieces of bone, or pieces of bone that have been broken, they are called occult fractures by doctors.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And so you should check if the patient has a fever; if they do not have a fever, it is called gout; if they have a fever, put a cushion under their legs.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And if the patient has been injured in their chest, apply a bandage to the area to support the wound, and use a cauterizing tool on the chest, but only a little bit.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And if there is a pain in the leg, do not use cautery on the area unless it is necessary.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And apply a poultice to the area if the patient has a cushion under their legs.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the area for 28 days, and then apply a bandage.
Capitol .vi.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	This refers to treating a fractured shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spoon is broken in the place where the patient's foot is not located.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And thus when the joint is broken, you know it by the way the bone is fractured.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's legs, and place your hand on their side, using your hand to help guide the treatment.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	Mays if your hand suffers from a second cushion.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then apply a hot poultice to the affected legs, keeping them still.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the foot in its entirety, whatever you have softened or heated on their legs and another part of the body.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Then place a cushion around the affected area.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The patient will be healed in twenty days or more.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And then when it is done, you will know that the bandage should be removed.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you must treat them, it is said that the doctors should treat the bone spurs first.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of fractures of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	When the foot is injured, apply a poultice to its surface and another cushion for support.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	Then apply heat to the surface of the foot, as this will cause inflammation and pain in the area.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And if it is necessary to burn away the excess humors, use the pointed cautery.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	When a patient is suffering from the pain of being treated for a broken bone or a wound.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	When the humors are caused by something that affects the limbs, such as the foot, it is called gout.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	And on the treatment of wounds on the body when they are infected.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Only the doctors know how to treat the swelling in the joints by applying a cushion to the affected area.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And let the patient's legs be covered.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	If there is need to repair the damage from the injury
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture is in the intestines, place a cushion on their legs, and another on their feet.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And so apply heat to the affected area.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	Then apply a cushion to their belly, so that the patient’s bowels are comfortable and the bloating subsides.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	And if it is necessary to make a point, or cushion, for gout, the doctors say that they must be treated carefully.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	When there are no more humors, the patient's condition improves.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Then place your hand on the patient's body, making them feel comfortable.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if you open the foot, which is the cause of pain in the foot, apply cauteri to the patient’s legs.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then apply a poultice to the affected area.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	You have already opened the translation:  "You have already opened the area between the patient's thighs, and if the patient has a cushion under their body, it should be placed to make a bandage."
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And if the humor is cold and needs to be drawn out from the patient's body, it will be healthy again.
Capitol .ix.	This is a description of a medical procedure, likely referring to a surgical treatment for a condition related to gout.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	The restoration of the vertebrae in the back (and neck).
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	And if it is necessary to use cautery on the legs or arms, you should use it in a similar manner.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when you are already aware that a patient's pain is not cured by traditional methods, then use other remedies.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you have pain in your foot or knee, then apply cautery to cauterize those areas.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And so you will know if it heals or not by the way their spine moves.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If the patient has pain in the legs when they are cold and the patient's knees and thighs are touched, it is customary to apply cauteri to the affected area.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	And if it's not due to any of those causes, it's better and less severe.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And if you cauterize the affected area, it will be said to be healed.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And thus, you can use a poultice to soothe the pain, but only if it is necessary.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If your foot is swollen due to other causes besides gout, then you can apply a poultice to the affected area; if it’s due to another injury, you should treat them accordingly.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	When you have a broken bone, it's best to use a cushion on the leg to make it easier to apply a bandage.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you experience pain in your legs, place a cloth on them and apply a burning iron to it only after the patient has been cleansed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10
De restauracio de la ancha.	Then apply the treatment for an ingrown toenail on the affected toe.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	And if the bones are broken in the foot, it is necessary to use a poultice on them; the patient's bones will be treated with a hot cautery.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	Then you should place your hand on the affected area to prevent further injury.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	Then return to the patient's body, placing your hand on their legs, and another on their feet, the intestine being returned to its natural position with the help of a cushion.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	Then place your hand on the long bones so that they are ready for healing.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	E then apply a hot iron to the area where they are already treated.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Then apply a hot iron to their feet for as long as necessary.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	When there are wounds that need cauterization, you must be careful to treat them carefully.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	Then treat them as such for a proper treatment of the body.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	This is a difficult one! Here's my best guess at the translation:
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	When your shoulder is affected by the body's humors, the doctors will call it a wound.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	Then, if the pain occurs on the legs, it is known as gout, which should be restored by restoring them to their natural state.
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	Two extremities should be placed on the patient's legs to help them.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And if the patient has pain in their legs, then the other cushion is placed on the other leg.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And if the patient's legs are swollen from illness, one should place them in their proper position for the treatment of that swelling.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And if you wish to have them burn your hand with fire, you should put a cushion under their other leg; and another one of the ministers should hold their arm near the wound.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want to make the pain stronger, use two cushions on their legs.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the patient's muscle is injured near the joint, another cushion will be needed to cover the affected area.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly, if the wound is near the foot, apply a poultice to the wound on the leg, since it is there that the pain is felt.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Then apply a poultice on the affected area to treat them.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	This sounds like a recipe for treating an abscess, using wine and rosemary as remedies.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And place a poultice on their body to reduce swelling; if you want to apply a bandage, do so.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Then apply pressure to the affected area, and if necessary, use other methods to prevent further complications from the injury.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And so you must use herbs.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And you have opened the space above the knee for the application of the cautery.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strength on their legs, which I have mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And so if there is an injury to your leg or foot, it should be treated with strict cauterization.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when pus accumulates in the lower part of the leg, it is called the sciatica.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so if you see that the patient has a displacement of the legs, and the pain continues in the legs.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	Then apply the cautery to the patient's legs and another to the feet.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And if you consider the nature of the injury to be caused by an imbalance of humors in all parts of the body, then it should be treated as such.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	Mays three days must pass before you can remove the cushion from the body.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And if the patient has pain in the stomach, the physician should keep their chest covered.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And the cushion under the patient's body is placed there to hold their position.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Then place a cushion on their legs, so the patient's leg will no longer be swollen.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Here comes the translation:
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if it is a lay fracture, treat it with a poultice; if it is a case of gout, another treatment is necessary.
Capitol .xii.	Another is placed on their legs and another on their chest.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Then apply a bandage to the arm, and bandage it up.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The patient's legs are opened and a cushion is placed on their knees.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And so, the pain in the feet is relieved by applying a hot poultice to the area.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	The doctors would say to heal the small wound, use a gentle touch.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when there's a break in the bone, it is called a broken bone.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And two of those who have bad luck are already in place under their legs.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if a doctor deems it necessary to cauterize the vein, this should be done on the exposed area.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	When the fire burns strong, it can be used to treat ailments caused by heat in the body.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if you cauterize the patient's feet, they are to be given more force or pressure.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And if you have to treat the intestine, do so by placing a cushion on the affected area.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And for him, let the doctors be in their places already established by custom.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And another applies a cushion to their body, and holds their hands.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And place the bones back in proper alignment.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if your body's structure allows it, let the physician use their skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if you hope to burn away the excess humors from the surface of the body, use the cautery in that manner.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	So if the injury is to the foot, it is called gout.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	The patient must be kept warm, so you have to apply a bandage with a poultice of oli and beeswax at the beginning, if you put a bandage on a very large area affected by a painful ailment, and the patient has their hands over the wound.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And if the patient has a broken bone, you should know that the stars are in a very bad position.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And if you wish to apply a cauterization, put a cushion under their legs and place the other on the limb, and another cushion under the other leg, and the patient should be laid down.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if they are the cushions that are rough, then use another linen sheet.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the following to be a member of the limb.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there is a need to apply heat to the affected area, do so after placing your hand on it.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the cushion be placed so that the legs are bound to the cushion.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	Here comes the first line containing the translated sentence:
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Then apply a cushion to the foot to prevent the humor from leaving the body.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	Mays al malaute no cove is another form of the word 'cushion'.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And you have already placed a cushion under their legs, so they can sleep comfortably.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And if a patient has a pain in the joints, or a wound that needs treatment for 32 days, it's done with a hot cautery.
Capitol .xiii.	This is a guide to understanding how to properly translate the text.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	And if it is necessary to treat the foot and its parts, place your hand on them.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Sapias que a la pinche de la ma, e no another?
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And if your body's fluids are unbalanced, causing a problem in the feet.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the doctor will see if they have good or bad humors in their body.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then apply a poultice and bandage to the affected area.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	When you are in pain from a disease that causes the bowels to be affected, they should wrap your wound.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if the body is opened, the physician should be careful to apply the correct amount of cloth to the legs.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	Then if a bone breaks in your leg, you will have to put it back together yourself because if it's a simple wound, use cushions to support your leg and foot when they are injured.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is a fracture in the legs, apply a cushion to those limbs, so they are not injured by the cautery.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	Mays es, then apply a bandage to the affected area, after which he should keep his hand warm.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And in this way, the patient's bowels are treated by applying a cushion to them.
Capitol .xiv.	The text uses the word "cambas" which likely refers to legs in its original meaning.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	De costuma, for a fracture of the bone in the thigh, you must use a cushion to support the leg.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones are broken by the cold in the legs, and they say that the pain felt in the feet.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The patient is laid down on their back, which is why they are already in pain and need to be treated with cauterization.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And if he has a cushion applied to his legs or feet, they will be more comfortable.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	When a man is ill, he should be treated by a physician, while others are merely given to a surgeon.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the patient's bones are inflamed, they should be treated with a poultice and another on their legs for each other part of the body.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And a physician must treat the patient's humors so they don't get out of balance; that's what he does.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	This is about treating an illness using hot cauterization, which involves applying heat to the affected area to drive out the infection.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	Then apply a bandage to the wound.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And then apply a bandage to the affected area to keep the intestine from protruding.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And when you have already opened the wound in the leg, place your hand on their ankle to prevent the bone from being fractured there.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then return the patient's legs to their place and another cushion for them.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Then place a bandage on the area where the leg was injured or on the limb, if it's a case of the gout.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then place two cushions on their legs to prevent the intestine from being damaged.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Then you'll know if a patient has a truly corroded intestine, which can be treated by cauterization, only then should they be given such treatment.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	Then you must carefully apply cauterization to the legs, so that the pain may be alleviated.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	The following are translations of the text provided:
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Perhaps in the above case, you are referring to the patient's legs, and another cushion should be placed there.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And if they have a fever, it is customary to use a poultice after forty days or more or less, depending on the nature of the illness.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	When the patient's injury involves the dislocated shoulder, it is customary to treat them with hot cautery.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	When the body is cold, or if there is swelling in the legs, cauterize the tendons.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	Then apply cautery to the wound, but not in the case of a fracture or opening of the body cavity.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And then the patient will be restored to their natural state.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then place a poultice and apply it to their closed eye, and use the cushion for the other ailment.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then we'll consider other treatments appropriate for those ailments.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	And then you will restore the broken leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	When there is pain in the joints caused by cold humors, it is called gout, but also known as a disease that affects the legs and feet.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And if you place a hot cautery on the patient’s arm, they will be cured by its use.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If the patient's bones are broken, their pain spreads throughout the entire body.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the patient has been burned by a hot cautery, it is applied to the legs.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if it is a bone fracture that causes the pain, it is necessary to apply a cushion under their legs, and another to stop it from being broken.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then apply a poultice and compresses to the patient's legs.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But if the break is in the leg, it is customary to use a hot iron on their legs, which is good for healing.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	When you need to treat someone's legs, which are swollen from gout, apply a cushion to the knee or knees affected by pain.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then place two bandages on the affected leg, one above the knee and the other below.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And place a cushion under their legs, three in total, to prevent swelling.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	Then place a cushion under them, and use another to hold the patient's foot in place.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And it is most important to cover the wound during treatment with a poultice if necessary.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a hot poultice to prevent the swelling from worsening.
Capitol .xvii.	When the pain occurs in the legs, it is customary to place a cushion under them.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	And placed a cushion under them.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	When there is pain in the body's joints, it is called a "pain" by doctors.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	Then, if the bones of the leg are fractured, they should be cauterized.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place a cushion on the foot where the pain occurs.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then place a poultice on the cushion and another two on their legs.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then put your hand on their foot to prevent them from getting another illness.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you should know how to treat them.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	This may be an explanation of how to treat a wound on the foot.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And cushion the affected joint, and place a towel on their legs to treat them.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	You have already opened the foot for a treatment appropriate for gout.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And so you should know that all the reasons for pain we have mentioned are also reasons for using a cautery on a wound.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii. translates to Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	And if you must treat ailments, use the hot hand to treat them for the woman and the cold foot to treat the other (likely referring to a specific treatment method).
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When a woman's bowels are affected by pain in her feet, apply it to the rest of the body.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And thus the midwife will place the woman's womb back in its place as if she were healing an injury; then she will apply her knowledge to prevent the woman from being opened again.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	You have already placed a cushion under their feet, so they should be able to urinate easily. Then, they are to be treated according to their needs.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Let the patient have seven days of rest, or thereabouts.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you use an ointment on the patient's legs, apply it with a cushion; the others are for the rest of the body.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	When there's pain in the body or if they are afflicted by gout, the doctor will usually apply a hot poultice to help.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And if a bone is broken in the legs or feet, you should cauterize it.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And in the case of this injury, it is important to place your hands on their limbs.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	And thus it is that the intestine of the sick man, when a cushion is placed on his legs, he can be healed by applying heat to the area.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	For restoring fractures in the bones.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	Translation: And if you have opened the door to illness, then apply a heated cautery to their thighs or other areas affected by the condition.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	Then, if the disease is caused by illness in the body's humors, you must treat them with remedies to stop the spread.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And if the injury is an infection in the joint, then treat that first, before using a cautery.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	When an abscess forms in the body, especially on the feet, it should be left alone for three days.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	When the bone is eminent above the surface, apply a cushion to reduce the swelling and apply heat to the affected area.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	Mays tu placed your foot on top of a cushion for his comfort, another one for the patient's comfort, and use the other tools to treat his condition.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And in this way, the patient's body will be healed through the proper application of heat and compression, as well as by applying pressure to the area with a cauterizing iron to prevent the pain from spreading.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Apply heat to the affected limb if the doctors think it's needed, but apply a cool compress elsewhere on their body.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then you have already identified the cause.
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And in Greek it is called "labre volentz atelat", which means “labyrinth” or “maze”.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	And if a patient's leg needs to be treated for a condition that causes swelling in the feet.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And then apply a poultice to keep the joint in place while the swelling subsides.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Then apply fire to the affected bone if the joint pain is caused by a cushion on which you place your hand, for the patient.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	When it is not possible to reduce the pain in the patient's foot, use a cautery on the leg or other parts of the body that are affected by the same ailment.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then apply a cushion to the area of that pain and put your hand on it for the patient's legs.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And if the patient's bone is still painful after being returned to its natural state, it should be treated with cauterization.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	And if you wish to avoid further damage, the other options are for the treatment of your body by making use of cautery points to heal them, and apply a bandage to prevent further complications.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And lay your hand on their abdomen to apply a cautery there, and then apply another in the same way to the legs.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Then if caution is used, the patient will be healed by the removal of the plague from their body and the use of a cautery on their body to stop the spread of disease.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if you have to apply heat to the area, use a different method because they are different.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	Then if you have a great pain or are afraid of their illness, treat them with a strong dose of cautery.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When you treat a patient suffering from plague, use the same methods as if the plague were in the feet of our own body.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	Then you should know that if someone has a problem with the disease in the foot,  it's customary to apply a cautery treatment.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	You'll need to apply a hot poultice on their feet if they are suffering from gout.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those that are caused by injuries, they are extracted or reduced through the use of another cushion.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	When the disease spreads in the body, a cushion should be placed under the affected area.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And a surgeon should not presume the treatment of gout as a mere matter of course.
Capitol .xx.	Nothing in the provided text suggests that "Capitol .xx." should be translated literally, so it likely refers to a chapter number in the treatise.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	The cure for a swelling that occurs after an injury or fracture to the foot.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This is how you would say if a person has pain in their legs, they have a pain that is often referred to as gout because of its association with the joints.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	when there are recent signs of illness in the legs and feet, it may be necessary to cauterize their humors but some say that they should use a cushion to apply a cold compress, and others say they should use a hot compress.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	E apert le canal so that they can be used for surgery or to treat those ailments which are treated by opening the legs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there are signs of pain in the legs, they are usually treated with cautery on their feet, some other areas being treated as well; et autre on the head etc.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	And if the patient's legs are not restored to their proper position, they should be placed back in place and another one on the foot.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	And after the bone has been fractured, you must restore it to its place with many causes for which it is necessary to be careful.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	This line is likely about applying a poultice to draw out illness from the body.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then apply a poultice to the area so that it heals naturally.
Capitol .xxii.	Another option is to translate the sentence into English.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	And for the treatment of broken bones, they are healed with difficulty by the doctors.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	If the intestine is affected by gout, it may be necessary to apply cautery to the affected area.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	This is a common treatment for those who have gout, which causes pain in the joints.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	And recently, they are called "recentz" gouty pains.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And if it is necessary to apply a light cautery to the patient's legs, it should be done gently and carefully.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	And if it is already twisted or knotted in the part of the body that is below the waist, it becomes a problem for the surgeon, who then must be careful to make the incision only on the knotted area and avoid damaging surrounding tissues.
Capitol .xxiii.	To treat the intestine or hernia, apply heat to the area to draw out the bad humors.
De sermo en dislocacio.	This phrase means “When dealing with a patient” followed by “of gout”.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Gout is a condition where a physician places their hand on the affected joint to treat the ailment.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when there is a dislocation, it must be corrected quickly, so that the patient will not suffer from pain.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for that reason, the legs should be kept together to prevent the pain from spreading.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When it comes to the use of cushions for medical purposes, it is said that the cushion should be applied to the affected area.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the cushion is placed under the patient's legs, so as to prevent the surgeon from being able to cauterize them.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	E aloc yeus to use the most appropriate tools for treating the patient's injuries.
Capitol .xxiiii.	And then apply cauterization to the affected area.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	From its dislocation, the jaw must be treated.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	The physician will first attempt to find out the cause of the swelling in the joint or joints before performing surgery.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the pain in the legs is severe, it is often enough to cause gout, but it can be caused by other things.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	Maybe you should say that if the dislocation is complete and severe, the patient needs to be completely treated with a bandage.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And then cauterize the dislocated joint with the cushion placed on both legs.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	When there are cold humors in the body, especially in the legs, apply heat using a warm cautery to the affected area.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	Therefore, when you have returned from applying a treatment for them, they are in pain due to the humors being released.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	If the pain is in the legs, you may apply heat to them directly.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And you should place a cushion under the patient's hand.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	Then you will know that the reduction of the intestine in le following hours will be difficult because of the pain.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you are experiencing pain, put the patient on cushions or pillows to prevent them from being uncomfortable.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	And to reduce the dislocation of the shoulder blade bone (scapula) from its place in the body, they are reduced.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The fork in the road is no longer a place for forks; now it's for the best way to treat the pain.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of the health of the patient is that they are treated by doctors.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And if the space is closed, you will be relieved from pain in their legs.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then apply a poultice to draw out the pain and a cauterization on the joint.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the small intestine be healed.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the affected area, hold their hands down and apply a bandage.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And so if this treatment is followed, the extremity will return to its normal state.
Capitol .xxvi.	E aprop reduzeys le cos per la necessitat del metges e du the body is to be understood as being used in the same way as a doctor would use the term "metge" (which means "doctor").
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	And on the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the doctors know this as gout, if a muscle is strained by a pain in the knee.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And if there are other reasons for the pain to be caused in the leg, and the other reasons are cold.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And for a good understanding of what is meant by the term "gout" in the original text, the doctors are mentioned.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	When a man's foot is wounded by gout, apply heat to his legs.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then, if you are applying cauterization to the feet, the other parts of the body should be covered.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And so the pain in the foot is known as a very specific type of ailment.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	Then apply a bandage to the affected area, and when applying a poultice for the pain, you will find the cushion needed no further cushioning, as other methods were already in place.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And of this dislocation a slight reduction should be made to the knee, and the foot should be kept in its proper place.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the minister carefully cauterizes the patient's feet to stop the pain from spreading.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	Perhaps if the pain is in the legs and does not return to the top of the leg after treatment, it will be necessary to use a bandage or other method to secure them.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then the physician will apply a bandage to his/her skin and place them on their legs to hold the patient's hands over their wounds.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	Then place a cushion under his legs, and another under his arms, to protect him from the pain.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	Mays if the patient has mild cold, then we know that the pain is caused by something other than the condition of the patient already having a cushion placed on their legs.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And so you should apply your hand to their long legs.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the patient's condition is difficult to treat, use that same force on their legs which you would use for a pointed tool.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Then apply a cloth around the patient's legs.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's body and place the cushion on their legs.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And if you are working on the leg, place a cushion under the patient's body, and the other way around to extend the leg.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the preparation of the poultice is done, it must be applied to the patient's chest, so that the patient's body is restored to its natural state.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the affected area of the body, it is customary to use a cushion.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then, if you have already done so, apply a cushion to support the patient's legs and feet.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	See Translation 2.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if at that time the patient has been unwell for seven days, it is customary to loosen the bandage after seven days so that the nerves do not tighten and are not affected by the pain.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	The treatment for this condition varies depending on the location of the pain.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the pain occurs in the legs, it should be cured by that which brings relief from the ailment.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the patient's condition requires it, they should be treated with a poultice to soothe them.
Capitol .xxvii.	Then apply the appropriate cautery to the patient's foot or leg, depending on the location of the affected area.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	This refers to the treatment of a dislocation in the leg or foot.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	The original text seems to be describing the symptoms and potential treatment of gout by a doctor.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	Then, if you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, it will be difficult to reduce the swelling; if there is swelling in the other joints, it is even more difficult for them to heal than any of the other types of ailments.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	This is the ancient way of saying "the intestine" - "to have possibily something in his legs."
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if a dislocated joint occurs at the front of the body, it's called a dislocatation.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation doesn't reduce easily, they should use force to help put it back in place.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And that you place two ministers on each side of the body, and a cushion under their arms.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And apply a bandage to their arm to prevent further swelling.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the physician has already opened the area of the joint, it is called a "cushion" (cuscinate) because they place something on their body to prevent the pain from spreading.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then apply whatever you have to reduce swelling under their legs, as needed.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then release the patient's hands; if necessary, remove them from the space between the legs and place a cushion under their feet.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	When there are many pains in the body, including the feet, apply a cushion to their legs and use your hands to hold them in place while applying a bandage.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if you wish to apply heat to the affected area in the legs, use the warm-up technique for a gentle approach, or apply a poultice to the affected area, both day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And if it is necessary to place a hot cushion on them, you will be able to guess that it's a cushion for applying to the foot.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Then return the intestines to their place, using cushions and placing your hands on them to ensure they are properly placed.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish to apply a cauterization, make sure to place it on the area where the burn will be dry and not spread.
Capitol .xxviii.	**Capitol .xxviii. Translate the following into English: The pain of the joint is caused by their humors being out of balance.**
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Treatises: Treat the body properly and use cushions to prevent the leg from becoming injured.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Sometimes a pain in the joints can be cured by applying a cushion to the affected area.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And if you are a doctor, and have to put a cushion under the patient's knee to make their condition more comfortable, then return the table for the legs of the patient.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	The correct English translation should be:
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so it is good if it is treated quickly; but if not, then leave it alone, for the body will naturally heal itself.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	This appears to be a combination of Italian and Spanish medical terms from the 16th century or earlier.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And if the intestine be inflamed or swollen, apply the cushion for 5 days; then remove the cushion and apply a cold compress to the foot for 7 days.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	Then apply heat to it, if necessary, to make it less painful, you should use cushions and place your hand on it.
Capitol .xxix.	In the 29th chapter...
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	And now let's talk about the treatment of dislocations of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Then apply heat on their legs, to the area where the pain is located, to help the intestines in that area.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when there is pain in the back of the hand, or in the fingers, they must be treated with a cautery.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And place the two splints on their legs for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then apply a bandage to the affected area.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when the disease is advanced, it affects the legs and feet, and requires attention.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And if the doctors are to be believed, they call it gout.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly, in other parts of the body, the pain is caused by humors that are out of place.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	This refers to the treatment of dislocations in the limbs, but for the spine.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	Then apply the other treatments to the legs and feet, or they will die.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And if it is necessary to use a cushion, it should be placed so that it is both under their legs and also on the body of the patient as a remedy.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it is called gout.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	Gout cannot be cured by any other means but those involving bloodletting and treatment for excess humors.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Mays in the hands are often found to be a remedy for gout.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And if the ailment happens in the legs, it is necessary to cauterize it.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	The pain in the legs will not be cured.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	Then let them be treated by the physician so they don't extend beyond their own pain.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And if a doctor cauterizes the legs, he should place another on the chest.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	Then apply the cautery to the patient's legs, and use another cushion to protect the body while applying the heat.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And to the head of the patient, you apply the other cushion to the knees.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the doctors are asked to burn the flesh, they will always say that it's a good idea to use the tool for the removal of their flesh to avoid the pain.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And if you wish to make treatment for pain in the legs or feet, you should use hot compresses on the affected areas.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, then take a cushion so you don't have to suffer from pain in the legs or feet.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And if the patient's pain is caused by a cold humor that has accumulated in their limbs, then apply cauterization to the affected areas below the knee.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, apply a cushion to the affected area; then place two cushions on their knees and another on their feet, leaving one hand free.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	When there is a pain in the thighs, you should call for the physician.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	A cushion must be placed on their pietz if there is a trauc in the legs to prevent pain.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then place a cushion under the patient's body and have them hold their legs in a position that allows for the flow of blood to continue.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	E aprop, then you should place a tourniquet on their leg.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the way the turn goes:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area, and use another poultice to keep the patient from becoming cold, e.g., on their legs.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And if you apply a cautery to that part of the body which you have called [it] gout, then the blood will be drawn from the bowels, and another cushion will be placed on their legs.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If you are suffering from pain caused by excess fluids in the body, use medicines to reduce the inflammation for relief.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	When your joints hurt, you might have some kind of injury to them, but if you're worried about something more serious, they might call for a doctor.
Capitol .xxxi.	Of the many doctors who are called, only one should be chosen.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	And treat them with a hot cautery.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	The pain in the legs and feet of the patient is caused by their own body.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	Then apply the cauterizer to the affected area, applying another cushion behind the knee for four days.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And if it is necessary to treat the patient's joints, place a cushion on their legs, and put a cushion behind them.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	Then the doctor will apply heat to the affected limb.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And if he makes points on their legs or feet, then put your hand on his chest to prevent him from making a further injury.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	When there are pains in the foot, apply a cushion to their legs and make sure they don't move; the other leg should be placed on their knee.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And if a person suffers from a dislocation in the hip or has a cushion placed under them, you must put the cushion behind their back to prevent the dislocated hip from being further stretched.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	May you reduce this ancient ailment by your own methods.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	And if the injury is recent, you can use this method to treat them.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Then prepare an ointment for the patient's foot and apply it to the affected area.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And so the patient's legs are opened for a long time or the other way around.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And one should apply cushions to their body, keeping them suspended in the air.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of treatment is called cupping.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And when the dislocation is cured, then it is no longer necessary to treat it with a cushion.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	When the patient's intestines are affected, it is called a hernia.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And if it is necessary to apply a hot poultice to the inflamed area and another poultice to the affected part.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This pain is caused by a specific ailment that requires special treatment for each part affected.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	When gout occurs in the toes, it is treated by cauterization.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let it be known that one intestine is for burning, another is for the other leg.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And if it is necessary, place two cushions on the sides of the body, one at the waist level.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And so they should apply a hot poultice to the affected part.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the proper reduction, the patient's leg or arm should be held by an assistant, while another assistant holds the leg in place.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Then let two be used for the patient's legs, and two to make the incision on their feet, so that the pain in the joints does not spread to the other parts of the body; hold the patient's legs apart.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	The patient must be treated for gout.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	And if you are careful, apply the treatment to the affected area, but if careless, they may be burned.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	When you burn the skin above the knee to treat a pain, apply the cauterization there.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And if the dislocation is in the legs, lightly apply pressure to the knee caps on the front of the leg, as well as on the top of the foot, with the right hand.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	E aprop es que la cushion should be placed on his face so that the other two (not necessarily cushions) are placed behind his head.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	When joint pain occurs, it's important to apply a cushion to the affected area.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	And so the patient's body should be treated with a cushion under the area where the pain is felt in the leg and another on the foot.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And compare the leg to the other leg.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And if the patient has pain in their legs, they are now ready for cauterization to be used on them.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see that there is some swelling in the patient's body, place cushion on the intestine of the patient after it has been treated with a poultice.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then apply a poultice to soothe the pain for several days.
Capitol .xxxii.	Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body, leading to pain and inflammation in the joints.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	And so the treatment of the intestine or leg pain begins.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The pain is caused by a lack of proper balance in the humors or vital fluids of the body.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of a dislocated leg. You know what to do. You already have a cushion under their legs, so put another on their chest, and another will tell them what to do with the patient's pain.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	Then place two cushions on its chest.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And if you want to treat the patient's leg with a cautery, but gently, so as not to cause more harm than good, place a cushion under their knee or ankle.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And if the patient's intestines are involved, place another cushion on their stomach to prevent the pain from spreading.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Let them use the cushion for a few days, then they will be able to walk around again with ease.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If a hot humor affects the legs, they are to be treated by burning or cauterization.
Capitol .xxxiii.	And if it is necessary to treat inflammation in the body, they will apply leeches to the affected areas.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of ankle dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Then apply hot poultices to the affected area.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And that the patient's ankle is dislocated, so you must place it back in its proper position.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The cure for lightheadedness is to treat the ailment that causes it.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	The translation for this text would depend on which language you are translating from.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to the right side, place it on their left leg.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And if you apply a cushion to the leg, then the intestine or other parts will be left behind.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And if a physician applies cautery to the body, they must be careful.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then you apply a hot cautery to the third part of the body, under their feet.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, if you return the intestine to its proper place, then use a pointed cautery to treat them.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	Mays si a tu es prohibida means "If it is necessary to apply cautery" (the word "Mays" is a possible misspelling of "Maybe").
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then apply another cautery to the legs, so that the patient may be kept from moving his or her limbs.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And if a cushion is used to support them, the patient's pain will be on their legs.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And if it is necessary to reduce the swelling of the injury, it is by applying a poultice.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And so that you have to keep the patient from being too injured by the violent nerves.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then leave it alone for two or three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then place a cushion under their legs.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	Mays if the wound is in the front, then it is necessary to keep it open for easy access.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if the patient has an outbreak of pus on their body, it should be treated with a poultice or embrocation in another place.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter xxxiv.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	The treatment for gout will be applied in this way.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Cove that the patient be given support to the affected limb; when the patient's leg is swollen, use cold compresses.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	And if you are treating someone who has dislocations, use their own body weight to help reduce the dislocation.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then place your hand on the patient's foot to keep it from swelling further.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And if the patient's body is affected by cold humors, apply a cushion to their legs, which will be placed on the table for three days; then you must ensure that the intestines are secured and protected from further harm.
Capitol .xxxv.	This sentence appears to be in Occitan, a Romance language spoken in medieval southern France.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	De dislocation caused by injury or other means, apply splints to the legs and use bandages on their limbs.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When the heat of the disease spreads to the intestines, then death will follow immediately.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	A wise man should be consulted for medical treatment, not a mere guesser.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Then apply a hot compress to the area, as needed.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	The patient needs a cushion to cover their intestine and prevent gout, which is caused by excess humors in the feet.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if a bone fracture occurs, you will apply your hand to the area where the pain is located.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And if you are to be a doctor, you must use your cushion to treat the patient.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	So many words have been written about the disease, but few know its true nature.
Amen.	Amen.
