On the restoration of a fracture of the hip.
Chapter 15.
The hip bone is often fractured and is noticeable by the way it turns inward and outward.
Its restoration is done by binding one band above the fracture and another below it.
And the patient should lie face down.
Then let the assistant extend each band on its side evenly, and this is done when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If the fracture is near the hip’s root, then place the band on the side of the hip so that the extension goes upward, and place another band below the fracture.
Similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, then place the band close to the knee so that the extension goes downward.
Then the physician should align the bone with both hands until it returns to its natural shape, and the bones should join well.
Then it is necessary to apply a plaster and a binding, if there is no swelling in the member.
If swelling occurs, then leave it for a few days until the swelling subsides, then return to your treatment.
The binding should be done as follows.
You should wrap a hard binding over the fracture, that is, a binding band, and fold it two or three times, leaving an excess.
Then wrap the leg until it reaches the heel at the base of the buttocks.
And insert a long cord between the hip and the leg near the knee downward, so that the ends of the cord emerge from the upper part of the two sides.
Then wrap the excess of the binding over the thigh and hip.
Then place splints on the hip at the site of the fracture and place one splint on the thigh bone.
Then fill the gaps between the thigh and hip with soft cloths to balance the binding.
Then begin a firm binding from the middle over the fracture site with three or four wraps.
And as you extend the bandage farther from the fracture site, let the binding be looser, softer, and gentler.
Then tighten the two ends of the cord that you inserted between the hip and the thigh.
Then tie both ends to the three splints above.
Then move both ends of the cord downward until you reach the ankle of the foot.
And with both, secure the ends of the splints on the other side, so that the binding does not move out of place.
Then release the bandage over it while it remains, so that there does not occur corrosion, nor swelling, nor inflammation to the limb, or anything similar.
But if something happens from it.
Then proceed quickly with its release, and correct all that happened from it, according to what we have said many times.
If there is a piece of bone in the bone itself that is sharp: then it is necessary that you smooth it, if it is possible for you.
And if not, cut upon it and remove it, and treat it with that which was previously mentioned, until it heals.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip is bound, with splints added to it, as we have said for the arm and thigh.
However, in the restoration of it being thus fractured, limping does not happen to the patient.
But if it is restored alone, without the other leg being applied to it, then it is necessary that he to whom it belongs limps, always.
And know that the hip is set in fifty days, or a little more or less; all of it depends on the diversity of temperaments and other conditions.
