On the incision for a watery hernia.
Chapter 62.
A watery swelling is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane, which is under the skin of the testicle containing the egg, and it is called "sifac."
And sometimes it is in its own membrane, which nature has prepared for it in part of the egg, until it ripens; this is another egg, and the skin of the testicle is between it and the white membrane we mentioned, though this is rare.
And indeed the generation of this swelling comes from a weakness that happens to the testicles, wherefore this matter is discharged to them.
And sometimes it happens from a blow to the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors.
For its color is either inclined to yellowness, or it is blood-red, or it is muddy black, or it is watery white, and this is the most common.
And the signs by which the location of the water accumulation is known are as follows.
For if it is in the white membrane we mentioned, then the swelling is round and somewhat elongated like the shape of an egg, and the testicle does not appear, because the moisture surrounds it on all sides.
And if the moisture is in its own membrane, then the swelling is round with part of the egg, and for this reason a person thinks it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white membrane, then it falls under sensation.
Therefore, when you wish to know the color of the moisture, then test the color of the moisture in the swelling with a square introducer, the form of which was previously described.
Thus, according to what appears in the track of the introducer, judge concerning that which is within it.
Therefore, when we come to the cure with the knife, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to be bled if possible for him, and you observe that his body is full.
Then he should be laid on his back on a somewhat elevated surface, and place many cloths under him.
Then sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right side, who will stretch his member to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and towards the part of the abdomen.
Then take a wide spatula and cut the skin of the testicles from the middle along the length, up to near the pubic hair; and let the incision be made in the straight line that divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white membrane encompassing it; and flay it and observe, or take care lest you cut it; and let the flaying by which you strip it be from the part that is more suspended with the egg; and carefully examine with the stripping to the extent that is possible for you.
Then pierce the white membrane full of water with a wide perforation, and draw out all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with hooks, and stretch the white membrane upwards, and do not touch the skin enclosing the testicles; and cut the white membrane however it is possible for you to cut it, either in its entirety, or in pieces, especially its thinner side.
For if you do not examine closely, security is not achieved in its incision, lest the water returns.
However, if the egg protrudes outward from its skin at the time of your operation, then when you complete the incision of the white membrane, return it.
Then join the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then care for it as with other wounds, until it heals.
But if you find the egg corrupted by some blackness, then you must tie the vessels, which are the suspensory structures, fearing the flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with the suspensory, and extract the egg; afterwards treat it with what we have mentioned.
But if the water is accumulated in two parts, then know that there are two swellings; therefore cut the other part as you did the first one, equally.
And if it is manageable for you to make it one operation, then do it; then wipe away the blood.
And insert into the incisions wool soaked in oil or in rose oil; and on the outside, place other wool soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over both testicles and the lower abdomen; and place doubled cloths on top, which are cushions; and bind them above with a bandage, which has six according to this pattern.
Then take two cloths, and sew them, and fill them with carded wool, according to this model: and make ends with which it is pressed with cotton or wet wool; and gather them with tightness in the waistband of the trousers; and one end reaches over the anus to the back, and the second reaches to the area of the groin; and two ends over the two thighs below, and the other two ends over the two groins, and the whole tightness is gathered in the waistband of the trousers.
And, sometimes this swelling is treated artificially with cautery instead of incision with a knife: and it is done by taking a thin knife-like cautery, and cutting the skin of the testicles with it; and it is heated, as we have described: until when the white membrane containing water is exposed; then take the cautery, in this shape.
It resembles a Greek letter.
Then pierce that white membrane with it while it is heated, until all the moisture exits.
Then stretch the white membrane with hooks, and strip it with a fine heated cautery, and cut it as much as is possible for you, until you eradicate it entirely.
And be careful of the egg, so that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is safer, and further from blood flow, and better than the operation with incision.
But if any resistance occurs at the time of incision, or at the time of cautery, a hot swelling, or blood flow, or something else, then it is necessary to treat what resists you with the treatment that is appropriate for it, as was previously mentioned.
But if the patient is fearful, and cannot endure this operation because of its terrifying nature, then perform the puncture as I describe it: and it is.
When it is confirmed to you by what we have said about the signs, that the swelling is watery, then it is necessary to make the patient sit on an elevated seat.
Then pierce the swelling at its lower part with a wide spatula: and make the puncture along the length of the body, and let the opening be wide, until all the water flows out.
Then place cotton on the area, and bind it, and leave it so that the remaining water flows out: then treat it, until the wound heals.
But if there is resistance to the flow of water at the time when you pierce it, and this is only because the white membrane causes resistance in the wound opening, and prevents the water from exiting, then you must insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument by which water is extracted from dropsical patients, the shape of which was previously described; or modify the wound operation slightly.
And know that the water returns, and accumulates after six months, or around that time.
When it accumulates again, then it should be pierced in the same way, and the patient will pass his days.
