On the method of cauterizing in the case of a tear duct fistula.
Chapter 19.
When you treat a fistula using what we discussed in the divisions of diseases and your treatment is ineffective, then you should cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, and have an assistant hold his head in his hands so that it remains still and does not move.
Then place a cloth soaked in egg white or in a psillium mucilage over his eye; next, heat the cautery, which has this form.
It should be concave, like the shape of the tip of a vulture’s feather on one end, with which the cauterization is performed; and if you wish, it can be penetrating to the other end, and, if you prefer, it should be raised in this way.
However, this concave form is better for your work.
Then squeeze the fistula, if it is open, to drain the fluid, and dry it; if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus.
Then place on it the cautery, which has been heated very much.
And hold your hand steady on the cautery, positioned away from the eye towards the nose, so that your hand does not slip or the patient become disturbed; place the cautery on the fatty tissue of the eye and destroy it.
If with the beginning of your cauterization you reach the bone, it will be good.
If not, then repeat the cauterization once or twice as needed, and leave it for three days.
Then apply a cloth with butter and treat it with a drying ointment until it heals.
If forty days pass and it does not heal, then apply a sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed, and scrape it as described in the relevant chapter.
There is another method of cauterizing a fistula that some early practitioners have described.
Direct your attention to the location of the fistula, split it open, and place a fine rod, that is, a thin tube, into the fissure, shaped like this.
Pour into it an amount of a drachma of molten lead, holding your hand steady on the tube with a good grip, and ensure the patient does not move at all, so that the lead does not flow or reach his eye.
It is essential to place a cloth soaked in egg white or water over the patient’s eye.
The lead burns the site of the fistula and heals it with remarkable efficacy.
If the fistula heals with the cautery and treatment as we described, it is good.
If not, then it is necessary to create an opening in the nose and redirect the fistula towards the nasal passage, as it naturally should be.
