On the treatment of something that falls into the ear.
Chapter VI.
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a mineral stone, or something similar to a stone, like iron and glass; or it is from a plant, like chickpea and beans; or it is a flowing substance, like water, and vinegar, and similar things; or it is some kind of animal.
When a stone or a type of stone that does not dissolve or grow in the ear falls into the ear, expose the ear to sunlight; if you then see the stone, drip some violet oil or sesame oil into the ear.
Then administer its extraction, and make the person sneeze with condisi, and plug the nostrils at the moment of the sneeze, after placing pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and pull the ear upwards.
For it often comes out with this treatment.
If it does not come out, then administer its extraction with Gesti, that is, with fine tweezers: their shape is this.
If it then comes out with the tweezers, it is good.
And if not, then administer its extraction with a fine, blunt hook with a slight bend.
If it does not come out with this, then make a tube of brass, and insert the end of the tube deep into the ear canal, and seal the area around the tube with wax softened with oil, so that no air passes except through the tube; then use your breath to extract it with a strong suction.
For it often comes out with this procedure we have described.
If it does not come out this way, then take a little bit of helkalimbat or birdlime, that is, prepared glue with which birds are caught; place it on the end of a rod after you wrap it with a cloth nicely arranged around it; then insert it gently into the ear after drying the ear from moisture.
If it does not come out with all the methods we have described, then proceed to cutting, before a warm abscess or spasm occurs.
The method of incision is to first perform phlebotomy on the patient in the cephalic vein and remove an amount of blood according to his strength.
Then make the patient sit between your hands, turn his ear upwards, and make a small incision at the base of the ear near the fat in the recessed area there; let the incision be in a crescent shape until you reach the stone; then remove it with whatever instruments you have available.
Then sew up the incision as soon as possible and treat it until it heals.
If the object that fell into the ear is one of the seeds that grow and swell, then administer its extraction.
If it does not respond to exit, then take a fine, thin spatumile in this shape.
And use it to cut away that kind of seed that falls into the ear, but do not do this if you think the seed has already become moist from the ear’s vapor, until you divide it into many pieces; then extract them with hooks, or with fine tweezers, or with suction as we described, for the extraction becomes easier.
As for water that enters the ear, the patient should first use sneezing induced by condisi, and then fill his ear with a bit of old cotton; he should lie on the ear in which the water is.
If it comes out by this, it is good.
If it does not, then take several stones, finger-length, thin, smooth, and heat them briefly with fire, and let the patient insert one into the ear opening; he should jump on the foot on that side and strike with another stone on the stone that is in the ear.
He should continue doing this with stone after stone until all the water comes out.
The water can also come out by taking a piece of papyrus or reed, inserting one end into the ear, and lighting the other end with fire, until most of it burns.
Then repeat with another reed, and do this many times until all the water comes out; and extract it with a tube as described earlier with the stone.
In the extraction of an animal that has entered the ear, if it is small in body, like a flea or something similar, treat it as I described in the section on divisions.
But if it is of large body, such that it can be sensed, then administer its extraction with tweezers and hooks: and its removal is easier than all other objects lodged in the ear.
In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we mentioned in the division and in the section on distillations, and your treatment does not help, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight.
If something appears there from the worms, then extract it with tweezers or with fine hooks.
If nothing appears there, then take a tube shaped with a narrow lower end and a wide upper end: insert the thin end into the ear as much as the patient can tolerate, then use it to perform strong suction.
Do this many times until all the worms come out.
If they do not respond to exit, then seal the area around the tube with wax, as I described in the case of the stone.
If they do not come out with what we have described, then administer distillations that the ancients already tested for killing worms; you will find this in the section on distillations.
And let your infusion of oils and medicines into the ear be done with this instrument, whose shape is depicted here.
As you see, make it of silver or brass, narrow at the bottom with a small hole, wide at the top.
Let the plunger that goes into the hollow of the tube be properly made of brass.
And if you wish, take a rod and wrap a piece of cotton neatly around its end; then pour oil, juice, or any of the medicines you wish into the tube, which should be in the ear: then insert the rod with the cotton on top, and press it with your hand with gentle compression, until the oil is pushed into the ear canal, and the patient feels it inside: and what is poured into the ear should be slightly warmed with fire; and beware that the substance you distill into it is not too cold, as the medicines do not tolerate it.
