On the forms of instruments used for enemas in illnesses of the anus, diarrhea, and colic.
Chapter 83.
Sometimes the enema device is made of silver, or brass, or cast or hammered bronze.
And sometimes these instruments are made small or large, depending on the patient for whom they are administered.
Therefore, that which is administered in treating small children should be small, and for those whose anus is weak or painful, so should be their enema devices.
Large enema.
Small enema.
Its tube, that is, the upper part to which the reservoir is tied, should be wide in this way, with a separation so that the reservoir can be fastened as you see, and its lower end, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt, that is, not open, very smooth, tapering to a thin point; and on one side, it should have two holes, and on the other side, one hole.
The diameter of the holes should be about the thickness of spokes, and slightly thicker, and the reservoir in which the medicines are placed should be made from the bladder of an animal or from egg parchment, shaped like a small bag, with a base of one palm in length.
And it should be pierced with many holes all around it, with the space between each hole about the width of a finger.
Then insert a strong thread of raw fiber, made of ten strands or so, into these holes, and tie it around the reservoir like a small bag.
When the reservoir is placed on it, tie it tightly at the top of the enema device between the two separations.
Then administer the enema with it.
And this is the form of the reservoir's circle and the holes depicted here.
The method of administering the enema with it is to fill the reservoir or bladder with medicine, warmed to the tolerance level of the patient; and be careful that it is not too hot or too cold.
Then the patient should lie on their back and raise their legs upward, and place beneath them a pad, that is, leather on which people lie, or a cloth.
Then anoint the end of the enema device with oil, egg white, fenugreek mucilage, or similar substances.
Then gently insert it into the anus.
Then the assistant should take the reservoir with both hands and squeeze it forcefully until it empties everything from the device into the intestine.
Then remove the enema device, and the patient should raise their legs against the wall.
If the medicine urges him to expel, he should hold it as much as he can.
And if he sleeps with it the entire night, it is most beneficial.
If you administer an enema for diarrhea, and he hurries to expel it, then repeat the enema until he is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus, then use a very thin, gentle enema device, like those used for children.
And this is the form of the thin enema device with a tightly wrapped covering.
