On the treatment of intestinal rupture.
Chapter 65.
The occurrence of this rupture is from a cut, which happens in the membrane stretched over the abdomen in the area of the groin from the lower abdomen.
Therefore, the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles.
And this rupture is either from the membrane or its extension.
And these two types happen for many reasons: either from a blow, a jump, a shout, lifting a heavy object, and similar causes.
And the sign, when it is from the extension of the membrane.
Is that it happens gradually over a long time, and does not happen suddenly: and it is a swelling equally towards the depth, because the membrane compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it when it is from a cut in the membrane is that it causes intense pain suddenly from its beginning: and it is a swelling, irregular, appearing close under the skin: and this is due to the exit of the intestine, and its movement to the exterior of the membrane.
And sometimes a zirbum comes out with the intestine: and this is called an intestinal rupture and zirbia: and sometimes it occurs with wind.
And sometimes feces move into the intestine and are retained there: and with this is harm to the patient, since it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of this type of illness with surgery, there is danger; therefore, it is necessary to be cautious of complications in it.
And the method of operation is that you instruct the patient to return the intestine with his hand to the interior of its cavity, if it will respond to being returned.
Then he is to be laid back on his neck between your hands, and his legs are lifted.
Then stretch the skin that follows the skin upwards, and cut the entire skin of the testicles along its length.
Then fix hooks into the two lips of the incision, as you need to open the incision with them; and let the incision be to such a size that it is possible for an egg to come out of it.
Then scrape away the membrane, and what is under the skin of the testicles, until the white membrane is revealed, hard on all sides; then insert your index finger into the area that follows the testicle, in that which is between the white membrane under the skin of the egg and the second membrane, and release with it the adhesion which is on the back part of the egg.
Then move with your right hand the skin of the testicles inward; and with this, extend the white membrane upward with your left hand: and lift the egg with the membrane toward the side of the incision: and instruct your assistant to extend the egg upward: and you release the adhesion, which is at the back, with complete separation.
And check with your fingers that there is nothing there from the intestine wrapped in the hard white membrane.
If, however, you find anything of it, then push it back towards the lower abdomen.
Then take a needle, in which there is a thick thread, made of linen from ten threads: and insert it at the base of the membrane, that is, the tunic which is under the skin of the testicles that follows the incision: then cut the ends that extend from the thread, until there are four threads.
Then arrange some of them over others in a shape like a cross: and tie the membrane, of which we spoke, that is under the skin of the testicles with a strong ligature, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can send anything to them, so that a warm swelling does not occur from there.
And again place a second ligature outside the first ligature, two fingers away from it.
And after these two ligatures, leave a portion of the membrane under the skin of the testicles, the size of a finger’s breadth, and cut the rest completely around, and remove the egg from it.
Then cut in the lower part of the skin of the testicles at the incision, from which blood and serum flow, as we described in what was previously stated.
Then apply wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound: and apply the bandage which we described.
And sometimes the white membrane, as we said, is cauterized after its incision to prevent blood flow.
For it often happens.
And leave the bandage until it falls off on its own.
If it takes too long to fall off, then bathe it with warm water: and place on it what we said, until it falls.
Then treat the wound with the remaining treatment for wounds, until it is healed.
