On the incision of an abscess of the uvula.
Chapter 37.
When phlegm descends to the uvula, and it becomes swollen, and is elongated, then it is called a pendant: and if it is thick and round at the lower part, then it is called a grape.
When it is treated with what we mentioned in the division, and the treatment is not effective, and you see that the warm abscess has subsided from it, and it is thin: then it is necessary to incise it.
And if it is gathered, round, without length, and is reddish, dark, or black, and has no sensation: then it is necessary to avoid its incision.
For in this there is a risk to the patient.
Therefore, when you see it as I have described in whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit facing the sun: press down his tongue with the instrument previously described: then fix a hook in the uvula, pull it downward, and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for the incision of the two tonsils.
And you should not cut from it except that which exceeds the natural boundary without excess.
For if you cut more than that, you will harm the voice and speech.
Then after the incision, use what we mentioned in the incision of the two tonsils: and treat it until it heals.
But if the patient is frightened of the incision: then it is necessary to use ingenuity in cauterizing it without fear or dread.
And the method of cauterization in it is only with sharp water: which is done by placing the patient’s head in your lap.
Then press down his tongue with the instrument we mentioned.
Then take from the water I mentioned to you in the chapter on cauterization, and prepare with it unslaked lime, and apply it in a way that is not thick nor thin, and fill the hollow of this instrument, whose shape is as follows.
Let the end where the medicine is placed be concave, like the concavity of a spoon’s ray.
And place the instrument with the medicine over the uvula itself: and let the patient lie on his side, so that saliva runs from his mouth due to the internal medicine, so that nothing descends from it to his throat and harms it.
Then hold your hand with the medicine.
And you should apply it to the uvula for about half an hour, until you see it has turned dark, and the sting of the medicine has subsided.
And if you wish, you may take a piece of cotton, wrap it around the tip of a probe, soak the cotton in the medicine, and insert the probe with the cotton into a tube from above, until the cotton adheres to the uvula.
Do this many times, until you achieve the desired cauterization of the uvula.
Then leave it: for it will dry out and fall off after three or four days.
If you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it: and after the cauterization, wipe around the uvula with cotton soaked in butter, and clean with it what is around it from the medicine: and rinse with cold water.
And treat externally with poultices, and internally with gargles, until it heals.
This method of treatment is therefore safer than incision and more distant from fear.
And sometimes the uvula is treated with something even gentler than cauterization and incision: it is treated with fumigation, in this manner.
Take calamint, hyssop, oregano, rue, sseah, chamomile, southernwood, and similar herbs: and combine them all, or some of them in a pot, and submerge them in vinegar, and let them boil: and let the pot be sealed properly with clay: and in the middle of the pot, let there be an opening, over which is placed a hollow instrument in this manner.
Let it be made of silver or bronze: and let the end, which has a perforation, be inserted into the patient’s mouth, until the vapor rises to the uvula over the tube, until the uvula becomes very discolored.
Then repeat over it many times, until it dries out.
And beware, do not perform this treatment at the onset of the abscess.
For often it will increase the abscess: and you should not do it unless at the decline of its hot abscess.
If, however, you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a reed and place an eggshell at its end, so that the patient's mouth is not burned, for the eggshell prevents the vapor from burning the mouth, and this is a good treatment for healing.
