On the method of cauterizing the eyelid when inverted hairs prick the eye.
Chapter 17.
The cautery for this is of two types: either cautery with fire or cautery with a burning medicine.
In cauterizing with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to let his hairs grow out, if he is one who trims them, until they are long and even.
But if they prick him at their root, then bind his eyes with a band so that they do not move, until they grow.
When they grow out and are even, then place the patient’s head in your lap, then mark on his eyelid with ink in the shape of a myrtle leaf, starting the mark near the hairs.
Then place a cloth soaked in egg white or in psyllium mucilage over the eye.
Then heat the cautery, the form of which is this.
Then cauterize along the shape you marked gradually in many strokes, until the surface of the skin, shaped like the myrtle leaf, is properly burned entirely.
And the sign of success in your work is if you see the eyelid of the eye begin to contract and the hairs lift away from the puncture of the eye.
Then lift your hand and leave it alone for three days.
Then place a cloth with butter on it until the scab is removed.
Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
But if some hairs return after a while, and the eyelid softens, then repeat the cauterization on that spot as you did the first time.
But if the hairs are in the lower part, then cauterize it until it is lifted to its natural position and leveled so that the hairs no longer prick the eye.
On the method of cauterizing with a burning medicine in the same case.
Chapter 18.
Instruct the patient to let his hairs grow until they are long and even.
Make a myrtle-leaf shape from a cloth paper.
Then take a known soap and unslaked lime, each in a weight of one ounce or close to that; then grind them together thoroughly, and do this quickly so it does not cool.
Then spread this mixture over the paper you made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on the eyelid of one or both eyes.
And place a cloth soaked in egg white under the eye, and the patient's head should rest in your lap.
Place your index finger on the medicine and press it gently.
Move it each time the patient feels the medicine’s stinging, as he perceives its sting like fire.
As long as he continues to feel the sting, leave the medicine in place and move it with your finger.
When the stinging stops, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
Then observe if the eyelid rises, as it would from contraction by fire or incision; if so, it is good. If not, reapply the medicine to the area where it did not take effect and did not darken, until your work is balanced and the eye contracts.
Then place a cloth with butter over it until the burned skin is removed.
Then treat it with diaphinicon ointment or another ointment until it heals.
During the procedure, you must exercise utmost care to ensure that none of the medicine falls into the eye.
If the eyelid softens after a few days and any hairs prick the eye, then repeat the medicine on the specific part of the eyelid that softened, as you did at first.
Then treat it until it heals.
And this is the shape of the myrtle leaf.
Know that human eyes vary in size and smallness.
Therefore, let your consideration be according to this, for the way of righteousness is not hidden from one dedicated to this art.
