On the methods of treating Ataxmir of the eye, that is, when the eyelid of the eye becomes softened, causing it to wrinkle as it should not.
Chapter XI.
When additional hairs grow on the eyelids of the eye beyond the usual course under the natural hairs, and they grow in abundance: then they harm the eye, causing various ailments, such as constant tearing, softening of the eyelids, and whiteness, until it becomes a cause of destruction to the eye.
And indeed, Ataxmir of the eye is treated in four ways.
Either by cautery with fire.
Or with a sharp medicine, as mentioned previously in the chapter on cautery.
Or Ataxmir is treated by incision and suture.
Or by means of reeds, as I shall explain.
It is necessary to place the patient's head in your lap.
Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it turns, then it is good.
If not: insert a needle into it, with a thread from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle with the thread penetrate from above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow: and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it with a rod.
Then make an incision on the inner part of the eyelid under the additional hairs with a thin blade, cutting from the greater lacrimal duct to the lesser lacrimal duct.
Then remove the thread, and place a small cushion of cotton or cloth under the eyelid: then mark on the eyelid with ink a shape like that of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the shape corresponds to the size and elevation of the eyelid, as it varies among people.
For there are those who require a large portion to be cut from the eyelid, depending on the amount that is softened in the eyelid.
Then, with a thin blade, make an incision along the two lines you marked, starting from the greater lacrimal duct to the lesser lacrimal duct, and let there be one cut close to the natural hairs, like the thickness of a rod.
Then insert a hook into one of the two corners of the skin.
Then remove all of it.
Then, join the two edges with a suture, using a needle and fine wool thread: and wipe away the blood, and make the excess thread adhere to the two eyebrows with some adhesive substances if you wish to do so: and if not, do not concern yourself with it.
Then leave the suture and thread in place for three or four days: afterwards, treat it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without a suture, and treat it with something that dries and constricts.
For the eyelid will elevate upon sealing and joining of the wound: but it will be better in the future.
This method of treating Ataxmir was taught by the ancients.
However, it requires careful attention to the patient, it is a skilled procedure, and there is no fear in it.
And there is another method for Ataxmir as well: it is to mark on the eyelid a shape like that of a myrtle leaf, as we have described.
Then lift the eyelid with three separate or combined hooks, according to the following shape, then cut the excess with small scissors, following this shape, with equal incision.
But if it is not possible for you to hold the hook, and it does not align, then take a needle with a thread, and insert it into the middle of the shape: and insert another thread near the greater lacrimal duct, and a second thread near the lesser lacrimal duct: and join the threads with equal tension between your fingers.
Then raise your hand evenly: and lift the skin on which the mark is made, as we have described.
Then join the two edges of the wound with a suture: and treat it until it heals.
But if an abscess occurs at your incision or fissure, soothe that abscess with cerate and similar ointments that relieve it.
And sometimes it also happens that the hairs of the eyelid turn inward.
Therefore, you should apply to it what we have said regarding incision: but the suture for both is more skillful.
On the treatment of Ataxmir with reeds.
And it is that you turn the eyelid and make an incision on the inner side, as I have described.
Then skillfully make two reeds or two thin pieces of wood: their length should match the length of the eyelid, and their width should be less than the width of a thin blade: and you have already cut into each end on both sides where you hold the threads.
Then gently place each one over the excess part of the eyelid of the eye, and bind the two reeds tightly on both sides, and leave it for several days.
For the tightened skin will die, darken, and decay, until it falls off on its own.
If it takes too long, then cut it with scissors.
Then treat it until it heals.
When it has healed, the eyelid is raised: and the hairs no longer prick.
And this is the shape of the two reeds, which you will make according to this figure and in this length and width.
