The Surgical Book of Albucasis, Part II.
On Incision, Perforation, and Bloodletting in wounds, and such matters.
We have already discussed in the First Chapter, every condition in which cautery with fire and burning medicine is suitable, and its reasons, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries.
And I arranged there the chapters from head to foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter by the same method: so that the inquiry may be made easier for the seeker.
And before I begin it, it is necessary for you to learn, my sons, that in this chapter there is as much terror as there is in the first chapter on cauterization.
And because of this, caution must be greater in it, since in the operation described in this chapter, there often occurs an evacuation with blood, upon which life depends in the opening of a vein, or the incision over a swelling, or the opening of an abscess, or the treatment of a wound, or the extraction of an arrow, or the incision over a stone, and similar actions: from all of which are associated tremor, fear, and in many cases, death.
And I advise you, lest that which involves hesitation fall upon you, for sometimes types of people come to you in this art with various kinds of sicknesses.
For among them is one who becomes angry with his illness, and death seems of little concern to him, due to the severity of what he experiences from his sickness and its prolonged malice.
And with sickness, there is a fear which signifies death.
And among them is one who offers you his support and enriches you with it, hoping for healing, and his sickness is dangerous.
Therefore, you should not agree with one of those who come to you in this way, whose nature is such.
And let your caution be greater than your greed and your rapacity.
And do not presume upon any of this, except after certain knowledge, which verifies to you that which achieves a commendable outcome.
And in the treatment of all your patients, use prognosis and guidance concerning what is most suitable for their health.
For in this lies for you help toward the acquisition of fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire in you, my sons, His understanding, and may He not take away from you direction and inspiration, for that is in His hand.
And indeed, I have arranged this Chapter by dividing it into sections, as was done in the chapter on Cautery, from the neck to the feet: so that what you seek from it, and what you need, may be made easier for you.
