On the treatment of fistulas occurring in the lower part.
Chapter 80.
Fistulas that occur in the lower area are knotted growths and thicknesses that appear near the outside of the anus or in the space of one of the parts, and there may be one fistula or several.
When this knotty growth becomes old, it opens, and a watery white moisture or thin pus flows from it.
And sometimes these fistulas are penetrating.
Penetrating fistulas are recognized by the matter that exits with stools and gas when the patient evacuates; sometimes worms may emerge from them.
Some fistulas, when they are in a certain position, penetrate as far as the bladder and to the urethra.
Some penetrate as far as the hip joint and to the coccygeal junction.
To determine if a fistula penetrates to the anus, as opposed to a non-penetrating one, insert your index finger into the anus and a thin probe of brass or iron into the fistula when it is not twisted.
If there is a twist in it, then insert a thin lead probe into it, or a strand of horsehair, until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
If you do not feel it at all, nor does anything exit from the opening with stool, nor gas, nor worms as I mentioned, then know that it is non-penetrating; proceed, therefore, with the treatment.
When the fistula penetrates to the bladder or the urinary tract, this is indicated by urine exiting from it, and it will resist healing with medication.
If, however, it penetrates as far as the hip joint or the hip bone, the sign is that the probe reaches there without twisting, pain is felt around the area, pus constantly discharges from it, and it does not respond to medication or heal with ointments.
For all these penetrating fistulas, there is absolutely no cure, and treatment is merely labor and futility at the hands of foolish physicians who attempt it.
For a fistula that is non-penetrating and not old, healing may be hoped for with a cautery, as I describe to you, having tested it myself. The patient should lie in your arms on his back, with his legs raised above his hips, and his hips bent toward his abdomen.
Then, insert a lead or brass probe if there is twisting in the fistula, so you can determine how far the probe reaches.
If the patient feels it near the anus, then you should insert your index finger into the anus.
If you feel the probe with your finger, penetrating by itself, but sense a membrane or flesh between your finger and it, then know for certain that it is penetrating. Therefore, do not waste effort on it, as there is no cure, as we have said.
However, it has been said that, in some people, tissue may heal, and a helpful treatment would be to heat a thin cautery to fit the width of the fistula as previously described, and insert the heated cautery into the fistula until it reaches near the anus.
Then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all the added, fibrous tissues, which resemble a bird’s feather quill, have been burned.
Then treat it with wicks soaked in butter until the burned tissues are expelled, then treat it with ointments that generate and consolidate new flesh.
If it heals, that is good.
If it does not heal, then it will never heal with any other treatment.
If the probe exits but does not reach your finger in the anus, and there is a thick membrane of flesh or a membrane between the probe and your finger, and you see the fistula near the skin's surface, then cut the skin from the fistula's start, cutting alongside the probe in the fistula until the incision reaches the probe’s end, freeing it to fall.
Then clean out those fibrous tissues that resemble the hollow shaft of a bird’s feather so that nothing remains.
If blood overwhelms you and disrupts your operation to cut away these tissues, then it is better and faster to cauterize it with fire or with a sharp medicine.
For cautery with fire gathers beneficial conditions: burning away the added tissues, stopping bleeding, and drying up moisture.
Then treat it with wicks soaked in butter or mashed cabbage until the area discharges pus and the burned tissues are expelled as pus.
Then treat the wound with consolidating ointments that generate firm flesh; these are medicines with astringency and drying properties.
For once they are restored, the wound is healed, and you need not fear recurrence.
If the fistula has already reached deep into the anus and extends far within the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine with it.
If you feel the probe, and there is a membrane or flesh between you and it, and it is close to penetration, then there is no further operation except to proceed with hope and trust.
This means that one of three methods can be applied: either cauterize it, as we have said; or cut it until you reach its cavity, making it possible for you to insert wicks and administer treatment closely.
Do not proceed too far with the incision, so as not to cut the muscle that holds the anus, which could result in involuntary discharge for the patient.
Then treat it with the methods we have described.
Perhaps it may heal, or you may cut away this membrane and clean it after making an incision near the anus, as we described, either with a probe or with another instrument with a sharp tip.
Then clean out those fibrous tissues that are in the incision, probing as far as you are able.
Next, attempt the restoration of the entire wound by keeping the incision and upper opening where it can consolidate, leaving the fistula open in the inner part of the anus, which will ease the burden on the patient.
Sometimes, the fistula is sutured according to this method: insert a probe into the fistula, which is located along the side of the anus near the body surface with skin and edge of the anus. Then take a probe with a perforated tip, similar to an awl used for leatherworking, shaped as described here.
Then insert into it a thread wrapped from five strands, and secure it around the probe.
Then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
If the fistula penetrates close to the inner edge of the anus, then extract the thread from that opening by inserting your finger into the anus and pulling out the end of the thread. Tie the two ends together, tighten them, and leave it for one or two days. As the thread cuts further into the flesh, tighten it well until the tissue between the two ends of the thread is cut through and falls away. Then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
If the fistula’s opening is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way available to you, unless it is very deep.
If it reaches the muscle, you must take care not to cut into it.
Then proceed as we have described until it is healed.
This is the form of the spined spatumilis used for splitting the fistula, with one end sharply curved, while the other end is blunt to avoid cutting unnecessarily, as you see.
