On the extraction of urine retained in the bladder.
Chapter 58.
Retention of urine in the bladder occurs due to obstruction caused by a stone, congealed blood, pus, flesh growth, and similar conditions among those we have discussed in the methods of treatment in this section.
And if the urine is not released, and you see that its retention is due to a stone lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over on their knees.
Then position his feet upon his back, and let him stretch his belly above his back, and let the patient hold his breath as much as he can.
Thus, pressure is applied on the neck of the bladder to force the stone backward, and the urine is released.
But if this method does not work, and the condition is severe for the patient, then extraction must be administered using an instrument called a syringe, the design of which is as follows. It should be made of silver, and be slender, smooth, and hollow like the quill of a bird's feather in thinness, and about one and a half palms in length, with a thin tube at its tip.
The method for releasing urine through this instrument is to take a doubled thread, tie wool or cotton securely to its end, and insert the thread’s end into the lower part of the syringe; and if there is excess wool, trim it with scissors, then insert it into the tube with firmness, like an insertion tool.
Then anoint the syringe with oil, or with butter, and egg white; and make the patient sit upon a seat, apply warm oils to the bladder and his penis, with olive oil and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the penis gently, until it reaches the base of the penis.
Then bend it above towards the direction of the navel.
Then push the syringe further in until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel that it has reached an empty space: this is done in this manner only because the passage it travels through has a curve.
Then gradually draw out the thread with the wool.
For the urine will follow the wool.
Then remove it, and allow the urine to flow through the urinary passage; repeat the use of the syringe, and continue doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
