On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Chapter XVII.
Know that the leg has two bones, one of which is thick and called by the name of Cruris, and the other is thin and called Focile.
And each of these bones can suffer fractures similar to those that happen to the two bones of the arm, and for that reason its restoration is carried out just as the restoration of the arm, and the operation is the same.
But if both bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions.
And if the thinner bone is broken, the leg turns toward the front.
And if the thicker bone is broken, you will find it below; and it is among those things that are not hidden from you.
Then apply extension, alignment, and binding of splints evenly according to it.
However, if the fracture of the leg is a severe fracture, having much swelling, the extension should be less and gentler with your relief.
And indeed in the leg there is a part of the operation beyond the arm: and it is such that when you arrange the splints and complete all your work, then take two strips of pine wood, which is used in the making of sunshades placed under the planks, and they are made from palm leaf stems, and choose those with small thickness, and they should not be from the thinnest; and their length should match the length of the leg from the knee down.
Then wrap each one in cloth with two wrappings according to its length.
And place one part of the leg on one side and the other on the opposite side, and they should extend from the knee to the lower part of the foot.
Then bind the two strips at three places, at both ends and in the middle.
For when the bandage is prevented, the leg leans to the right and left and stays in a good position.
And already a wooden cradle should be prepared according to the length of the leg, and the leg is placed in it to keep it from moving.
And most certainly it is necessary to do this in a fracture when there is indeed a wound with it.
Then observe the leg every day and diligently guard it from abscess, swelling, or any other conditions.
If, then, anything of those should happen, then apply to it what is necessary until it heals, if God wills.
