On the treatment of Water that gathers in the heads of children.
Chapter I.
Know that this condition often occurs in children at birth: or when the midwife presses the child’s head too harshly.
And sometimes it also occurs from a hidden cause which is not known.
And indeed, I have not seen this illness in anyone other than children: and for each one I saw, death came quickly: because of this, it seemed to me best to avoid operating on it.
And I indeed saw a child among them, whose head was filled with water, and the head increased in size each day, until he could no longer sit up because of the size of his head: and the moisture continued to increase, until he died.
And this moisture indeed either gathers between the skin and the bone, or gathers under the bone over the membrane.
And the procedure in this case, if the moisture is between the skin and the bone and the swelling is small, is to make one incision in the middle of the head across: and let the length of the incision be about two knots, until the moisture flows out.
And this is the form of the spatula.
If the moisture is more increased, and the swelling is larger, then make two incisions, according to this form.
And if the moisture is under the bone, the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head open on every side: and the water is displaced when you press it inward with your hand, and it does not hide from you: then you must make three incisions in the middle of the head, in this manner.
And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Then bind the incisions with cloths and compresses.
Then bathe it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the bandage, and treat the wound with ointments and compresses.
And do not stop binding the head evenly.
And feed the patient only dry food with little moisture, until the part is strengthened and healed.
And another method of incision is to observe where the swelling is most prominent and where the water has collected.
For sometimes it is more in the back of the head, or in the forehead, or on the right side, or on the left side.
Then make the incision where the swelling and fullness of water appear to you: and cut it as far as is possible for you.
And be careful not to cut an artery, and a flow of blood occurs, and the patient dies from that flow along with the evacuation of moisture.
