On Cupping and the nature of its use.
Chapter 98.
Cups are made from horns, metal, and glass.
And cupping is indeed done in two ways.
With scarification and blood extraction; and the other is cupping without scarification.
And this cupping, which is without scarification, is also done in two ways.
For it is either with fire.
Or it is without fire.
And there are fourteen places on the body where cupping is applied with scarification and blood extraction.
One of these is the cupping of Alnocrati, which is at the back of the head; and Alkehel, which is at the middle of the neck; and the cupping of Alhagdahim, which is on the two sides of the neck at the two blades; and the cupping of the chin, which is below the jaw at the lower part of the mouth; and the cupping of the two shoulder blades; and the cupping of Alachosos above the end of the tail; and the cupping of the two elbows, which is the middle of the two arms; and the cupping of the two thighs; and the cupping of the two ankles.
And indeed, cupping does not draw blood from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore the strength does not diminish from them, as it does in phlebotomy.
Nor is it appropriate to administer cupping, either with fire or without fire, for any illness caused by fullness, until the entire body is evacuated.
But if a need for cupping arises due to illness or habit, we administer it at any time, at the beginning of the month, at its end, and in its middle, and at any other time.
For there are people in whom, when blood multiplies to the extent that cupping extraction is needed, they experience heaviness and dizziness in their head.
And some of them feel fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck.
And some of them experience itching in their face and forehead, dimness, and dullness in their eyes.
And some of them scratch the place of their cupping.
And some of them experience an increase in laughter.
And some of them taste blood in their mouth; or their tongue swells, and they spit blood.
And some of them experience an increase in sleep.
And some of them see blood and redness, the dead, wounds, and similar things in their dreams.
When, therefore, we observe any of these signs, particularly if it is in the middle third of the month, we then order cupping to be performed after two or three hours of the day have passed.
The benefit of cupping the nape is that it relieves heaviness in the head and benefits the eyes.
However, it should be done after the entire body has been evacuated.
And this cup indeed serves in place of the cephalic phlebotomy.
And it is not permitted for those of cold complexion, or those with catarrh, to use it.
For it brings great harm to them.
And for this reason, the elderly and those with cold illnesses in the head should not use it.
And whoever uses it frequently will develop forgetfulness.
And because of this, you should instruct the cupper to lower his hand with the cup a bit, for fear of causing forgetfulness.
The cupping of Alkehel serves as an alternative to dark and basilic phlebotomy, and thus it helps with asthma, difficulty in breathing, fissures of the respiratory organ, cough, and fullness.
And the Alkehel cup should be applied gently, for if it is placed too low, it weakens the heart and stomach.
The cupping of Alhagdahim helps with pains occurring in the head, eye inflammations, migraines, perforations, and pain at the roots of the teeth; and it serves as an alternative to basilic phlebotomy.
And you should instruct the cupper not to press his hand during scarification, so that he does not cut an artery and cause a blood flow.
Cupping under the chin benefits conditions in the mouth, such as ulcers and gum disease, and similar illnesses in the mouth; it serves in place of the phlebotomy of alieherich, which is in the two lips.
Cupping on the shoulder blades benefits alchafacham, which arises from fullness and heat.
Cupping on the inner parts of the two elbows serves as an aid to the phlebotomy of the three veins: basilic, dark, and cephalic; for it draws blood from all the small veins in the flesh, and these small veins draw from the larger veins, until the attraction reaches the three main veins.
And you should instruct the cupper not to cut too deeply in scarification, for the area is exposed without much flesh, and underneath it are nerves and arteries.
The cup placed over alchausos benefits hemorrhoids of the anus and lower ulcers.
And you should instruct the cupper to use a large cup made of metal, for the area requires strong suction, and delicate cups might break; and it should be deeply scarified.
Cupping on the thighs brings significant reduction, for it draws blood from the whole body, and it helps with chronic pains in the kidneys, womb, and bladder; it stimulates menstruation, and helps with bothor and ademenul; and it serves as a substitute for the phlebotomy of the two saphenous veins and alhorcobeni.
However, it weakens the body greatly and causes fainting in many people.
And the benefit of the alhorcobeni cupping is similar to that of cupping on the two thighs.
The method of placing the cups is as follows: first place the cup empty, and draw with moderate suction; do not leave the cups in place for too long, but apply and remove them quickly, so that the humors come to the site with a balanced flow; and continue repeating this until you see the area becoming red and swollen, and the redness of blood appears; then scarify, and gradually repeat the suction.
Then consider the condition of the bodies.
For a person with tender flesh and sparse pores should be scarified only once, no more, so that the area does not ulcerate.
And instruct the cupper to make a larger scarification and to cut slightly deeper, and to adjust the suction with ease, speed, and gentle movement.
If the blood is thick, then scarify twice.
In the first instance, the path is opened to refine and thin the blood; and in the second, to precisely extract the thicker blood.
If the blood is very impure, then perform a third scarification to reach the final goal.
And finally, when we wish to extract blood gradually, or in a small amount, one scarification is sufficient.
But if we want to extract a large amount of blood, we scarify several times.
And if we determine that the blood is thick, then it should be deeply scarified; the proper depth in scarification is the thickness of the skin.
What should be applied in oils at the time of placing the cups, and what the person to be cupped should avoid.
For one whose skin is thick, tough, dark, and whose pores are tight, it is necessary to anoint the places to be cupped with opening, softening, and resolving oils; if it is summertime, use oils such as alkeiri oil, violet oil, sweet almond oil, or gourd seed oil.
And if it is winter, then use daffodil oil, lily oil, chamomile oil, or sarbatinum oil, and the like.
If, however, the excess is thick and cold, then use oil of marjoram, balm oil, alben oil, or dill oil, and the like.
If, however, the person to be cupped has wide pores and tender flesh, then he should avoid oil, and instead wash the places to be cupped after cupping with rose water, cold water, nightshade water, gourd water, purslane water, and similar things.
The one whose blood is very moist should wash the cups with vinegar, myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
But one whose excess is thick should wash his cups with aged wine, elderflower water, dill decoction, chamomile, and the like.
And cupping should be avoided in the bath, or immediately after the bath; rather, it should be done an hour or two after leaving the bath.
And one should not sleep after cupping.
What should be observed for the person to be cupped or phlebotomized before cupping.
And afterward, it is necessary to consider first: if the cupped or phlebotomized person is choleric and sharpness and inflammation prevail in his blood, then he should take cooling agents, such as pomegranate muzum, as well as endive with vinegar, lettuce, sekaniabin, julep, and the like.
And his food should be chicken, lamb meat prepared sekebiget-style, and foods seasoned with verjuice, and the like.
And for one whose temperament is cold, he should drink syrup of honey, almiua, or alsecaniabin made from seeds; he should drink fragrant wine of medium age, between old and new, and be instructed to consume food sparingly.
And his food should be chicken, partridge, sparrows, that is, small birds, and young pigeons prepared issiadebet-style.
On the day of cupping or phlebotomy, drink should be more than food; and it is necessary that some people take tyriaca alfaroch in drink, or a medicine of musk, that is, nutmeg, or alesselithe before cupping and before or after phlebotomy, to strengthen the main organs and refine the blood.
And they should not take it in heated drink.
On cupping without scarification.
Cups without scarification are those placed over the liver, spleen, gouty areas, stomach, navel, the regions of the kidneys, and the hip socket, because these parts do not tolerate scarification.
Their purpose is to transfer the humor from one part of the body to another; as when we place a cup over the breasts in the condition of nasal blood flow.
And we use them to release cold trapped wind in a part; as when we place a cup over the stomach and navel.
This thins and warms the part, and removes pain by resolving the trapped wind.
It is also placed over the kidneys when there is obstruction or a stone in them.
By the strength of its attraction, it may open the obstruction or dislodge the stone from its place.
It works similarly when placed over the liver and spleen to dispel wind trapped in both.
These cups are applied empty with section only.
And sometimes they are applied with fire.
And sometimes they are applied filled with warm water for conditions of pleurisy; this involves filling a large cup with hot water alone, or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The form of a cupping glass applied with fire.
The opening of the cupping glass should be about the width of two open fingers, as we have specified, and its depth should be about half a palm. In the side, approximately at the middle, there should be a small hole, large enough for a needle to enter. It should be made from brass or citrine metal, with thick, smooth, and even edges so as not to injure the body when applied. In the center, there should be a crosswise rod made of brass or iron, on which a candle with a flame can be placed.
This cup should be larger than the ones described earlier, though slightly smaller in some cases, depending on the illness and the age of the user.
The cups used for children and those with thin bodies are different from those used for adults and those with larger bodies.
To apply this cup with fire to the body, ignite a small wick made from linen or a small wax candle, and place it in the middle of the transverse rod in the center of the cupping glass. This should produce flame near the lower part of the cupping glass, ensuring the patient’s body is not burned.
Then place the cup on the body, keeping a finger over the small hole previously mentioned. When the cup is in position and ready, remove your finger, allowing steam to escape through the hole, and the cup will release immediately.
Then, if necessary, reignite the wick as described and reapply the cup.
In the case of a cup applied for pleurisy and filled with water, there is no transverse rod or small hole. It is used only by filling it with water and placing it directly on the body.
This is its form.
The larger this cup is, allowing it to hold more water, the more effective it is.
