On the cutting of extremities and the sawing of bones.
Chapter 89.
Extremities decay either from an external or internal cause.
Therefore, when you have treated that corruption with medicines and the treatment does not help, and you see the corruption affecting a limb, which nothing repels, then it is necessary to cut that limb up to the point where the corruption has spread, so that the patient may escape death or a greater harm than the loss of the limb.
The sign of this condition is that the limb blackens and putrefies, as if burned by fire, or decays after turning black; and this decay continues until it is cut to the point beyond the limb, and it spreads throughout the whole body.
Therefore, hasten to cut it, especially if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of certain venomous creatures, like the sea scorpion, viper, or rutella, and the like.
If the corruption or injury is in the tip of a finger, then cut off the finger, and do not give the corruption room to spread to the rest of the hand.
And likewise, if it occurs in the hand, then cut it off from the root of the wrist, and do not allow the corruption to spread until it reaches the joint of the arm.
If it invades further, then cut the arm at the elbow at its joint.
But if the corruption spreads beyond, and you see it around the elbow, then that is where the patient’s death lies.
To apply treatment beyond this is a matter of strength.
Likewise, do the same with the foot; when the corruption invades a toe, then cut it at one of the joints; and if it reaches the sole of the foot, then cut off the whole foot.
If it reaches the knee, then cut the leg at the knee joint.
But if the corruption has already spread above the knee, then there is no remedy other than to leave the patient to die.
The method of cutting or sawing a limb is to tie a band below the area you wish to cut, and another band above the place.
Let an assistant pull one band downward, and another assistant pull the upper band upward.
And you separate the flesh between the two bands with a wide spatula until all the flesh is exposed.
Then it is to be cut or sawed.
It is necessary to place linen cloth all around, so that the saw does not touch the healthy area, which could cause the patient additional injury and a hot swelling.
If there is internal bleeding during the operation, then cauterize the area quickly, or place on it some powders that stop bleeding.
Then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it heals.
And I will tell you what happened to a man’s foot, an instance of this same condition I am telling you about.
It happened that his foot became blackened, with a burning similar to that of fire; and at first the corruption affected his toe, until it affected the whole foot.
The man hastened on his own, after seeing the corruption affecting his limb with such intensity, feeling it in the pain and burning; he cut it at the joint, and he was healed.
After a long time had passed, the same corruption occurred in his index finger.
He came to me, and I tried to remove the excess with medicines I applied to his hand after cleansing his body; but the excess was not repelled, and it began to spread to another finger, until the corruption began to affect the hand.
He then called me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to, hoping that I could still repel the excess; and I also feared for his life at the thought of cutting off his hand.
For the man’s strength was nearly spent.
After he lost hope in me, he returned to his own land; and I received word that he hastened and cut off his entire hand, and he was healed.
I have recounted this story only so that it may serve as a guide for cases of this kind of illness, and as an example to follow and act upon accordingly.
