On the cutting of various types of nodes.
Chapter 45.
There are many types of nodes, and I have already described all their types in the division: and it is fitting to relate here the difference between a node and an exudation, as it causes confusion.
I say, therefore, that with an exudation, there is heat, fever, and intense pain, until the boiling of excess fluid subsides and putrefaction is complete: then, the fever and heat subside.
With a node, however, there is no heat, nor fever, nor pain, and they are contained in a membrane, which is their own sac, and is the color of the body: and they begin the size of a chickpea and grow like a watermelon, both larger and smaller.
And they are of two types: either fatty or containing fluid.
And the colors of the fluid are various, as I mentioned in the division.
Therefore, when you come to treat a node, you must examine it, and first investigate it with the instrument called an intromissum, according to the method that will appear in the chapter that follows this.
And the method of examining abscesses and all nodes is that you take this instrument and insert it into the wetter area you find in the abscess: and you move your fingers with it gradually, until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin.
Then measure the extent of your hand according to the size of the abscess.
Then remove the intromissum, and observe what comes out in its trace.
If a flowing fluid emerges, whatever its color: then cut it with a superficial incision, as I have described in the other abscesses.
And if no fluid comes out at the trace of the intromissum, then know that it is fatty: therefore, cut it with an incision in the shape of a cross, following this shape, as I have taught you: suspend it with hooks, and peel the skin from all sides gently: and if possible, preserve the sac around it so that you may remove it intact with the node.
However, if the sac bursts during the operation and it is not possible to remove it intact, as often happens, then extract it piece by piece, until none of it remains.
For if any amount of it, large or small, remains, the node will usually return.
But if you are defeated and a small part remains: then fill the wound upon completion with certain sharp corrosive powders: and close the wound, and apply over it a warm abscess dressing, and treat it with the remaining steps of the treatment until it heals.
If the node is large, then sew its two lips, and treat it with something that generates flesh.
If, however, there is a pulsating or non-pulsating vein in your way: then act quickly, and fill the place with powdered zegi, and leave it compressed for two or three days, until the wound putrefies and the bubbling of the blood subsides: then return to cut what remains of the node.
