On the treatment of dropsy.
Chapter 54.
We have already discussed the types of dropsy, and how water accumulates: the signs of each type, and its treatment with medicines.
And the type that is treated with the knife is only ascites: one does not approach the type tympanites with the knife, nor the type hyposarca at all, for that is fatal.
When you have already treated this type of dropsy, tympanites, with medicines, and your treatment has not worked, then consider.
For if the patient has already become weakened, or if there is another illness along with the dropsy, such as a cough or loose bowels, and similar issues, then beware of treating him with the knife, for there is danger in it.
But if you see that the patient is of robust strength, and there is no illness with him other than the dropsy alone, and he is neither a child nor an old man, then the method of operation is to lift the patient, standing between your hands, while an assistant behind him presses his abdomen, pushing the water down toward the lower part of the abdomen.
Then take a pointed spatula, in this form.
Let it be of two sharp parts, long, with a sharp point like a spatula.
However, let there be some gradual shortness in it, so that you do not go too far with it during the operation, and injure the intestine.
Then consider.
For if the dropsy is due to an issue with the intestines, then make the incision about three finger-breadths below the navel, in a straight line above the pubic area.
But if the dropsy is caused by a liver condition, then make your incision three finger-breadths to the left of the navel.
And if it is caused by a spleen condition, then make the incision on the right side: and it is not advisable to make the incision on the side on which the patient prefers to lie, so that discharges do not flow toward that weak area.
Then pierce the whole skin with the instrument.
Then insert it into the incision, and raise your hand with the spatula between the skin and the membrane, as though you are flaying it: and the amount to be flayed should be the size of a fingernail, or thereabouts.
Then pierce the membrane until the spatula reaches the empty space: which is the location of the water.
Then withdraw it, and insert into the hole an instrument of the following form.
And it is like a tube: made from silver, or brass, or bronze, smooth, polished: at its lower part, there is a small opening, and on its sides, three holes, two on one side and one on the other: its tip is cut like the shape of a reed, as you see, and at its upper end, there is a small ring.
For when the instrument reaches the water, it immediately flows down upon the instrument, so empty half of the water at once.
For if you empty more than is appropriate at once, the patient might die immediately from the collapse of his vital spirit, or he may suffer a fainting spell approaching death.
But empty it according to his strength, and as the condition of the patient indicates to you, based on the strength of his pulse and his well-being.
Then remove the instrument, and retain the water.
This is because it is immediately retained by the skin that seals the hole which is over the membrane, about which I have spoken, so that you pierce it in that manner.
Then repeat the use of the instrument on the following day, if you see that the patient can tolerate it, and also draw off a small amount of water.
Do this for several days without fear, and guard yourself from error, until only a little water remains.
But if you fear for the patient and leave much of the water, then treat him with burial in warm sand, intense sweating in the bath and sun, and let him endure thirst; treat him with drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize over the stomach, liver, and spleen after the water extraction, as I described previously.
