On the incision of abscesses that occur on the scalp.
Chapter 41.
Small abscesses occur on the scalp, and they are of the types of nodes, which are encased in membranes that act as sacs, as if they were the gizzards of chickens.
And there are many types of them.
Some of them are fatty; some contain moisture like mud; some contain moisture similar to curds and porridge and things like that; and some are stone-hard.
And in making incisions in all of them and extracting them, there is no cause for fear, as long as no artery interferes with the incision.
And the procedure for incising them is that you explore them with an instrument, the shape of which follows here, called the Intromittor, until you know what it contains.
For if it is one that contains moisture, then cut it with a superficial incision along its length, in this shape.
And begin the incision from line b to line g. When the moisture is drained, then strip away the cyst that contains this moisture, and do not leave any part of it behind at all.
For it often returns if any of it is left behind.
Then soak a piece of cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day.
For it will erode whatever remains of the cyst.
Then repeat the application of the cotton with Egyptian ointment a second and third time, and as needed, until you are confident that nothing remains of the cyst; then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
But if the abscess contains a fatty node, then cut it in the shape of a cross, and insert hooks between the two lips of the incision, and peel it away on all sides, and apply your skill in extracting the membrane that encloses it.
If an artery obstructs you, then do what I will describe to you later.
And do the same in the case of an abscess if it is stone-hard, with the same incision and treatment as we have described.
And making an incision in a stone-hard abscess is easier, as there is little blood and moisture.
And sometimes there are certain abscesses on the scalp in certain people which contain no moisture at all.
For example: I once made an incision on an abscess on the head of an old woman, and I found an abscess like a solid stone, hard, rough, white, which could not be broken, and if someone were struck by it when thrown, it would injure them.
But in other abscesses that occur on the scalp, aside from these, namely the abscesses that occur on children’s heads and near the roots of the ears, the incision for all of them should be a superficial one.
Or place the perforation always at the lower part of them, so that the flow of pus is directed downward.
Then treat them with the remedy that is suitable for them.
