On the forms of instruments necessary for the extraction of the fetus.
Chapter 77.
Below is the form of the press, by which books are aligned, having two equal pivots at the two ends of two wooden pieces.
However, this pivot should be finer than the press and should be made either of ebony or boxwood.
The width of each piece of wood should be about two fingers, with each side margin being about one finger, and the length of each piece is a palm and a half. In the middle of the two wooden pieces are two additional parts made of the same kind of wood, already fixed to each side, with a length of half a palm and slightly more, and the width of each is about two fingers, or a little more.
These two additional parts are inserted into the mouth of the womb, to open it when you turn the two pivots.
The form of the pivot with which the womb is opened.
Another form similar to it, finer and lighter.
It should be made from ebony or boxwood, in the likeness of forceps.
However, at its end should be two additional parts, as you see above; the length of each part is about a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
Therefore, when you wish to open the womb with it, have the woman sit on a bed with her feet hanging down and the area between her legs exposed.
Then insert the two joined additional parts into the womb, holding the instrument's end below between her thighs.
Then open your hand with the instrument, as you would with scissors, according to the amount you wish to open the mouth of the womb, until the midwife achieves what she wants.
The form of another pivot which the ancients called the form of the pusher, with which the fetus is pushed.
The form of the Almisdac, with which a large head is crushed; it resembles forceps with teeth at the end, as you see.
And it is sometimes made elongated, like forceps of this form, as you see, with teeth like those of a saw, with which it cuts and crushes.
The form of the Almisdac with which a small head is crushed.
The form of the hook with one spine.
The form of the hook with two spines.
The form of forceps with serrated teeth, with which the head of the fetus is crushed.
The form of the Spatumilis with two ends for cutting off the head.
The form of two wide Spatumilia.
All these instruments are used, and the more their types are multiplied and prepared by the craftsman, the quicker they are for the operation and more esteemed by people, due to their quantity.
Therefore, do not disregard any of these instruments; have them prepared with you.
For their necessity is undeniable.
