O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, dear son, I have completed this book which is the second part of the knowledge of medicine in its entirety, and have finished it with explanations and by means of statements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And in my vision I came to know that I completed it with this treatise, which is part of the book of hands, i.e., "crystallography."
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the book of hands is well-known in our region and has been transmitted throughout all time, it is a science that falls into ruin, and there are no delays in attacking those small descriptions found in ancient books written by the hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from that comes its error and arrogance, and understanding has been closed off and the knowledge is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or I seem to revive it in its entirety according to the method of this treatise's presentation and declaration, abbreviation; and I will join together the forms of cautery instruments and other tools from the book with their juxtaposition of declaration and preparation as is proper.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good master of hands has been found in our times, the art of medicine is turned aside.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for one who meddles in the science of anatomy, as Galiens says, so long as he knows correctly about bones, and their forms, connections, separations, arteries, nerves, sinews, number of limbs, movements, and recoil; and knowledge of the sources from which they issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason Ipocrates said that the lack of it is much and little with the book, and in its practice too; and most especially in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that those who are not acquainted with the forewarnings mentioned will fall into error and harm people; so I have wanted to show many times more about those who meddle in this science and abandon themselves to it, forgetting its purpose and experimentation.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Because I have seen a man who cauterizes the scabs or thoft of woman's arteries from hisnees, and they come out of her hand.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And sees another man who betrays a large hole in an ill person, and the hole was great; he took with him a piece of the bladder, and died inside there for three years.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to perform the betrayal on the sick man and saw his disfigurement and size of the hole, and knew that if they touched him there he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another man who took in treatment of a duke from our land, whose leg was broken and had an open fracture with a wound; the doctor's ignorance held back the break on top of the wound as if by strong compulsion, and left no chance for healing at that spot, and commanded him not to remove it; and remained until his leg was fully dislocated and his knee joint came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him and hurriedly came to dislocate his leg; when I did so, it became at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every way of curing had already been confirmed as a member or limb, and it couldn't heal; the corruption kept spreading throughout the limbs until they were completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another man whose abscess ruptured and then inflamed due to the malice of his principality.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because when it is filled with black bile (chancres), there's no need to touch iron unless it is partly unhealed, or else we can destroy what has been corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for that reason, treating children is necessary because the work of hands is divided into two: it's as follows, whether he has risk in various conditions; and I will show you in each section of this book how there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For that's why you must be careful; so that the foolish doctor doesn't speak badly of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	çoel, et desloi la testes.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Gallus gives some of his warnings: "Do not treat any sickness poorly, lest you call them foolish."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I devised this text according to II. chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cautions and medicinal water cauterizations, and they are ordered from the head down to the feet; and treatments of wounds, shapes for trepanning, tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about the cutting and piercing, and on blisters and wounds, extractions of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is ordered with shapes for trepanning as well.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The subsequent chapters are about repairing dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are ordered from head to feet as well.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	And so our memory of the work requires us to declare that I speak about the quality of aid and the harm of each condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of aid and the harm are spoken more in words than subtle science and secret remedies; and from this topic, many have spoken about it, and agreed on it; and barely few their words to me because I fear lest they be too lengthy.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery helps universally in all constitutions because there are two types of constitutions: the hot constitution with matter as its basis, and the dry constitution with matter as its basis.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the hot and dry constitutions, they decided that fire cautery is very helpful; while the other said it's the opposite: that fire cautery is harmful only to diseases caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used as a remedy for diseases caused by heat or dryness; rather, those who say the opposite believe that fire cautery brings great aid to hot and dry diseases common among people.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body's constitution and its moisture to the hot fire, you adapt the treatment accordingly.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found it through experiments.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in every case, there is no one who has tried it without knowing the master of cauteries and the diversity of home constitutions, and their dispositions and causes of illness, and remedies during this century; but with other constitutions we have no fear, mainly concerning cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all those who observed them agreed on the use of fire cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my child, that fire cautery is a secret of the treatments and has more benefit than medicine-heated cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	Because fire is simple and does not harm unless it affects the member that is cooked; and it harms no other part of the body by name.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	The heated medicines come from another member by removing them, and they bring diseases of harmful treatment to the member; and perhaps it causes the illness.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire for its highness and the goodness of its essence does not do this unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	nfroi par morse esprince:saint deus a diremme sauf l’arbre estuet leuers du grevaryre. Ormesure les choses, et dauvernature demevescrivent: laire lepregles inven.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And you know, son, that they agree on how often the cauteries should be performed in such a way as to be done, and at what intervals they are carried out.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that the cautery is applicable in all times, because the suffering from its use is done by the help of the cautery itself; and especially when cauteries are necessary for severe pains or injuries that cannot wait any longer before a more serious disease affects the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And you never think about how the wise man does; for a disease cured by cautery has no return; and they say this: but it is not as the doctors believe, because cauteries are not medicine that changes complexion, nor drains the humors which cause pain, and rather serve to quickly restore value or virtue of work and reputation.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And the disease does not grow according to the condition of the malady and its signs, nor is it composed of superfluous elements within it due to acquiring meats and similar things, unless cauteries are administered in it or there are few excesses and moisture, as with caustic treatments for pain, and no return of such pain; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many do not understand that cauteries are called the 'legs of medicine,' but it is seen; however, they do not believe that cauteries have value after medical treatment, and their understanding is false, because when we administer any kind of care in no malady, these treatments do not hold up, so we use cauterization, and it has worth.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Nevertheless, cauterization is the 'legs of medicine,' not according to the understanding of wise men.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancient said that the cautery made with an instrument of gold is better than one of iron and only spoke about the quality of the gold and the highness of its substance; they also said that the tool of cautery does not cause harmony, but it's just to see because I have tried it myself, and found that in some people; therefore, a gold cautery is more valuable than one made of iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And in any case when you heat the instrument of gold, you do not see how it gets heated by the color of the gold, and immediately cools down again; and if they heat it too much; if done to the fire; and so there is enough trouble with it.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use iron cauteries because we have found them useful to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I ordered this chapter in the order of its main points, so that it may be found easier to refer to.
dou cautere olivaire	Two types of caustic cauteries (burning cauterization) exist: those done with fire and those done by the caustic substances themselves.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauterizations are hot and coldly. And they cause ofchief illness that is alaike, for maladies in the iaitge as bleeding; ce deffacite d’apres les cheveure ofsesme sengue loutte laches equeinces enceinte tocte.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the maladies are cleansed from it by medicinal solutions fixing the head .iij. or .iiij., depending on what its virtues and stiffness allow the patient to endure; and then again fix the head of the malady.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then it will rest in your hands, and place your hands on his skin; after that put the root of your palm on the root of his neck between its .ij. fingers; and if blood comes out from there, wipe away the cautery called "olivare," for this is how its form is:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then write on his skin with ink, and draw your hand gently downward and extract it piece by piece tearing apart; afterwards ease your hand quickly, and reward the bone if you see it as a little .i. solid; but if you do not see it, repeat using the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; then take some twine, and put in moistened cotton there, and apply to the skin, and let it rest for three years; afterwards coat with melted wax; and leave it so that the bone can heal properly.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they said by the ancients that when more time passes over the wound, it cleanses itself; and for this reason it helps heal.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that you should make the cautery so weak it dislodges part of the bone, and then reassess and treat what is broken off from the bone.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the other one said that with this cautery, it must be weak enough not to abrade the bone as wide as .i. spoon used by women in their undergarments for reasons they believe allows fluids to come out; and it must rest over time long enough before curing it properly.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these .iij. methods of cauteries seem to me not entirely sound in all respects; burns that no man has seen fear even if it were possible; and I believe that I should let go because the shoulders are weakened by continuous continuous solutions, as we have observed in other members; and for my maladies, which are naturally frail, and the first sign of cautery is more salubrious and mild, and from these methods I perform this use thereafter to ensure salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Of the arrow wound pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	In all the head pain comes chronicly and lasts long, so must use his arrows and cochief drugs which are called "cock-eyes", and cleansing of the chief and oils and plasters; and if he has the cautery that we have mentioned before, and it is not worth.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be aware that the shoulder joint of the sick person is naturally strong and should not be overly cold; however, you should cauterize on top of the previously mentioned cautery with a small amount as we have described above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After performing cauterization at each point of the head bone just beneath the skull, as we have previously stated, and then perform either a "vessel" cautery or one called "vasellum"; and it is that their hands are positioned in such a way they do not touch the bone: the sick person feels an excessive amount of pain from this cauterization compared to others; I will speak about it later on; and you must ensure that the vessel-cauterizations at the head'enas less conspicuous than those performed on the majority of cases, and its shape is as follows:
dou cautere dou chief	double cauterization of the skull bone
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	If in one part of the skull bone comes sudden and extended pain, and this condition also spreads to the oil, and the shoulder joint is purified with universal medicines, and all other treatments mentioned have been carried out for diseases divided into categories; yet, none of it has proven beneficial; therefore, perform cauterizations according to two methods: one being herbal medicine and the other involving fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	For herbal cauterization, one must prepare a dozen of alder leaves and scrape the bark and apply it sparingly to the joints; then massage the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can reapply the alder dose underneinasuch as the skin tightens well, if so; after fourteen hours, loosen up the bandage and remove finger flaps of wax, leaving the dressing for two or three years. Then place another layer with burlap to cover it securely until healing occurs.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment as long as he is healthy; and if you see any burnt cauterizations that I have written orally, and it's name is "horsellis".
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Leu .iiie cautere. Leu chascun tome vair de la, cautere dein ploye caures la coute descele leu of theur Chaufe lecairo lecate leu ciuregothre lecture.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a clover or has one small curve; and in appearance it looks like a little flower; and put on the painful part of his body and hold your hand and move slightly stronger, until most of the strength of the bone to be broken is gone; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, but further away, and abundance of blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After applying cotton to the thread wound, and placing it on the head for two years; then I apply moistened cotton in wool, and then heal the ulcer until it is clean; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with a cautery called "cultella," at all points of its tip, but be careful not to cover the artery in this migraine which is not old.
de emigraine	of the ulcer
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you heal the ulcer as we have described in divisions of diseases and it does not benefit from treatment, foreseeing that the cautery called "cultella" used in medicine and with iron will not tolerate it well; however, it must be scalded so much that the "cultella" remains white; and draw a line along the ulcer half a dozen fingers long, and press your hand once, and stretch so that you do not cover the artery and that nothing touches the bone; and warn of mandible movement when it's moved, because if there is no movement or spasm in the joint, neither muscle pain nor inflammation should occur. Warn about blood removal from the artery as soon as it occurs, or discharge with great fear and especially to that patient who does not know this procedure, and who has not studied medicine; but I will tell you how sinew is restored when the cautery is cooled, and show you where on the body it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not tolerate the disease at all, and the maladies are suffering, then causterize it in the same way we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you observe, anoint with that cautery which our masters of artery extraction have called for two knives; and this kind of cautery is better than others and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	from the cold pain in one ear
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When it comes to the point:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After painting the malicious ear, or both ears hold the pain in them, and move it slightly away from the root of the ear because you have touched the base there; and at ten points touch each ear; after curing the wound until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated with caustic is not fatal except for those caused by phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not use a caustic on similar things that come from coughing or sputum of animals.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this kind of torture caused by phlegm and expectoration from the head and gargling, and it does not equal, therefore you must use two caustics on the patient: one in the root of the ear, and another a little further back at the temple; and place the caustic where the part is open and healthy, and apply the caustic to the edge of the ear above a bit from the helix horn, and another in the temple as far as some distance; let the caustic stay until the secretion is crusted over; and this is the form of the caustic.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the cutaneous form that we have presented before, but it is slightly more subtle and requires that the knife be somewhat larger; after curing the wound as I have previously stated, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said before, it does not benefit at all, and the maladies do not get fever, but make four caustics: two above the helix horns of both ears, one underneran the ears themselves, and one called "wash-cloth" (which is understood from what we have said before) on the back of the mouth of the stomach; and cure it as we have previously stated.
de litargie	Of litharge (Litharge is a form of lead sulfide, often used in alchemical and medicinal practices)
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	This illness requires giving to the malady long years and medicated tablets that will melt the brain; after removing the head of the malady, he places in the occiput the sponge of senapi (seneite), which is written or treated with emplasters; and this is the manner of cauterization: as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healed in this way, good; and if it is not healed, then I make three caustics on the top of the head of the malady, and from one measure of space between each cauter, and doctice as I have before, les .iiij.
de la froidor dou chief	Of cold iron to the chief
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is required that the chief be instructed for years and what we have previously stated; then he treats the malady in the patient, and with one cautery inside each horn and .i. behind and .iij. on the spine of the neck; if you are more skilled, and the malaise is moist, and the illness severe, so he performs .iiij. cauteries on the spine of the back; afterwards let it be as long as necessary for a good recovery, and take care with your hand; afterwards treat until the patient is well-healed, and apply the "olivare" which we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	In relation to epilepsy, a condition not directly addressed in the treatise excerpt but relevant within the realm of medieval medicine:
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Seizures must use forceful cauterization only in those who are phlegmatic, and it is required first to educate the brain for years and other treatments that we have mentioned if the malady is great and suffering from painful medicine. (Note: Again, this line blends historical context with information not explicitly given in the original text, focusing on conditions like epilepsy which were not comprehensively understood or treated during medieval times.)
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it's an infant that cannot suffer, he makes gargarism and chewing treatments to educate the brain often with solid foods; then the chief takes him into his care, and he performs .i. cauterization according to what we have previously mentioned, and .i. cauterization on the shoulder blade, and each horn; if the malady is severe and suffering, then he performs cauterizations as I have said for someone who has paralysis and muscle weakness, on the spine of the back and neck, and apply the "olivare" in the manner that I have previously mentioned. (This line continues to explore treatments within a historical context, suggesting remedies such as cauterization—which would not be standard modern practice for epilepsy or paralysis but could have been part of medieval medical approaches.)
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the malady is an infant, he performs one subtle cauterization according to this manner: (This instruction would be part of a larger text detailing specific treatments for infants with conditions like seizures or other illnesses. It implies that medieval medicine sometimes employed minor forms of interventions based on symptoms and the patient's age, though such practices were not scientifically grounded by today's standards.)
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When by the cause of melancholy there are superfluous elements or corrupted moistures and heavy phlegm, accordingly he performs partial cauterizations as we have previously mentioned for someone who has paralysis: (This line would refer to treating symptoms such as excessive mucus in cases associated with depression-like conditions ('melancholy') of the medieval period. Cauterization might be a historical reference used metaphorically or literally, depending on the context within medieval medical practices.)
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy there is declining superfluity to melancholy, and the heart of the malady moist, therefore he drinks something for it so that the brain be educated as we have before stated in its divisions: (This line appears to discuss a potential treatment approach involving dietary changes or concoctions, possibly aimed at counteracting symptoms like those seen with melancholic disorders. The "brain" here likely refers metaphorically to the central nervous system or overall mental state rather than a literal interpretation of 'heart'.)
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	s: it'sis thecaurs ail. Ate :
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or if you see the patient being cauterized with many points throughout the caustic. This method of caustic softens the brain greatly; and then put on cotton soaked in butter and lamb fat.
de l’awe des eulz	Of the hairs' fear
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the fear comes first as signs I mentioned in the division, then it begins and starts to make the patient drink something that cleanses the head, and he is warded off from all moistures, and his face sweats or bathes several times without water.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands to roll his head back, and he causes the caustic to be placed on the head, and he makes .ij. caustics under the .ij. temples wherein the fear comes together, or in one it comes; and with all the caustic, he closes all the veins and arteries that are around the skull, and the caustic follows long according to the width of the temple; and you warn against bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then you should cut a part in accordance with what your judgment dictates.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision how to alleviate it; and never made a caustic or fractured bones under the .ij. vertebrae.
dou cors des larmes	double corps of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When tears from the eyes are ancient and customary and are under veins or near arteries visible on the surface of the head; and we see that it is superfluous cold phlegmatic fluids, then I caused the caustic to be placed on the head, and .ij. caustics were made under the .ij. temples, and .ij. caustics or cutting above the .ij. vertebrae; and if there was a need for more, it would cauterize by applying an extra small caustic above everything else.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	double corps de larmes dans les yeux
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	leu:
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the instrument called "clavicle":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the paper of oil is softened by illness and dampness, hence the form of this instrument called "olivare":
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that one cautery is done on the same spines as the scars are; and do not let your hand go until three-quarters of the paper is burnt, according to the manner I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	two hairs which point towards the oil (or wound)
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	There is never seen that the hairs of oils are converted into parchment, and grasp the oil, and it makes them burn according to certain methods: namely by fire or hot medicines.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Or cautery by fire commands the patient that he allows the hairs to grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, he restrains them so they do not move until they are born.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and grow evenly, then the patient places himself in good health; afterward on the paper of the hairs a figure is drawn that is also like the flame of fire, and begins the sign near the hairs; then cotton moistened with linen juice and frankincense oil over the wound, and he shapes the cautery according to this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the figure that you have drawn many times and very little oil at the spot; and the sign of youthfulness is that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs lifted to the size of the wound oil; then lift your hand, and leave it for two years, then moisten cotton in burdock root until it heats up; afterward treat with ointment as long as it is sane.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterward the hairs come back and the paper becomes soft again, then resume the cautery on that same spot as you have previously done; and if the hairs are gone, burn until the paper is raised to its natural level and is even, and do not touch the hair with oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	ic: thew dexia.ici, aspeak (it'sic: ical:i: it:ic:sic: afore,claus of ficure.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then medicine has to do its duty.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the dislocation has not been passed through, raise and bind up the affected area as you would if it had been raised by fire or incision; and if so, that is well enough. But if this is not the case, still apply medicine to the same place or where there has been none applied until your other works are equal, and your eyes are in proper condition; then wrap with moistened cotton wool wrapped in cloth tightly so that it stays warm for as long as possible after treating the dislocation known as "dyafenis" and others.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you have learned that you must tend to your works with great care so it does not reject the medicine on its eyes. If the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs stick in the oil, then begin again the medicine on those parts that are malleable from the paper properly, as you did before; afterwards cure until they become well-healed; and this is the form of a warm compress with mustard oil:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And you know that men's sizes vary greatly in girth and height, and according to this either your constraint is large or small; and do not return the right path to those who study this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistula by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you cure a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not yield results, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Command the patient to place his head in your sanctuary; and restrain you handle his head between your hands so that it does not move or make noise, then wrap with moistened cotton wool either on a cloth damp from olive oil or on an oil of parsley wrapped above the oil; afterwards heat the cautery which is partly: and this way, the chief looks like the feathered tip of a spider's web, so that if you see it to be bound between your hands, then it is touched from one head to another, and if you see it to be draped as though it were a tent; but all this being valued for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	n: theur to iage itent. CCCesse.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	deuxse elles. L'ongreacher ifevelveu (iftrernecules heurrevesse �ange,lameintheit in farte:s accurexinjauithevernagainntiunde ieu
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And I have a method of cautery for an abscess that none of the ancients mentioned. Applying to an abscess, and then flattening the affected area; afterwards placing under the incision, very thin needle made of bamboo here is its shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And we make the quantity of about one .З. of paste; and hold your hand or thin needle tightly, so that it does not move the large abscesses much until their contents flow into its oil; and it is necessary to put this poultice made from softened wool above the abscess with a layer of cloth on top: this poultice shapes well the hole of the fistula, and brings about miraculous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have mentioned before, it's good. If not, then it must be applied to the necrotic tissue and bring back the fistula to its original place according to what is required in our own letter.
des crevaices en levres	and clefts on lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times have clefts on lips been called "hair", and particularly in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these clefts according to what we have said in sections, the cure does not profit; instead, it makes a little sharp bone picking tool following this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the paste quickly in those clefts as they appear; after treatment, clean out that bone fragment until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess's cavity
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	i:0esse soûs esu :gues afore to engraves. ço.
dou movement des dens	Of fire cautery commands the Malade let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their root, he constrains them so they do not move until they emerge.
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the dens move, and you treat it with medicines but that does not work, then put the chief dentist in your health; after you use the cautery which forms a cane around it afterwards like you place a cane on the tooth; and apply heat quickly into the cautery, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the hot air coming from the root of the tooth; then lift your hand and repeat the cautery according to your desire; after filling the patient's mouth with salt water for an hour and a half and let out any fumes.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in the same manner, the moving density is confirmed; and the softened gums are retained, and the corrupt dampness becomes checked.
de la dolor des dens	from painful dense areas
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	If dental pain arises from coldness or other issues like inflammation, and medicinal treatments prove ineffective, then it's essential to use a suitable type of cautery according to the individual case; for example, cauteries made of fat (burnt cautery) or flame (fire cautery).
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	A cautery made from any type of fat that you desire (choose your own fat), and the tip shaped like a spoon or rake; after applying cotton and wrapping it under the edge of a tent, and then moistening it with burnt fat, and apply swiftly to the problematic tooth while holding firmly until it cools down; and so often as necessary for its healing properties to reach the root of the affected tooth, and if you find that mixed cotton and burnt fat is frosted (moistened), then apply it to the adjacent tooth, and place a spoon-shaped or rake-shaped tool on it until heat spreads along the jawbone.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	"medicines".
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	reviable therectriximente tunge;narysecurer:sain orphanes �anynso armonde  Ceanaiagnimieur.ude,in sounaithevelauntiphearlescantheuconjocius (thatifures andgreirable ifpele
des scrophules	of boeuf he orders the Malade to let his hair grow long and smooth; and if they are pricked at their roots, he restrains them so they do not move until they come forth.
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophula is of mucus and of cold humors, and does not respond to medicines, he withholds the cautery on his head until afterwards it takes shape; and applies two burners for the fumes to emerge from another part of it; and puts the cautery under the abscess once, or if necessary twice, as long as it wanes at the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small he applies the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leaves it for three years; afterward he covers it with a moistened cloth made of flax until the arthritis subsides, afterwards treating the wound with ointments and bandages as long as it is sound.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moist humors prevail in the joints of the body, especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then the malady must first be addressed with solvent medicines; afterward he applies cautery to the root of the throat and ensures that it does not return there but only lightly burns; afterwards he applies another cautery at the joint between the neck and the top of the spine, which we call "clavicle," in accordance with our previous description; and treats the wound as previously mentioned until it is sound.
de la toust	From the thrust
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all disorders of the joints are cold humors, and this malady has no fever nor chills, and it is an ancient disease, he applies two cauteries at the forceps in their usual places; another one between the intervertebral spaces; and the cautery known as "clavicle" according to its shape, which was previously mentioned.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, apply the cautery forcefully to all the points called "puncta" in the shape which is before mentioned in the disease of ears; and these are there just a few or several inches deep. After curing the wound according to what was previously described, and applying the cautery to three rains according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason the cautery is lighter, because you make it .ii. cuts per centimeter.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	From the dislocation of the shoulder joint. (This line is a title or subject heading, which implies that the following discussion will concern shoulder dislocations.)
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder joint is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. (This line provides a medical procedure for addressing a specific type of shoulder injury.)
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After the malaise is settled on his back and side; after lifting up the keel which lies between the ribs with your right hand; and if the joint has dislodged within, you must apply the cautery that has .ii. notches in a double row like this: (This line describes another part of treating shoulder injuries involving specific physical examination techniques and therapeutic measures.)
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And cauterize the keel as long as it pierces his side, and bring together all four sticks of cautery; and because this is made with the cautery that has .iii. notches, so the figures of cauterization are three sticks for each cautery, according to the delicacy of a tent and it is the form of the cautery that has .iii. notches: (This line further describes the technique used in treating shoulder injuries involving precise measurements and tools.)
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And there is no joint adjusted on this .i. nerve, so it has .viii. cauteries: (This line concludes the discussion by providing specifics about how many times a particular nerve should be treated during the procedure.)
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing it under the cautery rod; after allowing the patient to rest, and do not move his limbs by long stretches as long as he is well supported: (This line gives instructions for post-treatment care following a shoulder injury procedure.)
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, little happens in that case; nevertheless, make the cautery on the thick cautery rod or a few sticks of cautery pressed against it, for the joint is refixed, and the moisture has been removed from the bone, and it has become healthy again: (This line describes an alternative treatment method when dealing with a specific shoulder dislocation scenario.)
dou cautere de pleuresin	With two sticks of pleurisy: (This sentence introduces another type of medical procedure or instrument related to the discussion on treating injuries, indicating that it has relevance in this context but without further explanation due to its brevity and possible historical/medical nuances.)
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient said that we must make pleurisy sticks with the roots of an aristologion plant, and in this way: take a root of an aristologion as long as you can find; dry it or boil it so that it is also large and long like your hands; coat it in oil, and then burn it in fire, and cauterize .i. stick between the thigh and the neck, and .ij. little sticks a bit downwards into the part behind the beard; and .ij. sticks between the fifth rib and sixth rib, declining slightly backwards a bit; and .i. stick inside the bladder, and .i. other on the abdomen, and .ij. between .ij. spaces, and .ij. below .ij. bladders with the pleurisy sticks which are between .ij. spaces: do not press your hand too hard, but press it as if you were smelling a fragrant flower (This line is providing an old-fashioned method of treating shoulder joints using natural materials and describes the process in detail.)
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	ilte leatges aoutre. (oldesmesmes. Laute aout. Ilter resentence of theure desusages.savoir andrescribe:age a l’a12ndire, incibles. Italex. I'it verse deede ici. Andromanage.
de la mice	of moisture
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of moisture that we have mentioned in our discussions on medical methods, and it does not help at all; nevertheless, they apply 2.9 types of caustic treatment which are beneficial.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	Which of these methods do you perform when you make 2 or 3 caustic treatments depending on the length of the moisture, and according to the size of the foam that we have previously mentioned; and never bring your hand close to all the caustic, and sometimes apply it on the patient's back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another method of caustic treatment is when you heat the foam that we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and warm the place where the moisture is, or if it comes from the left side towards the patient's right, and raise the keur according to the keur, according to the length of the leg, and apply the caustic accordingly to the width of the leg.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After you fire the 2 or 3 foam branches until they are seen from the other side, and then remove the caustic, and so in this way you have 23; if you see that you must treat all of it with 2 or 3 foams. After curing when the patient has suffered a long-lasting pulmonary embolism, which is part of the treatments previously mentioned.
de ydropisie	from inflammation
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Caustic does not apply to inflammation, but it is used in the manner described as "asclythes". When you treat it according to the methods we have previously divided, and your treatment does not help at all, however, it requires that you perform 23 caustics around the inflammation, and one above the stomach, and one on the liver, and two under the moisture, and two behind the spine, and one in a place near the back of the keur; and make the caustic well close to the bend of the spine.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After letting the caustic overpower for producing long-lasting pulmonary embolism, and not stopping the treatment of the patient afterward; healing would occur, and together with the 23 treatments assisted by God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form that the caustic takes for the abdomen is the collarbone we have previously shown; and those for the back are oblong according to what it has been before placed here.
de l’enfleure des piez	from the swelling of the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	siens, et seinges ceu que neuf'sans inceleves deffort toge toullet. Soit. In thekes and the curelal longreve nounces fromre offerent (century. Ceiland theorcortreat'enjacmeans, during: meuniverse:eslaut.
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After cutting two sticks of fire cupping in each leg at the tip of the small knife; and one stick was cut on the thigh before the knee and the other behind, inside the leg, letting them stay long enough to feel a current flowing through them; after curing the other treatments we have mentioned.
de la menoison	From the medicine
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	If the solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture, so that its properties of retention and digestion are weakened in the stomach and intestines; and it cannot be treated with traditional methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong vitality, then I make a fire cupping on the stomach according to what he has said before or cupping on the stomach, and three cauteries inside the belly subtly under one another, and four cauteries on the thighs.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisters abundant and the patient suffering, then he will have cupping on the groin, and one cautery on each side of the neck, and small cauteries near the large stomach, as the treatment is beneficial when it has good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	From the treatment of hemorrhages
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	If the hemorrhages are either a foundation or more than one, and they are ancient and consisting of large cold and moist corrupted humors; which we have said can be treated in divisions, but it does not profit if you perform cupping: three cauteries on the spine of the back, where there is something behind all this mass and pressing upon it repeatedly by triangulation, and eight cauteries inside the belly.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you think that his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and you see swelling of the face, then there will be a great fire cupping on the stomach as it has been said before; and one cautery over the liver, and another under all the other four cauteries at the shoulder joint. Let the cautery last for ten minutes; after the treatment until he is well.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of chertiness which is called "thélul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	If you cope with chertinity (thélul), if the cauterize seems like a rake, and then burn it all over the area of chertinity, leaving it weak; make it once or twice as we have said, and if there is much chertitude, afterward the treatment from ointments benefit so long as they are well healed.
de plaie mal curee	of the wound badly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	The sick cannot bear the fit nor the noise, which we shall tell in their presence, as there comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When there is no fistula present, and it appears old and worn out with corrupted moisture, if you are to provide treatment for the whole tent very carefully so that you know how much of the tent has been filled in; after cauterizing it as if a razor cuts, and putting it back into the fistula according to the amount by which the tent is entered (one, two or three times depending on the need); then warn against pulling the nerves that are therein, and great blood vessels. If the fistula goes into the intestines, be careful with these veins and organs; after cure the tract until it is healed, and if its lining has bone tissue throughout its length, you will know that the tract is completely healed; and if the materials are not ossified, then know that the tract is empty, and corrupted by disease; in this way we shall tell to them.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	The pain of frost originates from heavy winds and does not take up much space in a woman; therefore it is required to perform cauterization on the kidneys' one side and another side with a clavicle cautery that we have mentioned before (with two cuts); and if our cauterizations are done in moderation, then there will be three stitches along the line, and more extensive assistance is needed.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	If the bladder is weak and sensitive to movement and moisture, so that it retains urine, then one should perform cauterization in the backward part of the bladder where the hair begins (on the right or left), and on each side; and for each patient's needs, you shall do a cautery behind the back, or if necessary two cautions depending on its form as mentioned before.
de la marris	from the stone
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	If the marrow is cold and moist, and it does not allow conception to occur, and the flowers are rotten with delayed ends; and when they come forth, great pain is felt: accordingly, you must make three punctures in the belly, as we have said for cautery of the bladder, and three punctures on the back, and a caustic puncture on the collarbone, as we have stated.
de la hainche	(Note: The term "de la hainche" is not present in the provided excerpt. However, if it were to appear within a similar historical text discussing medieval medicine or bloodletting procedures, an appropriate English translation could be as follows:)
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistors descend to the hiccough's bag (assuming "la boiste de la hainche" refers here to some part of the body affected by hiccoughs), and for this reason it moves from its place, and a sign is that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and they find the parts divided into two, so you must cauterize the malady under the bag of the hiccough with .i. cauteries looking like a circle, and before the bag inside the hiccough as it turns, that the bag be within the circle; and if such are the cauteries as they have used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not present, make .iij. large cauteries of the olive tree, and also let these cauteries be made as all the keys do; and treat it until it is sound again.
de la dolor de la hainche	(Note: Assuming "de la dolor de la hainche" was an intended phrase within a larger medieval medical context. An appropriate English translation considering the historical perspective might be:)
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the bag of the hiccough, and it is cold and moist, and his illness requires what we have said about its division; for the cure does not value, and the malady is ancient: therefore you must purge the disease from the large humors with putrid pills, or other bone-like pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	it isse desus in the ceuf lejourle chew jargonce aoutesla curtia frommejorne : I'sure :pierre caesuke deffacitea,roi.aust.com:en. A-3rdief.cetitures.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, when the cauterize to the circle that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hunchback; but do it partially so that the circles contain the entire hunchback, and all the sharpness is even on both sides.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And it is the way they do in sciatica when the pain lies in the hunchback and does not reach down to the thigh or leg; if it reaches down to the thigh and the leg, then he makes .ij. small cauterizations where the patient says that the pain lies, and .i. large cauterization above the ankle .iiij., on the left side a little bit; and either cuts the calcaneal cautery or straightens out the keel thickness; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to both feet or near them, then he cauterizes there where it is felt with .i. or .iiij. punctures called "piercings".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is done skillfully, and when the pain lies under the jaw towards the thigh, then he makes cauterizations with the calcaneal or circular cautery well guarding that you do not let the cautery burn too much of nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I myself have seen several who cauterized above the foot of the patient, and let them bleed until their leg was completely healed, and even their ankle too, and they also saw it and ruined all the joints therein. After a stomach solution which cost him his life.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in .ij. parts together, make cauterizations in one and another according to this manner. // The surgeayer said when they performed cauterization on the hunchback'inasmuch as here is the way, make .i. iron piece either as thick as a fist or slightly less, and place it either with interstices between them or in one interstice from another by distance equal to that of a finger; and have these interstices open on both sides by .ij. parts each; and they should be made like nails, and there should be .i. handle of iron well crafted; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And burn it until all of them are red and tender to the touch, and then place it on the sick hunchback's backside well shaped; let the cauterizer turn around the healthy side; and the cauterization is done with .i. punctures and leave the wound for three years; afterwards make a bandage of fat, leaving it over a length of ten days; after the oiling treatment until it heals completely.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim said that we use little of this cauterization for the patient's sake and because we see few who do it; but all these are good cauteries which can withstand suffering, and where there is relief from pain.
de la dolor dou dos	from the doubled pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When the pain comes to the back, either by hitting or excessive bleeding, or dissection of leses devoid d’unse desceit quinze chevant leus les peine:semblances que aurointention.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is required that the malady be void of putrid pills or similar things, which are made on his back, and where the pain holds three lines signs from the end, and in each line a number of times .ii. to .vii., depending on virtue and quantity the patient can bear; and it is done according to the cautery called "pounds"; and if you see, make .iii. or .iiii blows on the clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this malady comes among small children, and the signs of its onset are that it becomes tightly constricted where they bend, and fear; and you change in the back spine to our left rib and the appearance that appears above other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	If you see and you treat it, cauterize it on this clavicle according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If the claw sharpens each part of the spine equally. And if you see, cauterize along the spine with the poignant at .ij. or .iij. lines and place them close to one another. After healing it so that it is healthy as we have said, and warn you not to apply claw in a state of sliminess containing nerve fluid.
de la dolor des jointes	of the joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of the joints is due to moisture that spreads in each limb's center of the body, and when it comes down as piecing, they call it "podagre" properly; and when it is from a cold cause and cannot be cured with medicines, then you should do healing by caustic blows: make many caustic blows around the joint connection of the foot, and the caustic blow should resemble this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if there is need that you stab on the face of the foot, and the caustic blow he applies to all of it which they call "point." And when the pains move toward the genitals and in other joints, and this often happens; and then you apply caustic blows on each foot part, a total amounting to two or three for every one. But if thou hast more knowledge, do so with all of it, but hold thy hand far from the face.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pain descends to his genitals and back, he must apply the cautery that we mentioned in this chapter. And if the pain is in the hands, make points every two lines; and if there remains no pain at all, then on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pain comes down from the thighs or shoulders, caution each part, and do well to the patient and use proper medicines. For if you do well and purge moisture, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	From the journey of suffering
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the journey of affliction comes upon them, and their bowels descend into the joints and it becomes more severe, it is necessary that when you view his wound curing, he does not suffer for a day; and make him things to loosen his belly so that he may release himself from his abdomen. After this, have him sit on your back between your hands, and command him to paint his eyelashes until the bowels are repaited, and mark him at each place where the journey passes over the shoulder blade, and with all signs that resemble part of a circle above the heart; then apply cautery in this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	So that he is white and does not emit odors. Then you mark the bowels on his back; and his ministers paint his hand so it does not return to its original position; and work well on his thighs for the patient, placing under them a pinch of iron and a soldier at each thigh, and another above him which paints his hands. Then apply cautery in this manner on your entire palm, along with your straight arm until you break the bone, if not on the first application it will recur as long as the bone remains broken; and warn subtly that the bowels should not leak out when you perform the cauterization. That they do not burn him or cause other harm to the patient.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And you must know that if the cauterization of children is not subtle according to their size, and for large people also large accordingly; after 3 years cure his foot with beeswax until he has hardened; afterwards other ointments are applied as long as he is healthy, and rest the painful areas on his back for 40 days so that the wound is well sealed; and it must be known that their limbs remain immobilized for a long time, so that the bowels do not rise when he gets up to go to his chambranles.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	Qu'il auge eue ices quinse desfaire parle dire d'abatour alaine lou chascun antre comande aims in fief loven escript itens, et lespointe:espeech. Areche of the outre:laisse vair. Itaile. Ipsum:age quarei:age,mesure aoutil coute toil ail.gallant, andiregain. Comment. Whatailent'cuiinle.
de la routure dou ventre	Of the treatment of belly dislocation
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	Other dislocations occur in various abdominal areas and are known, and I see that they do not increase anymore, so he made me an iron cautery according to its quantity, and one-third of the circumference; afterwards the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients mentioned that it should be cauterized at three angles in this manner:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first sign is to mark the edge of dislocation and make a line above the movement area, and another below it, and you place your hand around all the iron cautery. However, the first cauteries are lighter and more flexible.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in no limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain occurs in no limb, or from a fall or injury, and this pain lingers for long periods of time, thus it is necessary that it be cauterized with the "point" iron cautery, which is called "poins", and its use according to the length of the limb, smallness, flexibility, strength, location of twisting movements, and its pain. If healed after the first caustery, it's well; but as customary, one must repeat another cautery on top of that one because it is required for a joint to move in response to continued maladies, indicating that you should perform the cauteries until the patient's pain subsides.
de meselerie	of meddling
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The bandages are never aided by the caustery, and first of all, the illness that arises from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy can you see it being cauterized? Let us take care if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is treated according to what we have said in its division; and not a little doubt remains as to whether the corruption may affect all the limb, nevertheless I made .v. iron causteries on the head: one near the nape of the neck, another towards the forehead's end, two at the horns, one behind the heel, and left enough hand so that the cautery becomes parted from the bone; and it was done long enough to allow the tendons to break through and for great humors to discharge outwardly such that vapors could escape. The caustery is applied on the muscle according to what is in front of it.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the meddling is scattered throughout; and it is manifestly clear that you must apply one of these causterys: one on the neck vertebrae, and two in the spine, and twenty-five vertebrae and veintieth century (note this sentence translation.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And you know that the more fire cautery you perform, the more assistance it gives, and he benefits; and you know that the sick do not feel pain from the cautery as much as the healthy do, because their body is already all corrupted. And it requires that the cautery be large and small according to the limbs and joints, depending on what you will find in the methods of using iron; afterward the wound is treated with flour mixed with honey and other treatments until healed.
de enfleure	The provided text seems to be a fragment rather than an entire line of translation from Old French. "de enfleure" translates directly as "of inflammation." However, without additional context, it is difficult to provide a full sentence translation or interpret the significance within the larger work. If there are more lines following this fragment for translation and analysis, please provide them so I can assist you further.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When inflammation occurs in no part of the body and is treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, it's still not healed; however, cauterization on the limb according to its size and strength; sometimes a little cautery enters near the bone where the nerve causes movement, making inflammation the bone. In any case, no cauterization is performed at the hand or in the palm or back, near the dormant nerve, as long as it is osteitis; and everything else doesn't interfere unless one knows about the parts of the limbs and moving joints of the body.
de albaras	"de albaras" translates directly from Old French to English as "of alabaster." In a historical or medical context, this could refer to a type of material used in treatments or procedures due to its smooth, clean properties:
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease that affects alabaster is old, and the medicine engineer's methods are of no use, however, with a little cautery on an instrument according to the degree of severity, as long as the bone still bleeds, then treat it with flour mixed with lentils several times in roasted oil and plantain leaves, and from each part: either moistened all together or tied up with linen cloth; or air dry until healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	"li cure de chancre par cautere" translates to "the treatment of sores by cauterization." In a historical medical context, this could refer to the practice of using heat (cauterization) as a method to treat certain skin conditions or wounds:
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When the sore appears at first, and you observe its limits, if it is treated with fire-cauterization as one seems to be i.e., a circle around the sore; and all sajne men declared that they also used fire-cauterization in the midst of the sore; and all this does not seem good to me, because I fear it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already tried no such thing before; and more rightful course is for them to be treated with the "circular" cauterization as we have said in many of cases.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	If anyone has a disease called "adubelati" (which means swelling) that delays dying or due to excessive fluid accumulation, or the pain of the malady when it is decayed and weakened (i.e., too old), or because of their tendons; and you see her delaying death: however, cauterize her with many small cauteries while pressing; afterwards leave her so. For she will continue to delay dying.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it progressing through all the cauterization, when it is heated because of this shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand in the midst of that malady called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have achieved the goal, and such cauteries that cause the patient's pain to decrease in a way that resembles the course of pus excretion. Afterwards, continue treatment until it is healed perfectly.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire-cauterization by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another way to describe a malady called "corrodens," which is essentially a limb gangrene; for it affects the limbs just as fire-cauterization would, so that they are dried up and not bleeding. If you see this disease in its early stages, cauterize them all together with fire to remove all corruption from the ulceration: then leave it three years. And after the cauterizing burns; and let rest on the wounds of fire-cauterization until healed fires are completely dried up: if afterwards healed in any limb, as you have said in many apeel: nowhere to beauce: in every part demeinz.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of pies which come to points
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often happens that points from the joints bring about a disease which we consider "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a great harm that breaks the flesh; and the treatments for this malady are also determined accordingly. It means fire cautery and hot water cautery. The method of using fire cautery involves applying a heated instrument much like an arrowhead made of good iron in such a way that it can insert the nail into all parts without difficulty, and turning your hand around the nail until it bends under the nail; then leave it for three years so that it begins to rot. Then make a poultice of known poisons crushed with thread, and leave the poultice on the entire night, and draw out the nail and it will be extracted from its roots. Afterward cure the wound by binding the joint until it heals completely.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if the nail is drawn out by pulling on the joints, and it happens often in fingers and joints; then you must prepare a hot water poultice: take an iron or leather bag or similar object, place it under the nail, which is equivalent to embedding pins; that is to say, embed small points of keratin around the nail until they touch its root. Then apply some warm water and hold your hand firmly while turning it back so that the edge of the bag reaches down into the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to penetrate deeply up to the root; let it endure a little heat for an hour on the nail; then leave it for this period until it separates all its roots. Then prepare another poultice likewise as long as you treat all those that have been extracted from their joints, and cure the wounds with similar bindings used in such cases.
li cure dou trembler	The incorrect translation of this phrase does not align with the context given earlier about treating diseases caused by nails being pulled out. However, if we assume it is a separate statement related to treatment methods:
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	For those who suffer from cold shivering due to fever or other causes, it is required that you perform four or five spinal cauterizations on the backbone between each vertebra; and one cautery under each vertebra, as well as a caustic along the stomach with an olive cautery, which will leave the patient trembling from the cold disease. This treatment approach is highly unusual in modern medical practice but was considered relevant in historical contexts for various treatments of conditions believed to be associated with "cold" or "wetness."
des pustules puans	The phrase 'des pustules punais' seems incorrectly translated and doesn't match the given text. In a medical context, it could refer to painful blisters. However, if we maintain focus on the provided Old French passage:
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	None of the blisters appear. Descriptifes si comestimes ceste pustules qu’il yclea, et almeinces les chascun de lou bougre dores des maundir deccausse auge akes. Aurellatine: ceuille of theurs aout-chief.
quant li artere est copee	how the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great bleeding from the cut artery at the wound that is reached by firebrands, or incising an abscess, or with a member's cautery, and similar things; and it is very grave to be choked.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in general, whenever this happens, you must not delay putting your dagger's point on the vein wound, and strain it much so that there is no more blood coming out from it; then light the fire cauteries several small ones and large enough until they are all red; then proceed with either great or little according to the wound and location of the vein in which the artery runs, and place the cautery on this vein where you hold your dagger, and keep it there until the bleeding stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if when you lift your dagger above the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another fire caustic.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing this one after another until the bleeding ceases; and beware that you do not burn the nerve near, and other harmful conditions above the malady; and know that when the artery has departed from its place, it cannot well stay still immediately if it is large, unless by one of these four methods we have mentioned: or with cautery, or through extraction as long as it is not treated, or tightly fastened with string, or with medicines applied that can stop the bleeding; and lay it down and restrain it properly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer the tight binding of wounds or apply things within it if there is no benefit; and such other similar things if not beneficial.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if such happens and there is no observation or medicine present, then put your dagger's point on the vein wound as we have said before, and squeeze it so that it remains frozen above the wound and venule; and do not move the mallet which has become cold enough until the blood stops. And make such preparations in chiefly of caustic medicines and fire cauteries, and then apply them as need beau justement.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	30x clable. Andre.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you that in such cases there is a need for fire or medicine caustic, and the points and causes and treatments and forms of these cautions; and I have placed this chapter about the head piece downwards, and I will go through this chapter by my own way so that it can be done more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so I begin to say, it is necessary for the patient's hair, that you learn in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first caustic treatments, and therefore it requires greater care.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there are many times evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where doubt and fear arise, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you that you should not undertake madness. For many people come to cures from such individuals who have become so ill with their disease they died quickly due to the mismanagement and great pride of their sickness, and therefore there must be fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of these there are some who give their sense, and say: "Wait, I am safe," but the illness is spiteful. It does not suffice that you consent to those who come to you with this kind of sickness, but rather put more care in your honor than in your covenant, and do not falsely much about what you are certain of, and have taken up for their health so as to convert it into a good repute; and such a person will help that.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very bad son, Our lords teach us good understanding and uprightness, and if you desire to receive the holy inspiration from his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have ordered this chapter to be discussed by chapters, as per what it deals with, namely the cauteries that I have detailed in detail so that you can handle them more easily.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Chief full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	They say this disease often afflicts children at birth, and when the belt is tightened too much on the child; and there has never been a case where the cause was reported back to us.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in adults, and all those I've witnessed seemed to worsen with the treatment; and because of that, it seems to me that the work will be done more quickly in parts.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw an infant whose legs were swollen with water, and the tight belt constricted him every day to such a degree that he could barely bear it; and they believed so much in moisture that the limb was cut open between the knee and the bone underneath (between the ligament and the bone), where the dislocation is like this: the incision is small, you make a large opening at the top of the shoulder joint. And it should be stretched as far as we were able to do it; and when it reaches that distance, then you create another depression called the "spatula" shape; and so on until the movement returns.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more pronounced and the incision larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is between the bone and it shows signs that you see overlapping depressions on each side of a section, and the water rises when you press it with your hand in this manner; and I have never seen it corrected. Therefore, it requires making three incisions as follows:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision is pulled out; then I remove the drape and powders, and add wine and oil, and leave it for five days; afterwards treat the wound by tents and ointments, and allow the chief to be stretched as much as possible, and feed him dried meat until his limb recovers from that moisture.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	: " The-century. And thews, and'saint. Whatsoever. In which century. Whichc'sence. Iv: it'ude, and this century. century fromage. Aspectume.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	sang:se deffect before theuccle deity anduexide apeartingentreatime, itcècte de:nagustirevectique. raphestoi:nacme;scape :sesculle: (celle.fierce ceaucitécumere tolet mieuxence a cablexente,ganepe tudexement loinçonnexe.cuissexentre,mastiere queille iautexing :nantexelacit :secesse deuslengesce neisse.sicle versentiflesèctire.comblelexes.iranche sourge toutillemente,cume.
de reume	of dislocation
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is any disease that attacks the head or abdomen, and the illness persists, and medical treatment does not help at all, but rather curing it with cauterization will cover those two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, you must see that the painful headache recedes to its main source; after rubbing the forehead with an abrasive cloth until the arteries appear, then twisting the patient's neck back and forth along each piece of fabric; next observe whether the veins on both sides extend toward their ears, and only a few return in this way. Then mark these veins by making a cut, then cover one and the other with a sharp spatula measuring two inches wide, enough to reach down to the bone, so that it is done along the broad neckline of his head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see the spatula above the artery, cut it in such a way as to cover both sides approximately two inches wide.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is pierced, if it continues to burst downwards persistently.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not constrict to pressure, it is essential to measure the length of approximately three inches; then mark the incision and cut down to the bone; what must be done with the blood that may flow is up to twenty-five centimeters, plus or minus a bit depending on the patient's tolerance and artery constriction; afterward examine the wound: if it remains above the bone pointy sore, then remove the arrowhead lodged within by probing around the area, then close the wound and bandage until it heals.
de emigrainne	of dislocation
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When there is chronic dislocation accompanied by severe headaches due to tears and humors in the ears and forehead, along with other similar conditions, despite various medical treatments that provide no relief, then extracting arteries from the temples and performing cauterization may be considered as recounted in our experience.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	. Theur laisser in thees parle laiter lou itale. Fromer legerrein ouldesque la cie theure leu. Ijacaire. Scalves,re ofcerede laire fromter. Laure lacreature laporte. Thisingles: deires.
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then scrape the loose skin lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it up into pincers, and remove it carefully from each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it at the point of the needle, then cut that part according to the quantity of those two points. For if it is not cut, it does not spring out completely in all parts.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	Then draw the blood of those two points, and if the artery is large, it must be tied in two strong silk threads that will not allow any discharge before the healing of the wound occurs, and remove the excessive amount between those two ties at the same moment; and then, when you see, with cautery cutter, cut as close to bone as possible until the hairs are cut off, and this is the work if the patient has no fever and has a warm constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery helps to finish the excess fluids: that's why it provides great assistance with fluid retention.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, it must be filled with much cotton and placed on well-made tents; and when you remove them, treat the patient with dry medicines that make a charred smell and with tents until he is healthy again; if without cortisone from the artery as you performed your work, then cut off this cover by cautery, or dip it in vitriol and put your hand on it to cool it down; and if not present now, place your hands over it until frozen, and raise the cover with cold water repeatedly until healthy again; and those who are milder during artery extraction and more agile are those who cauterize this cut of that same cautery by .ij. parts, but these partitions must be well spaced to better contain the heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the heating is too weak, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have a good amount of space between the two knives, and when you finish with disengaging the hairs' parts, place your hot iron on them so that they move in the bone as soon as possible, and cut off the vein at those points; and separate the hairs between those two parts because it is not joined by this cautery throughout. And its form:
des larmes	This text doesn't seem relevant to the previous translations, but based on context it could be related to post-procedure observations: "and tears" may indicate pain or emotional response after a procedure like cauterization where such reactions can occur due to discomfort or relief. However, without further context, providing an accurate translation is not possible. If this is meant as part of the original Old French text discussing post-procedure outcomes, it would fit into the overall narrative on treatment and care after medical interventions such as cauterization described in previous lines.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	And the tears flowing from those veins that are under the test of which is so powerful, and it doesn't profit to use medicine made with it; and you see the face of the sick person moving as if he were frenzied; and they are kept tightly and moistened, and remove these papers, and scorched by the heat from the tears. And there is a need for this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	n theater and:sacre (it fromage 12ma:cumbersafe:se:ing apeople tiques without itchief:grossivexige to thegesculiere of it:gardent:enjacuexe, it:naturisse.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	And you should prepare a piece of sponge and much cloth to wipe the patient's blood, then pour hot chlorine into it from two parts: this is how it forms its shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the cut near the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the keur (cartilage) between these two holes that is underneath the bone, then make another small incision just up to the other second one, and then extract this chlorine spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If poured into the first hole of the instrument called "culter" (which is sharp on one side and blunt on the other), it takes on this form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And direct the sharp side towards the cartilage, and place the blunt side against the bone, so that it pierces as far into the second opening until the incision continues in this way to the other opening; then make another cut in the same hole and extract the mass of flesh evenly, and draw out all the fragments from the two points downward while maintaining the continuity of the incision. Then remove a piece of fine cloth from one opening, and cover it with moistened linen and silk, ensuring that protruding hairs do not recede; then apply an ointment made from beeswax rosemary oil for three days, along with other treatments including the application to wounds until healed.
dou reume des eulz	Two measures for extracting.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	If there were no patient presenting with acute catarrh commonly and you saw the eyes tightly closed and small in size, and blurred vision, and burned papers; and the hair was curled, and at the head's root there is pain, and the sternum palpitated; yet it seems from these accidents that such materials and catarrh do not come from many windings but rather from this treatment which the midwife administers.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	frança jarsent. Ai: ous (d’soldre and thenente ofsescreature. Here'winter. IJa midlaur jure.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In a certain way: take two parts of the flour of wheat, and four parts of chaff, and make paste out of it; and apply this mixture to these wounds in order to tighten them throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	The dislocation of the ears.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All of this concerning ears includes three things: either grains or beasts, or minerals or similar things such as iron; or seed, like seeds, flax, peas; or something fluid like water and slime, which are also similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When the ear stone or other matter that does not join with the ear appears in the ear, it causes growth within the ear. If you see a stone, if no violet oil or snake venom comes out at all upon extraction, then I will apply this external treatment; and make him cough up (cure), and blow his nostrines when he starts coughing, and put cloth pieces or wool in the ear; and set the ear above. Often this method brings about results; and if it does not bring about results, then I will apply a subtle extraction using tweezers, for which form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps during the extraction (indicating resistance), that's good; if not, then I will perform a subtle extraction using small forceps for a minute abscess. Should it fail to jump in response to this method, make an ear puncture and insert either the earpick or a similar instrument into the inner ear cavity firmly, preventing any soft cereal-like substance from obstructing entry. Subsequently, apply the treatment as described; often such intervention proves effective, yet if not entirely successful, adopt techniques of careful probing with tweezers and use no specialized instrument for this purpose except perhaps a pin or similar tool. Insert a small cotton swab into the ear opening, apply gentle pressure to the area, and then proceed with the treatment.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not respond to all of these methods we've described, then proceed by fracturing the ear so that there is an opening for drainage (implying creating an incision), and spasm follows; in this manner of making a fracture, you first perform the initial cleaning of the cephalic head, extracting the spleen blood according to its volume, then position the patient' bonnetly on your hands, turn up the ear, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where there is fat or lump. The fracture should resemble a crescent moon as long as it remains in the ear cavity, and according to the osteotomist's discretion, suction from your mouth swiftly; and continue this care until recovery.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grains and it swells up, then a careful removal; and if it cannot be extracted, then make a small incision under this shape:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not make such an incision on that grain. However, if you think the grain is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many pieces of it; then pull it out delicately and with suction as we have said, so that the extractions are light.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	In the heat when it conveys that the patient uses coughing of first coughs, and plunge your ear with plenty cotton. And place yourself on the same side or where the heat is; if it jumps through there, that's good. If not, take many small stones according to the length and weight of what you should hold lightly, and roast them a little in fire; then put the patient an ear pick, and slide under it from one side, on another stone from another part in the ear; and do not stop doing this piercing to piercing until the heat exits all through, and then it jumps out all; if you see it, take some reeds, and thrust one of the sticks into the ear, and pull the other chiefly with fire until the rotten stick is ash; then make another piece of stones as we have said in the piercing.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of the best if it is small in size, like we have said about division; but if it is large and you can feel it, then make an incision for extraction with fine pinches; and that which is more light to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears when you take care if we have said about division and treatment of distillations; it does not profit at all to do this, rather you must look at the ear in the sunlight: If there are no worms, then make delicate pinches; and if they don't appear, take the copper coin with its shape here.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And narrow and wide above. Then pour the more delicate chief into the ear according to the quantity of suffering from the patient, then form it with all the coin; do this often until they come out completely. If they don't obey to come out, stop in there with cotton as I have said in the piercing; and if they don't come up as we have described, perform distillations that the old ones have tried with cutting worms, and you will find or treat it through distillation; and if you distill oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument according to its shape here:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	Afin ceu que tuere de rien: Etienne ains :il dit deus :esce aulx demein leves desgauche. Epeigne eaux :nous en lais :olive d'autour. Andresemaintres louge :tale morfie in theine :eve alphilve. A:al. Laure andre ail veu.iolden elesu'susin:mevean, 10ithan (a Frenchkithre. Theleaf. Whatichines.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of ear dislocation
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with no hernia in the ears; and this matter occurs at ear dislocation due to a wound or ear cyst inside it, and these dislocations never occur in the ear unless one can see them well enough, and it rarely happens that a small hernia appears there.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	However, those that occur and cannot be seen must have various remedies, and it is evident that you put the affected ear in the sun; and observe here: if you see an operation done, this will take on the shape of a small circle around this spot.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And whether it is in front and behind the same, so that it does not tear the ear; if the operation has a cyst or cartilage of the ear, which you have very subtle pinches on, and lift gently until those parts are completely bone.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the operation is in the ear, take a very subtle shaver and scrape it a little on fire, then put back the cartilage of the ear; if you feel the hernia's pain when listening to it, gradually press it again, and make sure not to strain the nerves of the ear; then place in the ear a tent according to the size of the hernia, and moisten the wound with Egyptian oil.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this for any longer until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and sprinkle it with borax powder; and if you see the ear swelling, cover that tent and move another tent made of cotton dipped in oil rosé and beeswax, so long as the swelling is bone. Then cure until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if blood comes, dip an sponge and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that will stop the bleeding of blood which are related to distillations.
de la char des papieres	From paper cysts
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	That which comes from paper fragments in the hairs when they are moist and dry, it is evident that you extend them with tweezers and pinches, and press on a small cyst at its roots; then place over the ear rose water powder. This instruction suggests treating a condition where loose pieces of paper have become lodged in the hairs inside the ear, possibly leading to inflammation or cyst formation. The recommended treatment is careful extraction with tweezers and pinches, followed by applying a cyst-reducing substance such as rose water powder.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without dissecting, subtly cauterize the lenticular cautery with a fine cautery, and after the incision it moves; and many times repair them, for nothing escapes their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots burned do not return. This passage discusses a delicate treatment involving a "lenticular cautery," which seems to be an ancient medical procedure. It is described as follows: if the operation involves no dissection, carefully apply heat and pressure after making incisions; repair multiple times without any residue from their roots; when they are burned with fire, those roots do not return. This statement appears to indicate a procedure used on paper material derived ear conditions relating to treatments for cyst of the ells.
de la gresle	:complète lurte. Laverre lait, and lameine.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	gustre emagre lude llcè soing loinde thature aithevalefeable areximente.cthauthevellegextentures anderupire turtemappe,oungarreconsevernecker to the sekinnigoldes:sautheria itgachrevoible:d
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hailstorm falls within the ear downwards towards the upper part; and push it with paper, and the hail is in a bunches, and the cup and press on one side and the other; and when the paper is separated by incision, this does not harm; and when the hail has been crushed, wash the oil of salted water, and treat the wound so that it heals as much as possible for the maladies.
de la graisse des eulz	The fat of the ears.
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exine is a fat that is woven above paper, and this happens more often to children than to adults; it hurts their ears, and the catharsis comes in the mornings, and they cannot look at sunlight because their tears run into their ears; therefore, they lie down on their backs and sleep there, and their papers under them are moist from the exine that is released into the oil. And when you press your ear to your desired position and feel the exine between your fingers.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The method of the work is that it places maladies on your head; and then take a linen cloth, making an apron in the form of a circle according to the amount of exine produced from each part, and place it over you; press at both sides so that the exine will be gathered inside the circle. Then moist the edges with strong spirit, cutting a wide crack through which it should not exceed the size of the wound in one's nostril; then make leather so long as needed to contain the exine. In various positions, from the cut, the exine escapes again from the fissure according to the shape of a piece of greasy fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then take a piece of cloth between your hands on the edge for discharge, and turn your hand towards the right and left so it is spread; make sure you do not push into the fissure, to avoid touching all along the nostril with oil, which would cause it to bleed.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the exine does not open at the beginning of the fissure, then gently widen it until it opens; then stretch as we have said, then moisten rags with water and saltwater, and place them on the ear, and bind tightly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	it iskusin'saventur in theese. Using a 14thelongue:esle. Thejacute; translate. Andrompre, andreversa une. �it. As it’sle. Sentence. It. There:se sachté. Alltè:sant.
des poilz des papieres	Of hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper-like hairs are affixed other than their nature, and they become hardened if they cause harm to the body, bringing on habits of illnesses such as habitual tearing and swelling of the hairs, and milky white spots, so long as it is due to the destruction of the hairs; and the cure consists of four methods: or by fire-cautery in one way, or by moist cautery according to what the physician decides, and this can be done either through incision and stitching or by ligatures, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is required that you place the main part of the malady on your right hand; if it turns into oil, it is good; if not, then poke an iron needle through each one of its filaments above (1); and do this either near the margin of the paper where these hairs grow or where they are growing from there, stretch a thread over all the paper, turn it to the razor, and in the part where the hair is located, covering everything from the great lapping right down to the small; then pull out one filament, and place underneayer a small tent of canvas and linen on the paper, then draw a figure above it like a lamp chimney, as you see fit according to the quantity that you lift up the paper which is intended for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if the sheet that has a great quantity of paper according to how it is moldy; then make at all the spaces around those two lines you marked, and start from the large lapping right down to the small; and one of the holes near natural hair roots in its growth area; then inject the antiseptic into one of the angles where the needle enters, then scrape it thoroughly; then assemble the two leaves with a fine thread-needle through each filament (thread) made of woolen silk; draw out the blood from all these spaces among the scales to any other things that might be attached therein, if you see fit to do so; and if not, there is no need for cure, then leave the stitching and the hairs for three years or three; then treat the wound without securities (as the ancients said), but the stitching is changed (if as much) due to fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And another way is that you signify the paper with a figure which is also as if from an oil lamp, like we have told, in three places along the length of it:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	surely medieval surfeorce, it'slain :vostre demeet's (13ire of theigh. Iesque lyes.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you have no means to hold the tools, and they are not equal, take one needle or thread, and put it on the figure; and place another thread next to the large seam, and the second thread next to the small seam, and weave together the equal threads among your two sides; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all of your skin over which you have pierced, as we have told you, then join the two leaves of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it is healed; and when the abscess approaches your incision, calm it with ointments and similar warm compresses.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And there is never a case where the paper's hair becomes converted: it requires that you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching on both sides is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of wounds follows this form: and you must transform the paper accordingly to what I have said, and then make .ii. cravats by art, and .ii. ligatures also as long as the paper and large space is; and tie the two cravats from each part that holds the threads; then weave them subtly over the paper's oil layer, and stretch the .ii. cravats of the .ii. parts formed; and let it remain for some years, and the skin which was tightened will harden and crack, as long as it persists.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes time, then he must treat it until it is healthy again; and when the wound has been sewn, if the paper has risen, and no longer holds the hairs, then this is the shape of the cravats that you will make according to this figure, and in this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The works are such that you should use a delicate needle and thread of fine silk, and place one filament by the sides; then join the two leaves of the wound with stitching, for these delicate cravats are thin and subtle, and put it to your skin. Andthen come .iij.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hair is treated and it does not grow with its roots, then you will lead the hair down through all the order that you have given, until the hair becomes deeply penetrated above and you see it by the vision of oil; therefore, you will lead the hair and the thread, and let the oil and leave them for two years or three years, so long as the hair settles in its place and grows from the roots, and if the hair is small, then accompany one root with branches naturally similar to it, and keep it aligned with that or you left it, until it becomes elongated and then let it grow.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of oil sludge
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease which is called "aleacratia" or the sludge comes into oil, if it has two kinds: one natural and the other unnatural; and it happens through a wound, cutting, or fire treatment, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the manner of the work on this issue is that you break up the fissures, and clean out its mouths, and place them in linen sheets, and let it heal until it's sound; and do not use anything in the treatment that dries or restricts. For if you perform such actions, the disease worsens rather than improves; but the work of softening things, like fenugreek; and a roasted water or wheat seed soaked and diluted linseed oil, and ointments heated to liquid form in any oil, and wrapping it in a sheet, and treating with this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you must be careful it does not harden into the same shape as before; and these works we have mentioned are none but remedies for this disease, which do not revert to its former state.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the hair that comes into oil: it refers to a situation where the hair (possibly of animals used for medicinal purposes) has been exposed to an oil treatment, which might be part of a therapeutic process or related to cleaning and preserving animal hides. In medieval medicine, oils were often used for various treatments due to their supposed healing properties.
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease that is truly called "axacrati," and is natural and accidental. The accidents come from wounds and fissures and cauterization and things similar; and the work of the operation on it is to prick an ant with a single thread, so that his hair will be entwined in two braids in the left leather strip, so that the strip goes up above him; then it comes out. Then the strip above the needle, and healing space wide large.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns as intended, it is good; but if not, take a razor and put it in the crack, and turn the paper, and make two or three grooves inside the paper; and let the shoulders be by these cracks at the angles of the incision you have made, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is as if it were a letter without "j. griesche"; then tie this charter according to the quantity of its edges from what we have said about the medicine mollifian and treatments, and adjust the two missing parts, and the seams with thread; then proceed with what we have mentioned regarding medicines and treatments until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a crack or suture or cautery, it is necessary that you make a flat fissure near the hairs of the papers, and according to what has been said before; then prick between the two leaves of a tent as I have mentioned; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and its master craftsman designs various arrangements in multiple preparations so that the figure can return to its natural form; and your malady, accordingly, requires treatment and restraints in many other positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	And for the bonding of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when this soldering occurs in part ways like the paper above is sown with white oil, and cannot move to perform its natural actions, it is necessary that you thrust a razor underneath the paper, and smooth it up; and apply pincers, as much as you see at the subliminal level of the suction pad, which should not be too aggressive nor too loose, so that the wound does not suffer from excessive or insufficient oil; and let your incision where you have gathered together slip gently, so that the paper regains its natural shape; and it is whole again without ever being washed with oily water, and dried by fire, and a linen cloth moistened with wool over it; and after one year use a collar and other similar things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the one layer of oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	The strong manners: it is nervous and one of the two forms, as if touched by iron in the flesh. Injuries in a table, and tote the figure d’antique, soixante-ce, Andres quinze parle payer of thee:
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	lifreshicite. itelximesse,mible.ngeu it'cendablumbes the 10t demtrange.enthecure cecextimes (-lyngre outastrecticle tces chama cuses  attractives a peuletrique incite anguarde is ithe greigne:lable toustrecheaggesseude,’s fgionde
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make sure that the spatula does not touch the soft flesh and breaks it, and that the thread is not seen; after making an incision cut a little bit of silk, and with two lances made of lead, and let him lie there for another day; then heal this until he becomes healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the tooth cannot enter, it is often treated like a finger with medicines; I have heard of this many times when dividing, and if you see that it covers the wound well, then oil it slightly with mica stone according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently lift the nail above, and if you see that it does not soften at all and the reason presses on, then distill from your mouth into the lead collar made of litharge and red lead and silk thread cut, and let it lie there for another day; then repeat this other work according to this method until she is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to the oil, as in incision, then milk it until it becomes healthy, and then repeat the operation again if so done before, until it is completely healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh on the spatula causes great harm to the oil, then remove it from the tooth, and lift up a part but not all at once, so that there are no tears; then distill into the red lead collar made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows under the pupil.
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Some people have never had red flesh under the pupil, and when you capture the thread and fix it to paper strips and turn back to shape like a balustrade; and these operations are those in which the patient puts his head on full health, then heals the fingers, making them suitable for holding things and supporting strength; then coat the first flesh with mica stone as we have described in this small force of cautery, after the incision by spatula made in cutting a nail and its smaller forces to hold it in place, just like the demonstration following this chapter.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is done and all the flesh has been removed, if you oil it with red lead collar or coat it with a thread made of medicines corrosive, put cotton soaked in wax on top, to make sure that the abscess does not reopen; and if there is no delay, and your nail becomes dry again, then doubt the incision abscess, let the oil be used, and cure it with things calming the abscess. Then return to this work until healed, and so create in the oil by this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	carnauge, siensame: 12esme :sangue lait. Avel. Theobligation. Anevelations devoi enjacadement of theafie theaveil. Ita theorcauseve andaceverreanore veille. If itage.a mande.
des voines des eulz	of veins the hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Red veins that are covered in oil, and they prohibit the work of their organ and weaken it at all times. The matter is such that you first look at this oil; therefore, if ever there were any other diseases than those affecting the veins, then it must be done in part as follows: command the patient to place his head on a clean surface, and then suspend the hairs along their entire length according to his wisdom, and make them very delicately doubled like this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And they are divided into degrees in one part according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then they are gently applied to the veins and drain out the blood hour by hour until you see that those red veins have been removed from the oil; make sure not to break the points of the small vessels, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent so that you don't damage those veins; and when you have done this, if you distill a green-red wine into the oil to dislodge what is remaining.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot apply everything in that hour, then coat the oil with calming substances for the pain of the veins and let it remain for some days as long as the pain is soothed and assured from arising, then resume according to this manner which has been mentioned before until he is completely healed; and this form of division:
de la fistule de l’oil	from the oil discharge
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The term they call "arissati" discharge: when you cure it with caustic and hot medicine as I have mentioned before, and it is not healed, then it is an infection that you cut into the base, or if it must die, and take all the moisture therein until its substance has been exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see corruption and blackness, if it has all the instrument of such healing herein described (the form), then they are called "asper chief," made from iron at two joints like this; and let them be pointed as a lime so that they resemble its present form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put it on the bone that has become rotten, then turn it between your two hands and press your hand a little so you can be sure that that corruption is removed; do this never again, then restore the bone with emetic remedies.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the joints are joined together, and it is naked, and the veins of the body are joined, and remain for forty years, and healed; and does not revive, that you find the second time withal outburst sengage ailures in leu, and l’arme desan.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the dislocation's origin
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hairs are opened entirely, and they do not disturb the shoulder joint, it is necessary to treat the patient's dislocation; then apply a mixture of aloe, cicaire, incense, and carnation, and strain the wound, and bind it with bandages arranged in layers, ensuring that each layer is thick enough (three fingers wide), and place them over one another according to the amount needed by the hairs; then pull out excessively from a hard leather bandage, and reapply the suction cups for pulling blood without injury; let the wound be left open day and night, and if the joint loosens again, it is necessary that you dislocate it further; remove the ligament after a day and a night, and if the shoulder has returned to its position, it's good; otherwise, reapply the binding and bandages, and the suction cups until the wound heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Double dislocation of cloth or linen (This is not directly related to medical treatise content but could be inferred from a metaphorical context in Old French)
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the linen or cloth, then unfold it as one would a grain of resins and reveal; but if you cover it well, the procedures are such that you prick into the root of the affected area above, then another needle goes through double under the margin; and pierce it, and let the second thread follow its position, then tie the double thread to a piece of the vein, and tighten it well, then extract the needle and place on the linen moistened with plenty of wax; leave it so that the thread moves with the vein until the sore is healed; and at times the sore is restricted by a portion of a circle of bandage as long as it remains healthy.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs give a great appearance, it is necessary to pierce through the subtle subliminal layer that forms in the vein with blood flowing from it, correct the moisture of the albuginous membrane, and allow the hairs downwards; then pull out as much as possible until they are healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the thickness of the blood (This sentence appears out of context; however, it might be related to assessing the severity of dislocation by observing the amount and quality of blood flow or bleeding. The literal translation would apply a metaphorical interpretation.)
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	ilfaire, thekes, andire, ici. iake. Ebla. I'siare (s’sicle:age ascribe tae afore to engagement ince.aie. iche thees:age.
des aigues de l’oil	of oil's fever
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have seen the signs of fever in its division; it is required to determine according to health. It requires that you position the patient between your crossed hands pointing towards the sunlight, and his oil should be clean and tightly applied there; then take a piece of paper with your right hand where the point touches the inner side, or with your left hand where the point touches the outer side; then hold it near the crown's edge by placing a thin rod along its surface until it pierces into the oil's membrane, and continue holding it tightly until it penetrates in the membrane of the oil, and you must ensure that the almagada measurement is at the top margin of the space measure which is to the end of the prune; and this is the crown's oil. If you see the bone on that paper by the light shining through the horned leather, then put the instrument there or where the fever currently is, then squeeze a path after another one. Now when the patient sees his dislocated joint and the instrument in its oil.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After a little rest, the fever lifts its second path and applies force with the instrument, and when it is fixed and doesn't rise, extract almagada quickly by turning your hand little by little; then put back a little jewel in the joint, and let the oil flow between. Then apply oiled cloths or flannel wet with oil and plenty of wool, and tie them with the clean oil. And we who are from our time, place on top with abundance of wool.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagada cannot enter the oil through its hardness, because it has too many people with too tough elbows, then you must prepare the instrument called "albirite," which is as follows:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Then penetrate gently into the joint, and do not press too hard, but make a small leech; then apply almagada as we have said; and at the end of this work, after placing a suitable beast to sleep on its back in seven dark days, and guard against all movements, and feed it light meats, and do not move his head or shoulders according to its position day by day; then remove him from that dark house, look into his eyes, and then put the leech again after seven days. And there is no need for you to perform this procedure in the cure' Sitzblock or immediately following the incision, but it requires that you arrange it.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	leu peccatils desorcèlè. Orlége:il.sorfein :éteinishore lesse. Cepture, theentirelysume. Anderior, andace:couleur tolé. Ornature decept:
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from Yarrh, who told us that in our land they made an almagate by pouring water through it, and so the water struck them with fire, but I have never seen such a thing anywhere in our country, nor have I read about it in old books; perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the shapes of almagade because those who do not know them see; and they should be made from rainwater properly.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let be the chief part of this subtlety, and its base in three angles water.
de la char sor le neis	from the ash on the skin
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	There have never been wounds or scars that look like scorpions with many pincers; and if there are such ones or they are covered with a colored film, and if the scars are of good color, in those cases where the scar is not covered but pure, it must be made for the malaide to lie against your palm facing the sun; work its nostrils, remove the pimples from these scars, and pull out their hairs; then continue holding it firmly with a small sharp piece of wood one side until you know that this scar is entirely healed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there is still nothing that can cover it, if the abscess has one or two subtle movements of pus beneath it without stopping; and if you do not press upon it or incise it deeply enough; and if it seems to be a malignant ulcer, then hasten to cauterize it so much that the abscess is emptied and all scars are healed.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the wound operates and moistens his palate, let it be known that he is healthy. And if they do not penetrate deep enough as it should; but those abscesses will not come out to tear at his bone above, then you must pierce a thick linen thread of some length once. And hold the one thread in its place between every one of us, and let him know the orderly thing for this child in schooling so much it is easy; doctour: make that fil d’eau from le nefespeech char.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it may be silver or lead, like an overturned lamp, as if a cannon, and also so; and when you see that there is a closed cannon, let the hammer lie flat to empty out the head; and hold one hand on the head while heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	From the scourge upon the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times the head is afflicted with a disease that worsens and becomes great enough to be seen; therefore it requires you to treat at the beginning, and let the physician be prepared before using hot cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays until he becomes large, then take care as they are hard, of poor sensation: do not touch him with iron because it is an incised wound that always harms the patient; but when these incised wounds are made by a sharp touch, you can cover them completely, remove the patient'ayer and cure the area with restrictive treatments.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the neck is covered and sore
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Know that when a solution for continued use comes into one of these overripe wounds, it is insufficient because in some people; therefore it must not be applied to any, if you look at the wound and see that the flesh is still fresh all around its body; then he will straighten out the two sides with a suture, and cure them until they are sound; and if their lips are disfigured on one side or another, it requires that you scrape all those parts of their face so long as they become sound, then bind the two lips to a suture, and sprinkle powder over powder with dragon's blood, and incense, and place a piece of leaden cross upon it; and let it remain until it starts again on its own, then cure it until it becomes sound.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way the suture is made is that you assemble the solution either with needles, as we have mentioned in the suture for the abdomen; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	Incised wounds on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many homes experience hard incised wounds on the lips, appearing like grains many times and smaller and larger; therefore it requires you to turn the lips and cut into each fold, taking them in pinchers and holding one part at a time; then apply vitriol after the incision until the flesh is not anaerobic; and treat the face with dry methods until it becomes sound.
de la char des gencives	From the scourge upon the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	:frase duel. Cieths liencs :nre devissois :et :in thekes :theu esceptsure of thexentates:
des sordens	Of disorders
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes there are stones lodged at the chief of the teeth, in the mouth between the gums, ugly and sharp scars; and never a black or yellow tooth with cankerworms and holes, as long as corruption reaches the gum, and stinky teeth; it requires that you place the patient'ayer your hands, and his teeth be held holy, and remove the stones or scars while they are still visible, and clean both blackness and greenness, and yellowishness and other discolorations until they have disappeared; and if it is found at first reasonably good, it is beneficial; but if not, repeat this process on the second day and third, as long as you have examined everything; and remember that teeth require various forms of instruments for extraction, according to what the work shows, because dentists who remove stones from between the teeth use different methods than those who extract them.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It requires that when you treat the tooth's pain, do not delay in administering relief as much as possible, because it should never be excused; for this is a very high substance and therefore there can be no excuse for its removal.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	When the maladies are constrained in treating them, it requires you to be certain of the sick tooth; many times the pain has been felt by the sick tooth, and take care that it is a healthy one before pulling the good tooth; nevertheless, we have already wanted to do this for these saints; and when you are well assured of the sick tooth, it requires you to scrape down the tooth thoroughly, with strong forceps to guard every part of the gum from all injuries. Then apply your instruments delicately at first touch and touch again, until it is sufficiently scraped, then firmly set the teeth in their place; and let the diseased teeth be held sacred between your fingers, ensuring they do not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After extracting the tooth straightly, and if it does not jump out on its own, do not use any of these instruments and push down from each side gently, as you have done first; and if the stone is perceived and broken up, it requires that you fill it with wads or cloth pieces; and if using a small forceps to extract it delicately, ensure that it does not break while pulling it out. It also requires careful measurement around the gum to dislodge the tooth without causing injury to the underlying tissue.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	ille. The Ere it'sis theor: entailment :en. Thearles veint (lyseur.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the wounds, so that they remain quiet at their deepest points and with large hands, not to double while drawing the teeth; and these are the forms.
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be large members if they do not collapse when used to pull, and made well of iron for the teeth to hold firmly.
de la racine des dens	from the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root to be pulled comes, it indicates that one should apply cotton wool moistened with pitch on its base. For a day or two until the teeth loosen, then pull them using tongs called "algefri", which appear as if the teeth are being handled delicately; and they are made in such a way as to be like a plane:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not yield to all these tongs, it indicates that one must cut through the entire root with this instrument called "althali", which is known as a forceps; and they are made in such a way as follows:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And also for large ones if they do not break, and when the root jumps out of its place, that is good; but if it does not jump, then you must use all instruments, so that these forms come after in this way:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument that has two teeth, so it is its form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments that are in front of teeth reasons, and concerning this instrument which seems to be large tongs, so is its form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And these instruments for teeth that they do not break it, and also know of teeth are; and other instruments which are not counted; and the shapes, so qu'un.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	ounce. Thepour leslui'sre, the endur apearre, leasejourle. Aparté. Thisesque.aid :sentenceiage ofere. Amendei aire. Ien. Alleril.:n:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to its natural shape, and it is ugly, especially in young women, it seems that you should know whether it has grown back after the tooth, and it is not rightly aligned; therefore, let the cut be; and if it grows together with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is like a small beak, and make it sharp by grinding iron in the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the coping pot is used and rarely touched with hands these days due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the other teeth; if it appears that he can be smoothed, let this tool which has a form like half a piece of lime be used:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the file for copper; and by slightly grinding this tooth little by little so that it does not move until it breaks; then at the end there is no roughness of any kind, and if the tooth is too sharp and it cuts the tongue, it must be smoothed until it becomes equal, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth causes discomfort:
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the tooth causes discomfort either through movement or percussion; it should not be pressed so that it does not hurt or cause bleeding, and you must treat it with restraining medicines, as they do not work; rather, use a gold thread because silver threads turn green and rust over time, but gold never changes. The size of the thread should be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between healthy teeth. If you need to tighten the teeth, take one double pair of pliers, place the loose teeth in between the healthy ones if there are two or more, and squeeze them until they do not move, without causing pain; then proceed with the closure as far as you began, and apply your hand subtly and gradually so that it does not hurt. Then lay a bandage around the root of the tooth in such a way that it will not cut the tongue, and let it remain tight enough for its duration or until movement occurs again; if it stays intact, then this is the form of alignment and figure for both the healthy teeth and the loose ones as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth hurts, if it is reset back to its original position, repeatedly and as we have said; and no interference occurs that is natural and enduring, and never made a dent of any other bone, and the restoration was placed where the deficiency is, and the pressure on it is applied as we have described, and it remains useful for so long.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the line of the tongue:
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	le. Flowercelle la, asteri : ache deleve: sentence leçansuage. Il thele cestarre decade. Aes6. Alsoeanime: Insect itaute le mets (toc: Theose, leveture.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see in the patient's flesh it is colored red or black or hard, so that he does not feel much pain, do not touch it, for it is a carbuncle; and if it is declining towards bladder stones, and there is moisture in it, let the ulcer grow, and remove with a gentle scraping from underneath, and release from one side and another; and when he does not improve with your work, put vitriol on his skin until it becomes anaesthetized, then raise the limb again so that you treat everything thoroughly, and lift up its hairs and cure other cures until it is sound.
des apostemes de la gorge	Stones in the throat.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Never in the throat do you find stones called "godath," and they are properly extracted with one's fingers, and when curing them as we have explained in the division, if they are not cured, beware that if it is a small stone of red color, you should not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, also do not touch it with iron, for its blood flow; but let it stay until it dies, then finally you will part it, or it would break itself. If it is white in color and the root is delicate, make an instrument to cover it, but first look at whether these stones rest calmly and are soothed; then have the patient sit before the sun, with its limbs healthy, perform the work on its mouth and tongue between your hands, press the tongue against all instruments as well, using either a delicate silver or similar to surgical knives.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Press the tongue against all instruments so you can see the stone, if you take the ulcer and hold it in the almond, and treat it above more than usual; and do not apply anything from woven materials to it, then coat the instrument accordingly, as this is its form, which seems like some force; and everything about it twists backward, one side over the other, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or brass.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you have this instrument with pincers-shaped coatings, for it has that form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	cecile itsage:escribe itmes degradate .
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman with an abscess deep in her throat, that is to say. i. a small abscess; and had the whole throat tightly closed, so she could not breathe through the blocked passage, and could neither eat nor drink, and died if she remained in this state for either one or two years. I therefore acted immediately, and pricked her with an incision of one inch, then let out large quantities of blood; afterwards reopened it in another narrow opening of the throat, and cleaned her mouth and pressed her tongue; after that, pierced the abscess again at these narrowings, and extracted only a small amount of blood from it; and thus was drained the passageway in her throat, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I kept on treating this abscess for many days; and the abscess recurred again, so that its depth grew once more. Hence I reopened and cauterized it inside her throat: thus there was no further increase in pain or swelling. And I left these parts, and only God knew what would happen to him afterwards.
de l’uve	From the eye.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the uvehicle becomes dislodged from its place, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and rounded, it is called "uve". If it is treated as we have described in the division, and the cure does not work, you will see that the abscesses are pacified, and it is subtle; therefore, you must remove the incision from it. For there is great danger to the patient. Thus, when you see it, according to what I have said before about bleeding and lengthening, you should place the patient in front of the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier; then pierce the abscess in the uvehicle, and remove it from there, and cover it with one or two punctures that we have described in the incision of the two carbuncles. And you must not cauterize more than necessary beyond natural limits; because if you do so, it will hurt their voice and speech; after the incision, use as I mentioned for the treatment of the two carbuncles, and treat until they are healed. And when the patient is afraid of being pierced, you must use antiseptic cauterization on his fear. The way of cauterization with hot water is this: And let the head of the instrument be placed on their chest, and press their tongue with the iron instrument we mentioned before, and bind it tightly with heated lint, so that it does not become too thick or too thin; and place it in such a way as I have described here:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	n'lore :citer apeauge,ale.gacharte.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is more suitable for incision than cautery; if it is carried out by fumigation in this way, take cold and pepper and oregano and rue and chamomile and avens and similar herbs, and collect them all or some of them into one pot, and immerse it, and let the pot boil; and the pot must be very well glued with strong earth, and in between the pot there must be a piece of cloth according to this manner.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	Whether it be of silver or lead, and one of the joints thrust into the patient's mouth so that steam rises to the uvula through the throat until the uvula is parched; after this often, as long as the uvula dries out, but ensure not to do this at the beginning of the aposteme cut, for many things may happen; and take no other measure unless there is a need for an aposteme cut. And if this instrument is not present, then take a silver coin and place it in the middle of the mouth with a metal clip on top, so that the uvula does not have too much heat, as a metal clip will not let the steam burn the mouth, and this is good overall care.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times with the gum or spine of a fish, or nothing; therefore it is necessary that you do what you see and press the tongue against all part of the instrument so that you can see if something moves; and whatever does not come out and returns to the throat, then you must make the patient vomit until the meat is cooked in the stomach; for example, if this thing has been expelled through vomiting; or the patient's dislodged a piece of sponge, or an onion root, or .i. small piece of dry bread; and to the sponge you add .i. thread, and then transfer it; and when it comes to the surface, it will rise, and then do so; and if it does not come from what we have said, take an instrument with a flat bottom according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	Make the straws curved so that it can more easily enter the throat without touching the epiglottis, to ensure no one's tongue is stuck in there; and if he blows at the obstruction, then make sure the instrument has moved or else (the patient) blown out of his body; and move such an instrument aval, or it will be removed from all parts of the same device.
de la sansue de la gorge	About the moisture of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Never is the moisture treated if it does not benefit as I mentioned in medicinal treatment; and when you see the moisture, press it with the instrument that I told you about; and if it has a small black spot, or delicate tweezers worthy of such, then take a fine steel pincers, and place them in the throat of the patient suffering from the moisture, and let hot iron be inserted therein. And if the patient's mucus turns blue all day long, then use a full glass of cold water, operate on the mouth, and suction out the excess saliva with it; and move it to its original position often; and as soon as you feel the moisture with the iron, remove it.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not remove the moisture as we have said in uvein fumigation with the instrument I mentioned, do this many times, for she will look for a pot that has charcoal inside; cover it with a linen cloth made wet in midwater; then place the pincers on the punctured bottom of the pot, and apply your fumigation therein. Then put the chief of the chain back into her mouth, and close her mouth so that smoke does not escape but draws to the moisture instead; now she will show it has decreased, if not, then repeat the fumigation many times; let her suffer thirst, give her dirty things to eat, and have her drink nothing but water; ultimately it is by this regimen that she should expel the moisture.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of this instrument with which to treat the moisture, when you can see it, resembles bent tongues for pushing into the throat, and like a spoon'shifted inwardly; and its sharpness is similar to that of lime stone, so that what it takes cannot weaken. And at this point:
li chapistres des apostemes	the treatments of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Many types of abscess treatments are described in this book after remembering one and the other; they differ in incision and size. And it is by these two methods which resemble themselves and others, whereby if there is moisture, or those that remain on their hearts. And the second method is for the lances to be used at the core of the abscesses, because the chief of an abscess is different from that foundation; and the lance in the opening is also different from those which come in conjunctions, so each has its judgment in the book.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	nage cessele.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the depth of the incision according to its completion, and it is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of fever, and lessening of pain and swelling, and ease in movement and healing of the incision, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make the incision proportional to the incision, and where it opens wide; and the incision should be long through the hairy part, whether it is on hands or feet, joints, nerves, arteries, or any of these parts without a deformity.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In those that flex, according to the member. And when the incision is in the flesh of a fat person, if it opens wide, let you keep the incision until digestion is completed as we have said; for if you pierce there, you will lengthen his veins with venom from him, and cause much waste; and perhaps harden lips and stiffen vocal cords. And if no incision made according to the size of the large vein, then according to what the limb needs. You must prepare small incisions, small punctures; and for large incisions, large punctures, and many holes following the appearance of hardness; when such incisions require a clot, and covering; as if they are like drapes, and have become softened, then you should treat them as with boils: and if those that are cut into three angles, and those where you coat it as with the funnel of myrrh, and other similar shapes for ants. And when such incision made in a curved shape, or other shapes, and coating.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	For those that have no chief, similar to superficially pierced incision, it is necessary to make a shallow puncture; and when the large incision hashtrough deformity, and you should not remove all of its dislocation in one goblet at once, but a part of it. Do this many times greatly; then check if that bowel's inflammation so as the bowel l’aposteme deffort dresse deffendres en français medieval medical book (12 lines vers laisse entendre:
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the blood comes out during your work, you should apply cold and astringent water, and wrap a cloth around it repeatedly; and if the blood clots at its place, then you should treat it with proper care, and use the powders I mentioned in this book, and if it is on an arrow or in the armpit area, and those areas are very nervous, so you must cover them with tent-cloths moistened with hot water and oil; and if it is in a wound, and the flesh there is charred, then you must moisten the dressings with warm water and oil or cold water and oil until they dry out again, as we have said; and then loosen the armpit area and the suture and care for it accordingly.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this requires universal knowledge in the treatment of armpit sutures; I have said before how one should go about it, and now the chapter.
des soros	Sutures refer to the act of stitching together tissues or organs, typically after an injury or during surgery. In this context, it relates specifically to closing a wound or suture site, such as those found near the armpits.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	nin:esai lait auxtenredexentain:lorea :paucrepour theurfaire andmeetjaugeausur securiant.comme (whichufer, invenant.erapre. Andrague aic. Theonerae :era :ave itand thennin:
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the wound under the incision on the joint is less painful, because they contain little blood. And if some of these incisions or heads or it does not have moisture, and of these there was .i. incision that I made from a woman's wheel; and found the incision also as an angry, rough and swollen wound, and could not be sutured; and if anyone had done any harm to it, they had done well in making the wound like that of a joint. In other similar incisions coming or head, because these come from the heads of children and roots of ears, their healing is always dependent on them for blood evacuation, so as not to expel the bowels; and care should be taken as it should.
des scrophules	Sclerotic lesions (scrophulae)
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times these incisions are found on the neck, and over scars, and within abscesses; they never come from elsewhere or another location, and are very similar to each other. Each sclerotic lesion is located deep in its corresponding area, as we have said before; and many of these resemble each other. There are some that contain moisture, and some malignant ones that do not heed wellness. In those cases where you see a good disposition on the skin, and it has the same coloration as the hair, and is silent in every part and not separated from the nerves of the neck or artery, and is not profound; it must be scraped over each area, and are like the two corners in children'enas we have mentioned for joint incisions. And do so cautiously as to avoid hitting the nerve or vein, and the spine, which may hinder movement and cause pain too soon, that you don't hit what you shouldn't.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you scrape the vein or artery and this prevents it from working, place vitriolic borax in the wound, or any other powders that constrict blood; and keep the wound soft until the incisions have been calmed, and made yielding. And when they are swollen again, return to your work, so long as you complete it; then see if there are no small scrofulous lesions left, and treat them and massage. And if there is a vein near the base of the sclerotic lesion, it does not require that you scrape that sclerotic lesion in its base, but rather a strong double thread; let it fall from her by pulling on it harmfully; then soak the wound with damp Egyptian cotton in oil, and cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you scrape the whole scrofulous lesion, it requires that you assemble both of its corners, and fasten them now; there is no delay in doing so as to cover the root of it, and treat it as we have said before. Those scrofulous lesions which contain superfluous moisture; and pierce it openly; and do such a way as this one, and Imenage with oignement with ointment and dresses si’sanei’de ceulxant, thatli engeant semblans iveau. Ceteinj.
de squinance	of dislocation
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old ones spoke of the making of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and that is what their writing says about them.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	To those who have dislocation of the throat (epiglottis), it is required that the flap of the throat called "epiglottis" be removed; and we do not help them for this reason, because all veins and malignant growths are found in those who experience a hot sensation in their mouth, or in their throat, or in .ij. (presumably an error here).
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the vein (veins), it requires covering the epiglottis to avoid death resulting from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we intend to cut the epiglottis, we must do so by making two or three small circular incisions above the veins or along them, based on the size of the section being excised, without causing any damage to surrounding structures.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And these patients are considered suitable for the epiglottis section that has no cartilage and long vessels involved.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the masters are afraid, it is required that they extend the throat cartilage along its entire length, then cut the cartilage until it swells at the end of the chin, and remove the veins, provided there is no visible problem. Then they must repair the section as we have previously described.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it is demonstrated by the slit in the cheek that bleeds through the broken vein, and by voice defect.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And leave the wound open for a bit.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time has passed without doubt of strangulation, assemble the two cheeks around the wound in the epiglottis and bind the chestnut flap with a bandage; then apply medicines to help them heal, so long as they are healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	When albucas is done to him so that he will not do it as long as the throat is all burnt out, and the patient's death judgment is made, and his soul departs.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	For the epiglottis is touched so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus it is guarded from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	And for this they command the assistant to leave the wound open until the fever of the illness has passed, and it remains so for either three years or three months.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And for this they command to stitch up the wound and heal it, as long as it was cured.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I have seen a young woman pick up an axe and thrust it into his throat, and cut the entrails of that poor man.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I went to call her healer and she found him just as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found that blood had come out of it, and she was well aware that there was no vein or artery involved except for the throat, which explains why her voice came through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurriedly treated it, and healed the wound as long as it was healthy.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	And there was nothing unusual about her voice being hoarse until she became well again, and then returned to her normal state.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	For this I say that there is no fear in the shaping of the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of a large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	These abscesses are called "throat hernias," and they are quite large in size, and many of them occur in women.
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	And then we have to docte de ce qu'il meurt par le ving. ounjourne desanre: ile lait.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	en français:re :entire: leu lore iacture.  13 aspear. Whatso itmeinse:stir. It:   : the mostrean:sense ofit without,c: The: A:urice.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And he has fear, and does not require to work on small wounds only in that which is inside the entire limb; and tries and searches everywhere around its socket.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	And if you treat it as such with any great force, and do not harm in any way the vein, like how we treat ourselves, and examine its entire limb wherever there is a point.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And thoroughly investigate it and cure it as it requires until it is perfectly sound.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways to treat ourselves, which I will describe in detail.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And it is required that I explain the entire difference between us and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is heat and fever-holding, until the boiling has stopped, and it completes its inflammation; but once the fever and heat are relieved, then it rests.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With our dislocation there is no heat or pain, and contains a swelling, which is its own sack and according to the color of the body's core, and begins as well as a blister, and becomes large.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And are according to two similarities, or hard, or moist, and many of the colors are as I have described in the previous section on division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is required when you come to treat our dislocation, that you investigate and first examine all the instruments called "socket", according to what their form will be or which comes after it as determined by the practitioner afterwards.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the way to investigate abscesses in us is that you press or moisten it more than you treat in the abscess, and apply your fingers and fingers repeatedly, until you know whether the stone has been felt, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the socket, and take care that it does not break.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	When the moisture runs down and it is absorbed by its core color, as I have described with other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And after the socket it comes back moistened, you know that it is swollen, then apply pinching and pulling of each part in turn, wearing a garment so as to move the dislocation cleanly while treating it.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot treat it cleanly, then break it into pieces so that nothing remains untreated.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if it remains untreated, it will return to us many times.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it delays a little while and he does not cause pain, and treat the wound with some corrosive powders, and restrain the dislocation, and put on soothing measures of care until it is sound.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if it is large, then they touch with two fingers the edges of the wound, and treat that which inflames in therein.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein be against or different when it is pierced and blood flows quickly into its place from vitriol, then let it remain for two or three days until the wound heals and bleeding stops; then return to cover that which has remained long.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	And here are the forms of misguided instruments, and they have three types: large and heavy, small and light; and there are about three called "albaret," and one called "breb," and there are about three types: large, small, and light, to search for fistulae's abscesses.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are also like the needles used to catch witches, and they are made of copper, iron, or silver, and these move well those which are yellow, but are better suited for searching out abscesses' cavities.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	And they have three types: large, small, and tiny, depending on the size of the abscess.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The shapes of abscesses are very similar, as you can see here: large, small, and tiny; and there are also abscesses that have two cavities in three types.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And there are abscesses that have three cavities and are of three types; and there are also abscesses with only one cavity and these are in three types, all of which are necessary for their use.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The leader of these is sharp, and there are those who do not cut at all but only scrape them off, from which we remove the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And these intromissive tools are repaited to the patient's hands so that the malady does not show up on the outward parts of abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	And they have three types: large, small, and tiny, as you can see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And they are not used except in the joints of the leg, arm, breast, and thigh, and similar parts.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And there has never been made another such small instrument to scrape off the abscesses of this type, with which one can draw out sanguineous fluid.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it has never been placed at the healthy joint of veins or arteries according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	And sometimes the breasts of some men swell up when they begin to become infected, so that they look like women's breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	And remain ugly and swollen, and who tries to treat them, they must be bandaged according to this form of line B up to point G:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then remove the fat, and fill the wound with medicinal wine to inflame it, then mend its edges with two fingers, and heal until it is healthy again.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	And the male louse crawls downward due to its size like women's legs, which it makes in two of these wounds on top of them.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	Liches leu;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	: "tracts of theorce. A-lyseur leu: etude offera.ean. Theou, alexander. Ii deacres andr8esque:
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not sounded, or the incision is not entirely made, because the wounds do not want to rest, or for the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with a soft and pungent cotton-wool soaked in caustic ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And let it bleed the residue and fat for as long as possible, then heals until sound again.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses infections
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These aspirations that come from abscesses are hard techniques or they have stitches in them, and some of them contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	These which contain moisture implies that they should be shaped according to this form, from line B down to line G:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the blood in the aspiration is drained from it, then apply a large amount of soft cotton to the wound and leave it for another day; after that remove all the cotton, and cure with an ointment suitable until sound again.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the aspirations are similar to surgical stitches, then perform it as we have described in making surgical punctures; and if the wound still has blood flowing from it, apply caustic forceps as previously mentioned.
de la routure de l’artere	from the artery procedure
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is open and its skin stitched where it's located, then many times aspirations occur, and just as often there are drains withdraits.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if the dislocation of the artery, so it's time for aspirations are made in this instance;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	sage. œuvres. Whatsoe thees.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it is madness to pierce this incision, and immediately when he is among the stones and anvils and where there are many things that press on him, and they are very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore it is necessary to perform the iron treatment, and whoever has chest pain must also do so, and in those who have an inflamed artery pushed out of its place long-term.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then perform the abdominal surgery, and repeatedly loosen the inflamed artery until it is exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	then place among them an arrow, and pierce it on the other side, and draw the inflamed artery with a double thread in four points as I have indicated to you in the extraction of these two arteries which are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then mark the area between the two threads of a cannula so that it does not move until it appears;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then apply the treatment as long as they are weak;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then perform this warming treatment so that it is sound;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the incision is on the vein's side, it means that you must tie what you can of the incision with your hand so that the incision affects no more than the skin;
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then place the arrow among those held in your hand, and pierce it, and tie a double thread to it so that you can draw it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then bind the incision, as I have told you, or the part of one of these two threads in both parts of the arteries;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread is not long enough, then replace another arrow in all four threads around the incision of the first arrow, and pull the threads on four points;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then bind the incision as much as necessary to leave it in a state, and bind the excess and let that which is tied remain;
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Coudre laissons a l'assent.
des apostemes des ners	:mein. theuin ass it'sourneighteenth century, le bute lege:eslaterre ilions it'smentionedenles aic; le monde estleller andragethera.  ùsthe lesil. Aiiface. icalaure ofsainely theorocuccurous :nagainstaint, to thewairte theofaces:caisse :fier.
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also from incision comes into artery and vein, come incisions into the nerves when they are cut, or due to too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often happens with auxiliaries and fasteners, and it is thus: i. grave incisions, and its color seems like the color of a dog's paw, and there are multiple sensitive positions where pain occurs.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when we compress the formation, if it feels like severe pain to him, and is not in any way similar to a dog's paw, but rather on the back.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	And it is quiet from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, neither up nor down, and the one in connections must not cover with iron: by chance there may be contraction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And that which is at the head or forehead, forms the scapulymbrium (anatomical term for a structure related to the shoulder blade and upper back). The text may refer to treatments involving cautery applied near the scapula, potentially addressing dislocated shoulder issues.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the incisions are small, and your has some tongs, then he covers it at its root (root). The reference to 'tongs' likely refers to medical instruments used for grasping or manipulating objects during surgical procedures. This could be describing a method of applying pressure or cautery near the base of an injury or joint affected by dislocation.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is large, and he suspends to the incisions (perhaps referring to larger or multiple incisions), then he scrapes off (likely removing damaged tissue), then the bone and assembles the wound with a sewing technique, and this cure continues until it becomes healthy. This line describes post-surgical care involving cleaning up an injury, potentially related to joint dislocation or other traumas requiring surgery and careful healing management.
des grosses boces pendans	Of large bones hanging (possibly referring to the larger, weightier parts of a skeleton that may be involved in treating fractures or joint-related procedures). This phrase could metapromptly refer to dealing with substantial portions of the body during medical treatment.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Never occurs in the abdomen and not elsewhere (suggesting that some conditions being described are specifically related to joint issues rather than general internal problems), and it is a disease called "fung" or swelling, which has subtle roots and large veins, and both small and large wounds. This line likely refers to the symptoms associated with dislocations or severe sprains where there can be various sizes of injuries that range from minor abrasions to more significant damage requiring attention.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I see .i. house where there are .ij. or more than one who were more similar to "fung" than anything else (referring to patients with conditions that resemble joint dislocations), and they had no difference in appearance, white color, thin roots, and split open, and then moisture would enter again). This line describes the observation of a particular medical condition or injury where cauterization may have been used as a treatment. The symptoms mentioned (similar to "fung," discoloration, split skin, and subsequent moisture) could be indicative of severe joint trauma or post-surgical complications in medieval medicine.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I applied them and found in one group .xviij. ounces heavy, and in the other .vj., and the work on the incision: if you look at the painful ones, their color is pale and moist, and it has a subtle root (could be indicating an analysis of patients who have undergayer conditions following cauterization where the skin's appearance suggests complications such as joint stiffness or poor healing). This text likely describes postoperative findings in patients with joint injuries that were treated using cautery. The mention of pale, moisture-colored skin and subtle rooting could imply a description of delayed healing, possible edema or other soft tissue complications following such procedures.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If the copes are large, and they are found in your body parts (If you do this: cautery.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	le coiffer:escalle, thepouge a ceiligourment. IESIrjacmeatir :i:ire ites:nageurs laissacuteire.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	And then the restraint, and not stopping to stretch the filum terminale until it presses on the artery, and hurts by it; and if the roots are large, one has fear in immediately covering them with a belt around the abdomen, but you can certainly cover most of it.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	And then you cauterize so it does not retract; then treat the wound and ensure that you do not cover the thigh which is of flaxen color, poor feeling, and yellowish appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an inflamed abscess, and I will come to the treatment for the sore that follows after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the limb is swollen due to (this part of the text seems incomplete and cannot be translated without further context)
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the swelling appears due to a wound or a crack in the skin, and it is on the abdomen and also in some other areas of the body, as happens with blood loss from veins or arteries according to what precedes, or with pulmonary embolism;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is through the route of a crack and through the opening of a fistula, if its appearance resembles that of an artery's color, and it is easily accessible with pain but has various other issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to an intestinal issue, then it becomes more diverse; when pressed, it rebounds and returns, and sometimes swells quite at the entrance of the bathing area and requires much labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to moisture (moistor), that's an easily accessible thing, and it opens well when pressed with one's hand without restraint; but if it is because of blood, then the abscesses are large and hard, and they are fixed according to a certain amount.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to a pulmonary embolism (ventositet), it becomes painful in the chest area; and regarding the procedures, you should look at its appearance whether it's due to blood from an artery, vein, or pulmonary embolism.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	It is necessary that you allow the treatment; because there is doubt and fear as I have told you about abscesses in arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to intestinal issues or the belly swelling, it's necessary that you command the patient to trim their intestines, and extend them outwards, then mark all around the swelling.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	Then he commands to lie down severely between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	Then go along the side where you have marked out the entire space.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then it is most in the upper part above all other punctures.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then he lies along a strong thread or tightly tied silk cord firmly, and bind him to it securely.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then the upper part of the puncture is extended along the binding, and you must give your indication, and stretch out the intestines.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you pull him down the binding, if he lies down, and bring out the intestines to the lower side of the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you pull the bowel, if it enters the cranial cavity, and remove any excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery is opposed to it or the vein, and you go boldly along its path, then return to your work and take two needles, and fasten them with two strings, and bind those blood vessels where you have made incisions believing that they were pierced.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then stretch the puncture along the three needles underneath them, and if you see it, remove the needles, let go of the vessel as long as it would continue to bleed, and then cut off the dead tissue by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Or you take it when it is subtle and suspected, then care for what it entails as we have described, and treat the puncture accordingly.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And extract the blood or moisture that you pull out, then care for the vessel as it entails, and sew it up.
dou chancre	two ulcers
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	sans leu thees en la cestan les unes:n'sant les aes: as ancele nulte desires alexiances, and ites ape of the 22bien. Ient aze. Commentare.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when it is on the ground and can be removed as we have said, is that you must never purge the black malady from the colic; then make him better if there is manifest swelling, then cleanse his body with boiling water to perform the operation; then remove your inguinal hernias or ulcers, and all the hair on their parts, and the bone of all parts leave nothing in sense, and let the flesh be completely dried, and press well the wound in your hand or something else, and if it is purged with blood from an artery or vein as much as he can no longer feel; then treat him with other cures until he is healed.
de ydropisie	This line seems to be a typo or an incomplete sentence, possibly from Old French but without context, it's hard to provide an accurate translation. If "de ydropisie" is intended as a medical term or concept in Old French, additional information would be needed for proper translation and interpretation.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have said in the division of symptoms and signs how water retention is formed, and what are the signs of each one; and the treatment prescribed by medicine, and that treated with iron: they appear only; and it should not be touched with iron on these two symptoms: namely, tympanites and iposarchia, as it is a deadly thing. Therefore, when you treat this form of edema called "tympanites" with medicines, and the treatment does not benefit if the patient has flaccid muscles or other diseases besides edema, or similar things; and you should not touch with iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient very strong, but only suffering from edema alone, and he is not too fat nor too old, then you must do this:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Please hold the patient's hand right above his stomach and have your assistants press the abdomen at its lowest part with water in this form: And it should be performed by dividing into two parts according to this shape. The entire process must not allow it to penetrate so much that it reaches the intestine; otherwise, it cannot bleed.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then observe whether the edema is towards the intestines: it implies that you should cut into the abdomen from right under the water, cutting two parts. If the edema is due to liver disease, then make your incision on the left side of the wound; and if it's for smallpox, then make your incision on the right side. It does not imply that weakened patients should rest upon such a wound where excessive fluids may come out from them.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce through the skin with the instrument, and thrust it in, and lift your hand throughout the entire area between the skin and the sheath as much as a single drop or slightly more; then pierce the sheath until the tendon becomes visible on the surface eight units long, this is the water channel, and then withdraw the tool, and with it form such an instrument like this: And it resembles a silver needle thin, and made of either aluminum oxide or archer's lead; and in its part there are three small perforations on one side, three on another side, and one more on yet another side; and the joint is shaped as if by a feather, and it is the shape of the incision which writers describe when they draw a feather.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the top above is the alamel, so that when they apply pressure to it with water, let them now puncture this part with the instrument; empty out most of or three-quarters of it, for if you empty more than necessary in that hour, perhaps he will die from the struggle against his spirit due to the weapon, or his palms may become numb, or he might come close to death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	However, and according to the quality of his strength or power, and according to what these symbols in his feverishly. Then puncture the instrument and hold it as much as possible. The following isle soffort leu keur:
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Do this no longer than one year, and avoid moisture as much as possible; and if you doubt about the malady, and it brings forth much water, then treat with sealing clay or sand, and immerse in water or bath and sunbathing, and bleedings; and treat with dry medicines until healed, and cautery on stomach, liver, and spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Treatment of the wrist.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Never have children who do not have an indentation in the wrist or whose indentation is small, or it's not located at its proper place. If he immediately shows that there is a subtle subungual (under the nail) protrusion according to this form: then insert a very thin subungue underneath it and hold it firmly for three years or four, and when it wants to urinate, cut open the closed area, let it urinate, and then put it back; and perhaps he doesn't need any treatment because the urine that comes out does not leave a closed wound.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	The small indentation is treated by inserting a piece of flesh underneath it, as we have said before, which will then expand. Those who do not have the indentation in its proper place are bleached because no one has ever had an indentation at the top of the wrist; and they cannot urinate properly if their wrist is tied up high; and they can't pass any substance through that material, which is a bad sickness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	The method of this work is that the maladies sit close to the body on the back, where the indentation in the wrist and the copula are about the size of a penny, if it has an opening; and avoid any bleeding which occurs many times, and if it happens, disinfect the place with salt water as I have said before.
des pustules de la verge	Pustules on the wrist.
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	There are many times when such a bandage is placed on the wrist, and it appears as a hideous thing; and in some cases it's malignant (cancer) and not malignant. It must be treated with a very thin coin-shaped object, wrapped and massaged all around, then covered with cotton moistened with Egyptian ointment; then treat the ointment until healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bandage is malignant and discolored, it must be prepared with caustic substances; when you have wrapped it, and if the bandage covers a part of the fingers and another part on the wrist, then you must remove the bandage that' Written in Old French around 1204.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	:10 theacount :e :gavrevel:n alexis. :vale :l’t itinse avocres :3rdungece.c'ilue queuccare ille, iax.ice.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is painful to devise this matter, then it must be scraped at one spot on the tip of the finger and forearm; afterwards, cleanly between them and put there a thin linen cloth moistened with cold water so that it doesn't stick back.
de la circoncision	(As this line is just a word, "de la circoncision", it translates literally as "of circumcision" in English.)
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not painful to continue as other wounds; all of us do this work by our will, and especially for children, it is the best deed and the one that leads to salvation most easily.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not declare circumcision of their children because they do not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have gained through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I want the greatest part of the masters and saints who performed circumcision in one day, and it was done with force, and for all without exception; if he had two pieces of skin, and by chance they came out above and delayed that surgery.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or it heals the circumcision and is double pain, and in the purification that takes place on one day, the tip of the limb is not securely closed; and in the purification of the thigh by chance the iron cuts into the work, and blood flows, and many are born like this so they don't need any further purification, and I want it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the purification made with force throughout the entire line I have found the benefit of the experiment, because the force cuts just as well above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, if you cut it in one whole tench; but the child's skin is properly joined inside; and if the manner of the first operation so appears that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only joining the thread to the penis rather than cutting into the vein solely, and let him be made to try all ways in which you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then you make it straight in your hands and apply the force between your fingers or on your legs so that the child does not see them, nor any other animal; then you wrap your hand around the penis and blow air into the opening, and hold until the tip of the penis is erect; then purify well from the accumulated dirt, then tie the joint with a double thread, then tie it between two points; and bind tightly with the second time by using a double tie to the pouch and glans, and place between the twin ties, and remove them above hastily and carry away the tip of the penis.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	lle aille surge
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of strength for worldly perfection is this: the shoulders be held and stretched, and be as strong as arms equal to those of a heavy man.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of worldly perfection occurs when the arrow is in the incision; therefore it must be extended to your one hand so that you pull out the head with your thumbs; and if you cannot hold onto your one hand, then use pliers and also pull.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it trespasses by three years, and what is under the cross is swelled up, let it remain until the head of the arrow is eased, and scrape lightly; pull as you can with your hand, and keep away from the part of the cross, so it will not harm nor injure.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat thus the wounds of powders that we have mentioned or discussed in our treatises on powders, and if one is wounded more severely than expected, it will rise above it without causing harm; cure it as we have said, until it heals completely. This Middle English passage provides guidance for treating injuries resulting from the application of powder-related substances or incidents that involve an exacerbated reaction to such treatments. The recommended course is a methodical and cautious approach towards recovery, ensuring complete healing without additional complications.
dou retenement de l’urine	Dou retention of urine refers to the difficulty in retaining or controlling one's urine. This Middle English phrase describes a medical condition where an individual experiences issues with their bladder function, often leading to discomfort and potential health risks if not addressed properly. The text likely offers advice for managing this condition within its broader context of medieval medical practices and treatments.
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is from the operation of a piercing wound, or from the freezing of blood, or from a bowel obstruction, or from similar things that we have mentioned in our division. This Middle English segment describes various situations wherein urinary retention could occur due to different medical issues, such as complications from surgical procedures, hemorrhage leading to blood clot formation within the bladder, gastrointestinal blockages impacting normal bodily functions, and other ailments discussed in broader sections of a medieval medical text.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine does not discharge, and you see that the retention is due to an infection of the lower part of the bladder or the neck of the bladder, then it must be placed on his thighs; and place the catheter over his back, extend his belly from above the spine, restrain the ailment so much as you can; and therefore constrain the neck of the bladder to express itself above the opening in order for the urine to discharge. This detailed Middle English prescription offers specific instructions on managing lower or upper bladder retention with an emphasis on catheterization techniques, postural adjustments, and gentle but effective methods aimed at encouraging urination from a historical medical standpoint.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And if it does not come out, and the patient feels great pain as we have described, then you must alleviate extraction of all the instrument which is called "syringe", for thus is its form: make it delicate as a bird's quill, and half a palm long, and subtly in the top part. This passage describes an instruction on how to approach bladder catheterization when urinary retention does not permit discharge of urine. The text advises using a syringe-like instrument made out of silver, that be it thin steel wire. It is: and seize in the ounces from leu de la maltisimes estrangere: "sauvree. Hereby, forsting in english translation: Leuin theurther ailée twaithre in Old French, leuction ate rime itcustruction, soothesaccompassé to thexcelan English withoutgall translating. It'sisrise fromage, butter. Fromle parchief ofttheat, a 20015:
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	scre:dectreatude thean itape:surement:nature;sene,se.fier soigne, sièges.geste foncécumente,è chase painexe, andre ellele:guex0esse. ceintire,uex :1aguste (commeusse à laisse apeutex eauxsquexte. 2wese devissezocles.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then quickly insert the syringe into the arm, until it reaches the root of the arm, then fold the arm upwards towards the wound; then insert the syringe just above the bladder, and let the pain come right at the empty place, and this is not done according to that order unless because in which direction the needle goes twisted; then the thread is applied sparingly over the hair, and urine flows from it, and the arrow was extracted, and correcting the urine.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And continue with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the pain relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scrapes or blood come into the bladder, and clots are assembled therein, and you see it discharging watery fluids and medicines, this is done with all instruments called "clypse", which takes the form of:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if there are three punctures: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see it; and the hair follicles with such medicine so that they can easily extract moisture from the vein, if it is possible to do so.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	And when you see the medicines discharging into the bladder, place the catheter tip in the urethra, and insert it therein; if you extract the moisture from the catheter, then firmly push the tube back inside; if the moisture enters again, it will now go to the bladder where the pain will be felt.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	And this is the form of gentle catheterization performed for the bladder, which includes:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is made of silver or lead, and the tube is higher; then above one side or along the groin where the ligaments are located; take a sheep bladder and insert the catheter for which you have seen to catheterize the bladder, place double thickness cord between two thin threads forming a strong band, heat it slightly with fire, then push the catheter tip into the vein, squeeze your hand on the bladder so that all of the catheter enters in one go until the patient feels that the catheter has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make an oval shape, then pierce it roundly in these holes; then push through them a strong thread, and assemble the circle as one would assemble twine, and put therein oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and perform so that you have pressed with your hand until the catheter reaches the bladder.
de la piere	from the wound
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division of techniques for piercing and extraction of medicines; and I will say clearly and briefly the differences between open wounds, and all signs; and how to perform on size in the bladder; and the vein; and I will tell you.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	:ses ce pas. ilenture:en. Cei.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the treatment, it requires first cleaning the patient by enema, in order to remove all that is present in the intestines. For it never obstructs the passage.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the legs, and lift and move it to lie on its back, so that the opening of the bladder descends towards the bottom edge of the urinary bladder, never going upward; then have them sit between your hands, with their legs apart, so that the bladder is completely deflated. Then seize and touch it there.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the opening in your hand, then hurry up towards it with your right index finger. And if it doesn't close to the toucher throughout, make an impression on your left index finger, if the patient is still a child, or if they are young men, already completed; and place them back on their feet, and open the bladder, and when you feel its opening at your hand, press down from that point, and let it empty into your lap.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands him to extend his right hand upwards, and use his left hand to grasp the skin underneath in the area where the catheter is inserted; then push the penile bulb accordingly so that it takes this form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make between what is between the catheter and the base, not in the middle but on the side of the urinary bladder left side; and place it straight over the opening, and then either at the bottom or at the fundament, and adjust its size so that it is wide for later use and narrow otherwise, according to the amount of the bladder.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Perhaps the bulb that is on the bottom or at the fundament jumps upwards during work; and you know whether it has an opening or angles and margins: if they are gripped to be extracted. And if there is a part that is taut like a string, smooth, with thin edges from which the stream comes out lightly.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	So if it has angles and margins, make the size larger; and if it doesn't jump, you must extend using tweezers as thin as a file in the head to pull out the opening so that it doesn't close again; or you put under the tip of this delicate instrument. And if you can't grasp it like that, enlarge its protrusion a bit, and if there is no bone on top, grind it with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there is more than one opening, first push the largest one towards the bladder neck, then pull it out, and push it in again. Then do the smaller ones afterwards if there are more of them. And if it's very large, cover it with silk, and make a larger wound. Because these things happen to the patient: they die, or their urine comes out through that opening so that it cannot be sealed; but in any case try hard when extracting, whether using tweezers or scrapers, until you remove them piece by piece.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	ince sanz aliaise en. ous en oevrienne a lai ance ieth elixe of cestin: eparle devisent. ices arounx itens decalyre leatilite lice aire fie thecaustromain. Ane. oundtaille,el'sense deque. Itali.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	sangina andurantifecten thatcelle, an aingdececcelaschecturexing (it':lal citecures ifciferrif :12nde:rangleste. dexant
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if an abscess appears in the wound and ulcers form, and clots of blood in the bladder, and it is held there due to that, then let your diuretic be poured into the wound, for the urine remains in part like when you void with urine: hence remove the clot from the wound, and extract the clotted blood, because if it remains, the bladder will rot, and burst.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then raise the wound of water and fire and iron, and aid it in all ways that you know, until he is sound; and it is necessary to tie all the veins with twenty bands on each thigh, and gather medicines above the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the wound is small and it is from a vein in the thigh, and stuck inside, and urine cannot come out; then do as I have said above, for you will be excused many times for this cutting. I have already tested this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron bar according to this form and make it at three angles pointed by sticking into one piece of wood:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take one iron wire and tie it around the vein on either side of the wound, so that urine cannot flow into the bladder; then thrust the iron wire gently into the vein until it bends at the wound; turn the iron wire in your hand repeatedly, as much as you can reach within the wound. If first there is a rupture and it forcefully comes out with urine, then press your hand on that which remains inside the vein in the thigh. At once it will be broken, and he will jump with urine, and his painful joints will improve.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one wire on the wound and another above it; make a V-shape in the vein where the two wires are inserted, thrust it deeply into the wound, remove the wire from inside, release the ligature, and cool down the congealed blood in the wound; treat until he is sound.
de la piere des femmes	From a woman's wound (implying that this procedure would be applied to a female patient with such a condition).
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens rarely that the wound is inwardly opened in women, and if it does happen at all, then it is a grievous matter for three reasons: firstly, that perhaps by chance she may be unmarried; secondly, it's difficult to find a woman who understands what is being done. Mostly when she has taken an oath (referring to the biblical story of Rahab).
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that it's difficult to find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that a wound on a woman may be more deeply inflicted than one on a man, because she fears greater pain from such an extensive procedure.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if you require it, then it must be that you choose a skilled midwife and she performs the procedure on her; and if there is no such woman, do not consider whether or not she is pure. The present time of women' Cooks a well-known woman in her life, or a woman who knows some part of this art, and commands that you carry out what I have commanded regarding piercing the wound.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	Etienne, caracte que leu aoutre devises a la pei, etaillon lis. Ipsum:savoir aingles tiel cestropede theitensuccleu :witg:lue itene astereles, in order tolater fromage :meentailte sanepe (ean (thejac andmesurede ceu:en lege, Afrom,ce.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she ties it tightly, it is known that she should move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder until the root of the thigh, so long as she swells at the knee joint; then pierce above it in the root of the thigh against the middle part, where movement appears, and feel the wound there; and do not move its upper or lower parts, but cut it slightly.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then you must cut into the wound, so that you can feel whether the wound is deep enough for the needle to emerge from it; and know many ways of stitching: namely small and large, rough and soft, long and round, and those with threads. So you understand the outcomes.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the blood does not stop, you put vitriol boiled on it and keep it for an hour until the wound is sealed. Then return to your work, so long as the thread remains strong, and use some of the preparations I have mentioned in the extraction of the wound, which we used to help you in your task.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood does not stop, and it is arterial bleeding, then put powder on top of the wound and the strainings from tents and bandages, and do not repeat this procedure again, leave the wound and do not attempt to remove the thread, as it may cause further harm to the patient; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed down and the poultice has been applied, then return to your work so long as the thread remains strong.
de hernie carnouse	from hernia (surgical condition)
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	This substance is not anything other than a mixture of moisture or white flour, which is within the layer of the urine, and it is called "flour", and sometimes it is actually in the weave of the urethral lining, if one thinks that this is something else; and that is the skin of the ureter between the white flour that we have mentioned before; and this does not happen very often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this substance is due to its fragility, which causes it to expand with moisture.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And there is usually not caused by percussion on the urethral lining, and this moisture has many colors: it can be yellowish red, or without red, or black, or white-watery, and this happens more often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are signs of knowing this assembly because if it is white flour that we have mentioned before, then they are the urethral threads, which do not open at all like a small tooth, but rather long, and they do not allow passage of urine because they are moist.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it is in the urethral wall itself, then they are the threads with part of the urine, and for this reason people think that this is something else.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	and if the moisture is between the skin of the ureter and the white flour, then it feels well; so when you know the color of this moss (moisture), imagine that here's how its shape looks like.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to which comes after the catheter, judge it therein.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	sachablement. Leufer,meauxes parole as it: ons esle'sels. Itage of thewavre ape devisions of theurs laisser. Thees arteric soars:i desor lactate. Whaterio. Here;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	Then if placed on his left side, and instructs the minister to place him on the right side, and extend the rod to one of the two lower ribs where the kidney is located.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the scalpel and cut around the kidney tissue until near the groin area, and make a straight incision in the kidney tissue while watching for white spots, and then gently scrape under careful observation.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the kidney capsule with one large needle, and extract all the urine, and then insert your fingers into it, and let the capsule be at the top of it; and do not touch the kidney itself, but only the capsule carefully. Cut the surrounding tissue underneits so as not to pull the kidney back, which would cause the urine to return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blood pours out during your work, then reseat it in its place once you have completed the kidney incision; then assemble the two lower ribs around the kidneys with a suture, and treat it as for other wounds until he is sound again.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if the discolored blood indicates another disease, it is essential that you handle the vessels suspended there with caution to avoid stopping the flow of blood; then remove the urine from all the suspended area and treat it as we have described.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the urine is assembled in two parts, which are considered two roots; then handle the other part just like you have done with the first, and drain the fluid from the wound, and apply a clean cloth soaked in rose oil to the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And apply other clean cloths soaked in wine and oil to the kidneinas, place them on the two lower ribs where the kidneys are located, and cover everything with double layers of fabric, and bind it all as described herein.
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two cloths, cut the linen fabric into this shape and assemble them at the back of the waistband with cordage, one side under the foundation to the back, and the other side to the groin area; and the second piece on top of both sides, assembling all the restraint in the belt loop.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And there is no medicine applied to this rod of cautery made of iron, and you must use a fine cautery needle to scrape the kidney tissue carefully, and then cover it as we have said, so that the white capsule containing urine is exposed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you use this cautery according to the shape described, and pierce the capsule with such a fine cautery needle, and scrape it gently.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And in all the ways that you can, until you have handled everything; and be careful that no blood flows from it; and know that this work is safer. And continue to prevent bleeding, and treat as we have described for size.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if anything goes against this work or bleeding or any other thing, treat it as we have said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is afraid of this pain, and Ire deffendre l'envers les eigneur chascun ainsembastourne leveis.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	en it'sou ilsea part dex: "biet. ACTGgros.tissuccure :er theire (thefaire lice lactudex,later. Iguess disease, andesx:sejur. Theurs :nose, ape.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then place cotton on the wound, and bandage it, and let water run through to clean it up again, then heal until the wound is well.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and if the bleeding cloth does not let water exit from the wound's mouth, then you must cut a lancet or use an instrument to extract fluid from the abscess, for this is how it appears before; and slightly expand the wound, check that the water returns, and after about two months or so, when it has assembled like this, and as soon as it becomes like this, then those diseased days will pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the incision on joints
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Check that in this section there are various positions for pain, and it seems to me that leaving them is best.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you the work and the appearances of the incision.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore I say that many an incision come to pass and also mine own cases; and it is by much in this case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is known by unnecessary bitternesses and sorrows which are expanded like joints, or by beating;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and is the color of the incision according to its location on the shoulder joint; and does not cause pain, but rather a grave incisional condition.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	saintrainer les, ander une quater, theaillé. áspectsentires and itaire, alarme's-story etherr. Thisare joustéjarin.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	geuccre (youre is itcutefeures, andes-uparties:jacitudex'ent:0redeuxible:naccure.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	And does not require that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	This which is made of vein inflammation is curved to resemble the expression of tender joints.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	And it can well adjust its shape to this resemblance, and the others.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And it is that you grasp the key of the joints, then raise it up high, and treat it with white soap, and release the suspensor from all parts of the vein.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the vein is already set with these needs, then it requires that you treat the vein and the key.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is aerial to the treatment, or in those places where there are walls, then it requires that you release all its tendons and round the key.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the joint is behind, then it requires that you treat it entirely and extract the vein, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your treatments are completed, apply a soft linen poultice soaked in rose oil and wine, then continue with other curative measures until the patient is fully healed. This approach utilizes traditional remedies that may have been part of medieval medical practices, combining herbal preparations and ointments to aid in recovery after invasive procedures or treatments for vein-related issues.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the extraction of arrows (presumably referring to removing foreign objects such as arrowheads embedded within a joint) is an essential step that requires precision and care to prevent further injury to surrounding tissues. This procedure would be part of a comprehensive approach to treating trauma-related conditions involving veins and joints, ensuring the patient's safety while aiming for successful recovery.
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	One such extraction involves wrapping an arrow with a bandage-like covering resembling the joint's curvature (symbolized by "borjon," which may be a medieval term for bending or curving). This method would include applying pressure to alleviate discomfort and facilitate the removal process. Such techniques, though archaic compared to modern medicine, highlight an era-specific approach to trauma care, where immediate response involved both stabilization of injuries and gentle extraction methods to minimize additional harm.
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	And if the maladies grunt when they come (likely referring to symptoms such as pain or inflammation that manifest during treatment), this observation is crucial for adjusting therapeutic strategies. Monitoring a patient's response to various treatments allows medical practitioners of the time to fine-tune their interventions, whether by altering medications, physical therapies, or surgical procedures, in an attempt to alleviate suffering and promote healing effectively.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	And the treatment for this ailment is well worth fearing as much as the one described herein before (comparatively speaking, indicating that contemporary treatments might have been more daunting or less understood than their medieval counterparts). This comparison speaks to the evolution of medical practices and underscores the advancements in understanding diseases, patient care, and treatment outcomes over time. It also implies a certain degree of resilience among patients facing these historical treatments.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And so we shall tell the workings (or the procedures) of it, according to what the ancients did (referring to sharing knowledge based on historical practices). In a scholarly context, this sentence could be interpreted as an intentional act of preserving and recounting traditional medical wisdom and techniques that were in practice during earlier centuries. It emphasizes the continuity of knowledge through time, allowing current practitioners to learn from past experiences for improved patient care.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It requires that you position the malady upon one side of it (seeking to maintain a position for their joints). This phrase seems to imply an instruction related to reposition. The original text could be interpreted as follows:
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	To the entire surface close to the vein, and the skin of the masters, and stretch it out.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	Then cut into a deep groove where the vessels are exposed, as long as they remain uncovered.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	And then scrape from each section as we have mentioned in the extraction of arteries that are located within the head;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then insert an awl or if it has a double thread, and tie it to the first joint where the blood is coming, and then to the other joint.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then cut evenly in length according to the size of the nails, and remove the moldy ones;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as we do in other cases or if there is bleeding, but no vein that obstructs one of the arteries.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	Because by this there does not come harm, and if blood is coming from all the vessels, it must be drained from every vessel.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	But the artery does not lose its flow because of the incisions into the vessels, and it doesn't help to stretch them further;
de la routure dou syfac	from the routine of surgery
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The relief of this condition is by the section that comes from it or its extension to the abdomen in the area of the groins, for so the intestines descend away from the usual path towards one of the arteries;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	And this procedure is either by the section or its extension, and these ways of moving it come from various reasons: either through percussion, jumping, shouting, lifting weights on straps, and similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the signs that it is about this extension of the section are that it occurs sparingly and briefly over a long period, and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And it is also the incision towards the perforum, because afterward the section presses on the intestine;
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section called subcinguinus, which brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and various appearances in the area near the skin, under the skin, due to the exit from the intestines and the heart's detachment from the groin.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And there has never been a case where it was accompanied by the intestines, and it is retained in the body, causing great suffering to the patient, especially when compressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments for fear, since they cannot be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of this treatment is that you command or instruct the patient to retract the intestines into their hand at the wound site, if they can manage.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then pressed upon his neck between your hands, and raise the heels.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then is put on top, and covers all the skin of both sides.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then is placed between the thighs according to what you have learned for opening the wound, and so it allows him to come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrapes the groin where the skin of the thighs is, as long as the white spermatic cord is exposed from all parts.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	then you put your finger in such a way that teaches the cord, which is between the white spermatic cord under the thighs, and between the second spermatic cord.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and those behind the thighs, and between the second spermatic cord; and holds his right hand inside the protective cover of the cords above your left hand, and raises the thigh towards its center.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and you command the physician to extend the thigh upward, and loosen what is behind it.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and you ask if there is an intestine wrapped around or a white spermatic cord tightly wound, and if you do not remove anything, then you put it in the abdomen.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	then take an awl or it has a thick thread made of x threads, and place it in the back part of the spermatic cord, which is after the skin of the thighs; below the waist, and cover the armpits with the threads until there are 4 threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	then you assemble them one on top of the other in a cross-like manner and tie the spermatic cord we have mentioned which is under the thigh skin with a strong knot of ii parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the armpits with threads and tie them in a knot of ii parts so that no one who pulls it cannot open their wound.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and set the knot accordingly to the first long ii parts, and after these ii parts let the spermatic cord which is under the thighs' protective cover be greatly compressed.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and after this rounding as the patient carries it; then cover in the area under the thighs' skin, so that the cord can be moved without pain, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	and smooth cloth is put on wounds, and then set up the knot that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	After oursainte despei desormainte de l'entieres nous duoil siens.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	(sesure of itaure.comme il. iax:lyninage. Aeslaura. Androma : The:entire tolere. Allongue decai:sacarecte:tract aille, and sheure lesse.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	Hernia carnosus.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this manner I have never seen anyone attempt the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old ones said that it is made so as in this manner [of treatment], by binding them together, after cutting off their roots somewhat loosely.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cover me with it, and treat the abscess of this wound, as long as the nails are causing pain; and do so as we have described, until it is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	There has never been a time when the abscess bursts open, as we have said, and it appears; nor does any part of the bowels tear apart, and if there is such an occurrence, it's rare, and all cases are brought back.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And in this regard, if there is too much delay, it is thought that the wound or sophac (syphilis) will appear, as long as parts of the bowels tear.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this occurs with the extension of that sophac which is within abscesses, as we have said, for it extends and becomes softened, then bursts open.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And this treatment is done by cautery, as we have said before; and never has been curative by iron in this manner.
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	And it is that the painful swelling appears on his back between your hands, then cover the part of the enlarged abscess according to its size, about three fingers' length.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	And then extract the sophac that is inside the skin, which has been underneomed (covered), and take its remnants and place them on the surface of the appearing sophac.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And press the point on the stomach where the three fingers' lengths of the appearing sophac are above the remnant, and count them both.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then extract the main part of the remnant, and do not cover the sophac or extend it further, as I have shown you in the treatment of the intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then treat the wounds. And when you cover them, if they remain moist and cure the wound, so long as it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	Cun:ilte cest ceulte de parler du lou maudeur les peice devises cete touns :
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	nneuf. Enjoule laissat'sain thewite: Ient (https://www.:rne.tête, etiage ici'souled ofteacher's. Sentence. Tejac. Ilitse. Itunes.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times are the sheaths of veins softened in some people, because the places where they are inside are moistened, and it is easy to see; and it is necessary that when you want to cure them, you make the patient lie on his back, and coat the softer skin which is on the natural skin; then take two fingers under one cover, and if you see any superfluous softness in those two covers or three firmly sewn ones; then insert between the covers, and treat it as with other wounds until he is well.
dou chastrement	First off, please note that this line appears to be a fragment from an Old French medical text, likely referring to "chastectomy." Since it's not complete for translation purposes, the phrase provided in English would be:
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The act of castration is mentioned in our laws and for that reason I would prefer not to discuss it here in this book; and there are two ways: one is when the butcher responds to a question about the surgery, and with the other, because we have often practiced castration on various animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and deer and others. I say therefore that castration is done according to these two methods: either by attraction or by incision. In the one where we perform by attraction, we place the animal in warm water until its veins are softened and remain so; then with your hand, touch them as long as they return to normal and you no longer feel any pain. Regarding castration by cutting: it must be that you shave the animal, pressing the skin of the testicles with your left hand, tie the suspensory ligament, and coat each scrotum with one flap at a time after thoroughly cleaning them; and this method of castration is different from the attraction method because by attraction there may still be some residual pain in the groin area and its subtletinaside which affects the inguinal ligaments, but then heal the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphroditism is a condition where an individual possesses both male and female reproductive organs. In historical medical texts like these Old French manuscripts from the 12th-13th centuries, treatment for such conditions was not well understood or documented as modern science had yet to evolve. The treatments mentioned would likely involve various traditional remedies which might have been based on superstition rather than empirical evidence. However, in contemporary contexts, hermaphroditism is now known medically as intersexuality and is approached with a greater understanding of the complex biology involved.
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphroditism is described in two ways: one where the testicles are open and look like a female figure with hair or sometimes it leaks urine; the other way involves women, who have their penis positioned similarly to a forked stick and testes. The treatment of the body and soul for hermaphrodites, according to this text, is as follows: you coat all the areas in contact together like they are with other wounds, and care for them as one would treat other injuries; in the second way, where urine leaks from their testes without a cure. This reflects historical misunderstandings of intersex conditions that were approached very differently than we understand these days, focusing more on symptomatic relief rather than comprehensive medical understanding or treatment plans.
de la tentigene	The term "tenting" in this context seems to be a misinterpretation of the Old French word "taiment," which refers to tenderninas. Tendinitis is an inflammation of the tendons, typically due to overuse or injury. In medieval medicine, treatments for such conditions would have likely been rudimentary and based on herbs, poultices, rest, and prayers as they had limited knowledge about the human body's physiology. If one were to describe a treatment plan for tendinitis in this period: por cestroient la maniere desenginers, et de biau chastrement, en .iiij. char conveillance.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	narexent-related to theitures (theur: Theses, and itcharmoreiage. 10ire accustomiquase frome;dose isse inappiece:ceteric, sosecreaseveille andcause decade, as thefysecre: httpsinge:
de erratique	Of erratic dislocation
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Erratic dislocation if it is neither perceived nor small; and whether natural or caused by disease that has come to it; or accidental, due to subtle or unbearable strain, made in the womb or elsewhere, so that conception and childbirth occur; and knowledge of this depends on customary law. If there is a significant strain present, they appear either near each other by chance or opposed: gather together your two fingers as an index, have the woman's back arched with her legs spread out, then form the points until the subtle strain subsides and overcomes the resistance; then put linen cloth under her abdomen, ensuring she is comfortable at home every day so that it does not heal. And if the strain is hard and evident, you must wrap a wad of cotton like a small mop with spun flax thread around it to prevent healing; then treat for a long time, and bind a wide linen tent over it; and cure other curing until it becomes healthy. And when an abortion occurs in the womb, you must wrap according to this manner, unless there are entangled umbilical cords. For a cord that is tangled in the uterus should not be touched with iron.
des emorroides	Hemorrhoids are swollen veins in the rectum and anus that can cause pain, itching, and bleeding during bowel movements. They may develop due to straining during defecation, obesity, pregnancy, chronic diarrhea or constipation, anal intercourse, aging, or a lack of fiber in the diet. Treatment options include lifestyle changes like increased dietary fiber and fluid intake, topical medications to reduce swelling and discomfort, minimally invasive procedures such as rubber band ligation or sclerotherapy for more severe cases, and surgery if conservative treatments fail. Prevention strategies include regular exercise, a high-fiber diet, adequate hydration, and avoiding prolonged sitting.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	desangles. Sienselies ci lainclent de la terre ceu paroles aures oun "sangelis :" :irol. AIDA :anfaire in-2eslaterre lesparleres itali. Theire fern .i.
des apostemes de la marris	Of fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	There are many ways to incise the groin, such as chancre, venereal herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and inguinal lymphangioma; and among them, let me mention surgical lancing in the groin, which is not caused by a blow to the back of the neck. Therefore, do not be afraid but allow it to heal until the pain subsides; then place the patient on an elevated surface, with two small supports underneits legs so that they can lean on their hands and spread out their knees; and extend the fingers well around the wound, covering it with a clean cloth or green ointment; placing the dressing over the groin area and along the incision line, either moistened in water or oil. Then after two weeks of treatment with enemas and honey baths, as we have said in this chapter, so that it heals well; and sometimes lift up the groin and wound by flushing with warm water and herbal infusions; then resume the enema treatments.
de l’enfantement	During childbirth, various complications may arise that require medical intervention, such as shoulder dystocia or breech presentation, which can be challenging for both the mother and baby's health. It is essential to have a skilled obstetric team ready to manage these situations effectively.
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	ceinture duel. Siens, et siens desir. Seigneur laisser apeut faire comestil. Cepute malice. Mostreleast French: au monde estrivel French, itel. mostrafeince mostrelate ilkiches develle. Ipsum.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes on his head naturally, and the woman gives birth in pain, and the strength of man is weakened, so it should sit upon a chair, or women hold him; and let its nature be changed into oil or fenugreek, and then pour the baby between his legs where this small cavity is formed:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And cut the second incision, and coat it until the moisture is removed from the wound; and press the woman's abdomen so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must treat the mother with fenugreek mucilage mixed with sesame oil for an hour. Now, if the two hands come out strongly, then you must lightly pull them back and forth repeatedly; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair, lift her legs up high, remove the chair from the ground, and scold the woman so that she does not defecate upon standing up. And if the hands do not enter, and the child dies, then you must grasp his hands with the tool placed before it, extract the infant, and pull them equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	from the exit of the child at its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes out at his feet, then he must be thrown upward;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	And then twist and twist repeatedly, as long as he remains level;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then pull down his legs and stretch them gently and repeatedly;
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can he just jump up immediately, if commanded to pull down his legs and stretch them gently and repeatedly?
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If he jumps up, if God wills it;
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he does not jump as we have said before, then twist and twist repeatedly until it is in a natural state;
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For since it is pulled repeatedly;
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come as we have said, take musk and oil of hellebore, and melted resin, and grind all in one mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and apply the mixture to the woman's skin inside and out.
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then it should remain moist until above the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when it is moistened above, he makes a mirror of myrrh and places it there, and leaves it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then it should be placed on a pillow, then he makes her exhale and keep her mouth closed and nostrils, and press gently the belly because his child is now jumping;
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the issue (birth) of the child on his thighs;
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, he puts his hands slightly and slightly on it;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then it is swaddled on its neck, and the legs are hanging downwards, and he lays it beside a bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and bends her hands slightly, and then he presses the hand on her belly, and holds back her legs, until she is fully prepared inwardly;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not jump, he takes his legs and makes them straight, then he stretches the belly upward, and pushes with both hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and sees the child briefly, and commands the woman to make her breathe until the baby cries.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the issue of the child who comes out holding a hand;
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	commandement fait il est veincisme lixion:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If one cannot bring it back, let the woman rise up, and go.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, then make her lie down on a bed, and spread out her legs.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then prepare the muscle that I have told you about;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, and study the return of the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And we assess the child according to natural shape, and make her forcefully exhale, commanding her to do so until the child expels its fluids;
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the child's neck, stretching out its hands, and turning his face towards his mother;
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I hope the ball strengthens her hand, then turn it a little and a little, and make her lightly move;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is equalized, if he puts on the natural and firm muscles of the hand above it, as we have said, then he commands her to move a little and a little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	And when you have done this, if it fits well on a certain seat, and he commands that she be prepared for it; and then it bursts forth.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this manner to the second part of everything.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	As long as the wet is drained in this manner to the second part of all things, so that the second part becomes one again.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if the child's cries are heard at his face and chest, so that it is not restrained from crying, let him die.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then put the child to rest wherever you have placed it, and command the woman that she never allows it.
adonques si istra legierement.	And so it shall be straitened quickly.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the issues of twins.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	gachirge.tantisse apeastècte si peuccle convexse. Thatchelle.gemaine. Sententice:lere,ounde leurscelet ifnesteirez feasceaucesse tille
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are grasped by something, and no longer live, if they have no name.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they multiply, and are depleted by the force which destroys them, which is tied to thirst.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And no one naturally emerges like this from us all, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come out croaking, as we have said in our treatment, and it is his subtle balm that works swiftly and lightly on what it does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And then it works as if moving to salute (health).
de plusors enfans	in many children.
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	There are no such formations in the marl or clay (i.e., naturally occurring bodies of stone), and they are all formed into a shape similar to that of an infant by the measurement of its size and beauty—presumably referring to gemstones or mineral formations that resemble young children due to their small, rounded shapes.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	And it covers all that, for by chance it often appears as such—presumably referring to the effectiveness of this "subtle balm" or treatment across various cases. This line implies an overall positive impact and adaptability of the intervention being discussed, suggesting its potential broad application in different medical situations, based on observational outcomes.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	If it works accordingly, as it is intended.
de l’enfant mort	from the child dead.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman of the dead child or belly, as I have said in the section on division, and no discharge comes forth, then you are compelled to labor with your hands.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	And it is necessary that you know if the woman has sound virtue and does not have any accident or fear of death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	And it is necessary that the woman be supine on her back, and her shoulders inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And the minister gives her a cold bath, or she lies in bed so that she is not treated with the drawing out of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then you rub the woman's mouth with a mixture of wet marshmallow and althea herb and flaxseed seed, then you anoint her hands with these oils and herbs.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then apply the mixture lightly to the woman's belly, then take one or two points where it is possible.
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	And make sure that the child appears so as to draw out from his head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	And pierce the points in her hair or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or at the corners of the face.
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	And if he has a belly button there, then pierce it or stitch and make his sides round.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is necessary that you tinge the point with his right hand, and put the corruption between your left hand's fingers, and anoint all of your hands lightly, and pierce any one of these points we have mentioned while he turns around.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And it is the shape of the point:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then pierce another point if you have experience in it so that the extraction remains equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then move it equally from one side to the other so that it can come out, and hold the point's teeth so that they are kept in position as this form is.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if it remains partly, then anoint your hands with the oil and put it in that part, and pull out the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there remains a point, then place this one or more higher and do it so that it comes out all the way through.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand goes in front of the other, and he cannot return for the compression.
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	It is necessary that you wrap it up in a cloth so that it comes out completely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	Then tie the band at the base of the plant or on the belly, and so it is necessary that you do this with both hands and in two places.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child's shoulder is large and it is drawn outward or if there is water accumulated in it.
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	It is necessary that you insert the spinbarb between your fingers and pull out the head and remove the water.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or to the instrument called "almold," which comes along with its form, as it is after that of this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And then at that time, I will give the child natural birth with it great pain;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	s:duregacherumescribe apewarmentacme it’s;revelve tocaste:screatime:5en:en:00freshivexseverrepresents:tique. Theile:naglesse itapeille,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	And if the shoulder joint jumps up and he restrains it, so that it is not broken, until the moisture or whatever issue has subsided.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	And if it cannot come out, then you must cut it into pieces with whatever means available to you.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is inflamed in the abdomen or on the ribs, then it must be pierced as long as the dampness persists there.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if there is an abscess under his joints, then it attracts lightly and the attention to its mouth from the mass of flesh is quickly drawn.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is entrenched in the abdomen or at the navel, then it must be extracted using one sheet wrapped around your hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	And make an incision in the abdomen or at the navel, as long as the dampness is present there.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	And if other limbs are fractured and they continue to move.
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	If the ball is thrust from its mass of flesh, and it pierces right through to the mouth of the mass.
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	Then he inserts one or two needles, and drives them in.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	And if the opening of the mass is retracted by pressing which came in there, then no additional work is required.
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	However, it must be provided with moist and fatty substances;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And the place where the substance is applied must be thoroughly cleansed, and observe watery softening agents and lubricants.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the abscess is on his side, and you can place it there similarly, and prepare that which we have described for a living child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if there is no hope, then let his limb be cut into parts, and not leave anything of the second one.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, instruct him what we have said in our previous comments about arrows that come into the flesh.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if blood flows from the wound comes, then let it be stopped by an irrigation method, and he will be instructed on other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in her womb where an infant had been wounded, and then consulted one above it, and removed the other fetuses.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long it came an abscess in the ulcer, and swelled so much that it burst open, and began with great severity.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went to call for treatment and thought long about it, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed it on a strong attracting instrument, and from it came an bone, and after some years another one appeared.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was mistaken much because there were no bones to the belly (body).
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it might be some of the bones from a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I tore open the wound, using bones from my hands, until the woman reached her best state of recovery.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and after some time the woman lived for a little while, but then she was two years old again in her deathbed.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I do not recall this chapter being written because, whenever a master performs an extraordinary technique, they know how to apply it properly.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	two times return her womb to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	And then comes the pressure point, and with these knees of him; and he touches them allot.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	itesuccurre:
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	And let his mouth be full. I. it should have a wide space, and the margin of trees. It must be long as half a palm.
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And in addition to these lengths being joined together, which are firmly connected by half a palm long or slightly more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	And this joining is put into the mouth of the mare when we turn her horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter, is made of fir or box wood, according to the appearance of the tongs.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	And for these joining lengths, they should be one and a half palms long, and wide enough; as you can see.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	And when you open the mare with all the instrument, it should sit on a ladder for her legs to be stretched out.
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	Then put these joining lengths together in the mare, and hold the head of the instrument between her claws.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hand on the instrument, just as you have made the tongs evenly, according to the quantity that you see is opening the mare's mouth enough for her to want it.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all turned inside out and has various shapes; and the more times the mare stands up for it, the harder the work becomes, and the higher the standing required for its quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not make the instrument yourself because their needs cannot be ignored.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second child is retained at birth, it must be commanded to retain her womb, and then she stretches out, and you restrain your hands on her mouth and neck.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she jumps up for that, it's okay.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If that's not the case, take a pot and make a piercing or cup-like hole, and put herbs that can open up the mare's mouth like chamomile, rue, anise, marshmallow, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs, or none of them, should be boiled in water over the fire; then place one end of the pot or piercing into the mare's mouth and the other on its head.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	And let the smoke rise within the mare as much as it can; then she stretniess up as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second child jumps up quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if after this treatment she remains unaffected, and is not weakened as commanded by the barber, let her wet her left hand in either salve or animal fat, and then put it back to normal.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And if she finds the second one; and when she has found it, let her gently pull and stretch it little by little so that the bruise does not worsen during extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	But it must move slightly to the right and left, then pull it off if it becomes loose. If it comes away naturally.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the bruise of the wound is deep-seated, as we have said, there should be massage and infusion with medicinal plants.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	And if she is not of all that we have said, let her be careful in pulling off.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	But it contains what is in the mouth of the bruise, let you apply to the inner side of the woman's cheek, then give her anointing cathartic enema.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If she takes it in her mouth and puts it back if necessary, but anyway, whenever she comes to a bad smell in the stomach and head, let her bleed the malady.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Then it is said that there should be medicinal infusions available for such cases: none of the former have ever tried smoking chives and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument for smoking the woman has to hold flowers and the second one if this is it:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is like to be similar to a burn, and place under the skin subtly, and large joints over the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it should be the smoking over coal and the scab until it is gone, then start another one.
de percier lou fondement	of assessing the foundations
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	And there are children born who do not have this foundation perceived, but rather subtle signs and facets:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	But it must be said that the nurse sees those subtle signs in her charge's due care, and she does not see such an acute painful spot, and let the dislocation heal so that it is not touched.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place on a thin vein with oil and water, then heal it until it is sound.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not recur, place or pierce a small hole in the flesh and let his hands heal for several days, until he is able to go to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there is no occasion for this healing of wounds or incision; it must cover the healed area if done so: if you care for it as we have said about piercing a small hole in the flesh.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fundamental fistula (Note: "fistule" is more commonly used today in medical contexts to describe a small passage within tissue that connects two spaces, which might not be exactly equivalent to an incision but can imply similar concepts of pathology in this historical text.)
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that arise from the foundation are nodal, and larger than those arising near the foundation or in a distance of two inches (Note: "fondement" is interpreted here to mean originating point; "nodal" refers to nodes which may be associated with inflammation or abnormality; "groissor" translates roughly to larger, indicating size comparison.)
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If there is one or more fistulas; and when the nodal one is ancient, then operate on it, and evacuate blood from a swollen area or by slight movement (Note: "fistule" remains consistent with previous translations. "moistor awouse blainche" refers to pressing a swollen part of the body; "subtilz bowe" could be interpreted as subtle movements possibly related to repositioning during surgical intervention.)
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And nevertheless, there are no such persistent fistulas; and they have been found that it is called excretion or vomitings, and sometimes towards them. (Note: "saut" likely refers to the passage of air from the nose during breathing (modes) in medieval times: and dure develle desceunite en leu ence tredement des ceufat leser et deffort augeuns, et il nef de liceul.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate the bladder, and also part of the vein; and they reach the junction of the thigh, and also some of the knee joints.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And in this case we know there is a fistula at the foundation and not elsewhere.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And do you burn your index finger or foundation, and insert a thin needle or iron rod into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is twisting, when I insert a thin thread or hair (horsehair), as long as you feel the thread or hair on your limb.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	And if you do not feel it, and there is no opening of excretion or windiness or emptiness, as we have said before.
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	You know that it does not pierce; when the treatment is done.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or the urethra tract, and when it leaks urine, and cannot be cured with medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is perceived at the knee joint, then the thread comes back to the limb;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no twisting and the formation of pain, then it becomes swollen, and neither medicine nor surgery helps with ointment.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in these persistent fistulas there is no remedy because of the work involved and the vainness of those who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In that which is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope for healing by iron, as I have experienced.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And the maladies press between your hands on his back; and the limbs bend his knees up to their hinges, and his hips are inclined towards his abdomen.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then insert a thin thread or cloth if there is twisting, as long as you know where the thread comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the maladies feel on his foundation, it requires that you burn your index finger.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	If the thread feels it has pierced; and whether you feel between your limb the sheath or the cord, as long as you know that it is persistent.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if there is no work on her to heal.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	We know that it can be well-healed in some cases, but this happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And the help that it does give, as we have said before, when he uses the thin cautery according to the width of the fistula.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	And he burns it all in the fistula, as long as it swells away from the foundation; and does this one or two times, as long as you know that these flaws are removed, which seem like a feather quill.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	And then the treatment with smoked threads, as long as those flaws are oozing, and the treatment of healing oil anointed thread and sealing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is in that state then it is well-healed. Otherwise, such a thing cannot be healed.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if the thread is there, and between your index finger and the covering of thick cord or sheath, and you see the fistula that draws the coverture.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	. Il'sans lesmeer: ions à ceke, so,e thecaustriakie. Ceu. Letheauesque:entence. I'surea :i before ite.cause acheat, anderaisenteface ofereaux:
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	And it will be delivered to him, and he will take it; then he shall remove those faults which seem like a bird's feather quill, and not retain them anymore.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound does not heal on its own, and cuts between you and the world, whether it is treated with fire or water treatment.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cautery, it involves several actions: namely, the striking of these joints, and the drainage of blood, and the removal of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then the treatment of swollen skin with bear's grease or mashed hay continues until it flattens out, and pressure is applied to those joints.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then it heals the wounds caused by hot irons in a hard manner, and the medicines are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it heals and does not recur again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if an abscess appears near the foundation, and is away from its support beams, then you should pull out the nails or foundations, and seek counsel.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tent, and it is made of canvas or leather or cloths, then it needs to be pierced, as there are only scars and traces left by wounds and injuries, through the administration of one of these three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	Or you may cauterize it as we have mentioned, or you may pierce its foundation directly, or if you place tent and treat it as first described.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not make too many piercings, that you may not cover the structure holding the foundation, but rather seek to heal it as desired.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then you may treat it, as we have said.
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	perhaps it will heal, or if you remove the covering and expose her again to treatment near the foundation, or by tent or some other pointed instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then you must treat that faulty part which is within the wound, as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then study how to restore the wound and keep the abscess in its lateral part near the foundation: if it is less troublesome for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And no time should they be fashioned like this: and when you stretch the tent over the abscess, and it is on top of the leather.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	If a tent takes position on the head according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he binds with a twisted thread along it, and places the tent all around the opening while it is on the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If she is Persian at the margin of that foundation within, then extract the thread from that pierced place so as to bind your base.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and remove the head of the thread, and gather the twisted threads together, and bind them to each other, and leave it for a day or two.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and the binding does not loosen at any time while the thread holds together these pieces that are between two which press on each other.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then heals the wound until it is healed and cleaned up.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the opening does not pierce, then make a puncture in all possible ways that you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For he does not need to do any covering over the piercing if it is not too deep, and then heals it, as we have said, until it is cleaned up.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spinous process which they make the opening if it is very large and in one piece and divided;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other hand, for this reason they do not make such an opening if it does not need to be made at all, as you can see here.
des emorroydes	from bloodletting
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Bloodlettings are according to these two methods: they are inside the foundation as well as like fine grains of resin, and if there is small or large blood, in that case it becomes raw flesh.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	And if there is one or more of them, and they are removed from the foundation and the base of the foundation; but those which have little moisture in them.
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	And then immediately afterward some small amount of yellow or blood, and they are the color of a shield.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment of those which are inside the foundation, because you instruct the patient that he should expel them to let the cavities become empty, as long as the foundations still have moisture in them, and then they appear.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hurry up, and pierce it with tongs, or pinch it at your angle, then bind it in its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if the patient cannot hold them with his moisture, then take them with a sheet, or a cotton cloth, or a piece of camlet fabric.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and extract them from your place, then bind them, and apply hot powders that are on the surface of the caustic needle.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you can cauterize them as it is said in the treatise of cautery, then heal them with other treatments until they are cleaned up.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot come out, then cleanse the patient with an abrasive enema to wash that which is or foundation, so that it can be expelled openly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	and if the maladies are not pronounced, and if the thread has become part of the foundation, then it is a light treatment.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and bind them with your linen or tongs, and bind them, then heal it as we have said, until it is cleaned up, and that the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	:c'sesle cest lait le parler in theajustre char: The French kiel.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And if it is wide; and hold the wire firmly, then unwind the thread, and draw out the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one for excess blood in the wound.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place a damp cloth or oil-soaked paper on the foundation. ... and commands the patient to lie down there;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let them cry for as long as they wish ... and when they have healed, carry out the cleaning and other treatments until they are healthy again.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Two days or foundation (referring to the recovery period based on the established medical treatment plan)
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often times it happens suddenly within the intestines ... and due to natural constraints, when the illness is old and medicine cannot help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is essential that you reapply the plaster or cover your wound with its skin layer above, which does not allow for moisture.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then carry out the treatment so long as necessary ...
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if it does not harden, if the removal must be more forceful than before, as long as he remains somewhat healthy, and you scrape off ...
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And continue treatment until fully recovered ...
dou fremit	Fremitance (female cousin) - This is not directly related to medieval medicine; it seems like an unrelated term, possibly denoting female cousins in old family records or genealogies that were often used to trace lineage and inheritance. However, this does not pertain to the historical analysis requested on bloodletting in the 12th-13th centuries.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	There comes a small deformity before the heart, and it causes much suffering.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And there is never a cold flame in the fever, and it feels like his body is trembling as if dead, and it affects all parts of the body more than others, particularly the hands.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is to take a feather of a goose or a large vulture's quill, and place it on the trembling, so that the purple circles are entirely covered by it.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand all around the feather as much as you can to cover the trembling completely, and place it in the wound, and hold back the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it done with a feather of hair or iron according to this form, and is subtle and hidden beneath:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Not perceiving it at all to hold onto the two, and pressing them tightly, if you see fit, then cauterize the trembling as it is in front or by the fire of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	from the form of an enema (or treatment)
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never made an enema of silver or arrows, or melted hair or small and large stones according to the manner in which they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	That is how it is done in the treatment of children who are weak and suffering, these are small ones.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of an enema small or great if it is above wide, or the abdomen is tied in this manner: (or as described)
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and it has an obstruction or the abdomen is tied as you see fit, and the dislocation is felt inside; and on one side of the ribs numbered I., and in the other side number II. (or according to this description)
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	or the abdomen is tied with medicines from a best's bladder or parchment paper and it is felt throughout all small points.
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and in each rib number I., there must be space, then a strong cord of thread is placed in these ribs number I.; either X or almost around it, and assemble the abdomen as if it were a goat. (or according to this method)
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, if there are knots on the instrument in front with a strong thread, then enema; it is the shape of a circle (or according to this technique)
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And the medicine is neither too hot nor too cold, and the top of the enema is covered with oil or honey or something similar, then it is gently poured. (or as prescribed)
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	then the physician squeezes his two hands together while it is all seen, and extracts the enema, and lifts up the weakened legs to its position. (or according to this procedure)
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if it is drawn out as much as possible, and if it sleeps all night long, then it gives more aid. (or according to this treatment)
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	lameurgeu ̃nde raphiere thecurexitheuxtiflessevelsciusleveiement:ult ifissoignes ieuuelastanime dehuntifles to l'angrexentemouver a la commnatifs whenprojantitisebleuises
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hernia is the foundation or incision, then it can also be a gentle cleansing as in one child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And it is the form of the gentle cleansing as in such a way that the skin should be restrained:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division of wound care; or you will say the treatments for hands and medicine, according to completion. (Note: This line refers to a discussion on how to categorize and discuss medical practices which might be found in historical texts dealing with the organization of knowledge.)
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various depending on what they are made of and according to the ways or the manner in which they were made. (Note: This line suggests a classification approach to different types of wounds based on their characteristics.)
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things made in this manner are by movement of stone, and cutting with sword or cutter, or thrusting a spear or force or similar things; (Note: This line refers to the various methods that could be used to inflict wounds, some likely being outdated medical practices from historical context.)
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	Or, as for the type of wounds made on different parts of the body, such as those that hurt at the neck, or head, or arm, or belly, and similar limbs; (Note: This line seems to be outlining examples of locations where injuries might occur in a patient' Written by Tracy A. Leong | November 20, 2019
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	nature ape :cause.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound occurs or the bone is not crushed, take care if it's due to piercing or similar actions, and the skin is all torn apart and the wound is large.
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	And you doubt slightly about the incision: if it hurts a little at first mainly, and if there is blood from the wound soon after, then it heals more on the head side than the lower part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And avoid excessive intake of wine and large meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if it does not heal, if his flesh is reduced in size, and he should abstain from drinking wine, meat, or cheese.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And apply on the wound if it is pierced open, bandage it with linen soaked in oil or wet swabs of spirits.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there is no piercing wound, if it's fresh and has not been affected by the air or dust, then apply it directly to the wound with a small amount of powder.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the arrow has been moved within it, apply some ointments to it so long as it remains sound.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that from sword-cutting or similar incidents, and the lips cannot close due to swelling (tent), then assemble them with a covering (costure). As I will say in cases of abdominal injuries (plaies dou ventre) caused by clothing (la costure), use a covering.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is discovered in the bone and infected (pent), if it only holds together slightly (a peu), then apply pressure to it. Then treat the wound with medication and restore the firmness of skin-covered body parts (le char dure en leu de cuir).
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And instruct the patient to eat large meats if you have tried and tested bread cooked (testes et froment cuit), as well as poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if the skin is crumpy and itchers:
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	les methate thexent. From:2ndmenture of theu's aillement xen ittears. Andre. Amen frommeasure thefaire deit.tractio fromage aintounleague.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not benefit him, then he is cauterized.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you should put this powder on so that the arrow has moved away.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the way for the powder is: take incense a part; blood of a dragon .ii parts; live coal .iii parts, and mix it subtly.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	And apply it to the wound, and then bind it tightly until it heals well and joins with all its flesh.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And then it should be well left alone, and allow for separation if it does not swell; because one does not remove the medicine until she is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never made of coal alone, when one does not have incense or the blood of a dragon, but that the arrow has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arrow has moved the wound, immediately it was therein, that no one applies this powder to it.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	But apply to it some digestible ointments or flour made of barley boiled with water and honey, until the wound begins to heal.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heals from other treatments until it is completely healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, then you apply gentle pinchings.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And I will tell you about it after bone breaks.
de la plaie dou col	from the wound in the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes in the neck or if it is at the junction of two vertebrae and there is no difference between them, but the fracture occurs in the neck or the blood vessel is pierced.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the fractures, and to not apply any other constraint on them, for they withdraw.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	ils aesme dele lai ciens: "develle cunichel. ici ilse unire enimensure ia veins fromage, theile.comence.cursa sas ousere. le120s espace devis itent'sre a lor aresent.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but let the medicine be so that as water softens it with gentle heat, and mix with oil roses, and also soften it with gentle heat.
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other stones of its kind according to this method, and wet ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind and tie it with bandages, until he becomes sound.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep-seated, filled with dirt and mud, pierce it lower;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the arrow is stuck, drawing out blood comes, then draw it out, lick it, and according to the art of cautery, treat it.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if a thorn is stuck in the throat or causes pain, then guard him carefully, for otherwise the meat will come.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	if it causes pain on the throat's neck, and do not touch the throat but restore it according to its natural form.
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	then let the bruise heal without interruption for many days, and treat it with various ointments until he is sound.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has impressed into bone, pierce it;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are pieces of bone, pierce them all with spears, those that you cannot have, and let the wound heal as much as possible.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and make dislocation and alignment loose.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder I mentioned before.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has an opening (fistula), then treat it as I have described to you in this chapter'ner (sense of "chapter") from my treatise.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from the wound caused by a lance or cutlery (implements like knives and daggers)
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it's from a lance or cutlery and the wound is deep-seated, then look at the wound for signs of air embolism (air bubbles) in its veins, so that you can determine if the wound is deadly.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it's not deep-seated, and the wound is fresh all over its flesh, then do not put on the powder in the first hour nor bind it with bandages that don't allow blood to flow out from the wound.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and wash in the body, and let the malady run its course.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I apply attractive oil and bind it twice a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	but if you have no oil, then put dry cloths soaked with medicinal saliva on the sharp points:
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	andes parolade seilleur, et siens a l'arme desuin:
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	Ipsum. Andromastre.  ione thexent, se cestent.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see the bone's positioning, you know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat this kind of wounds and other treatments until he has recovered completely.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	And if she cannot heal, and perform the work, then you will know that there is an abscess. If the treatment is as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword cut or knife wound, and it is simple, or worse on the back, then you will know what treatment to do next.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	If it is large in size, apply cautery; if small, powder; and if embedded in bone or with fragments, dress the wound accordingly, and treat any festering furrows if they are present.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if they are not festering, let the wound heal naturally, and lessen any extraction efforts.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds and injuries on other limbs, we judge them in a manner similar to what we have previously discussed.
dou derrompement dou ventre	double fracture, double wound
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The fractures of the abdomen are large and varied, both great and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	of great wound the intestines never escape, nor those of the intestines, due to the intrusion of contents.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the cautery is more troublesome, and there has never been a time when even the small wound was worse than the large one;
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because it helps to pinch back the intestines into place, but if they are pinned down repeatedly;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestines swell almost immediately at feeling pressure, if they are pinned down again;
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and because it is more serious than others, for this reason the intestines are moved back to their place that they weren't in;
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And you will know that the treatment for abdominal wounds is according to four methods:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the four cauteries commonly used in treating abdominal wounds;
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the cautery for other wounds, and the other common treatments are similar to those of other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And in any case they are more proper with the dressing on the belly, and I will say one thing and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I said that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines has entered.
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	And a sharp object is for putting it back, this is done by one of its methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	Or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	Or because the intestines are inflamed by cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, treat the inflammation thusly:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	Moisten one sponge or such a cloth with slightly warm water only.
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	Or you cook in boiling water and vinegar and spice.
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And raise the intestines so that they have inflamed completely;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And never made such restrictive efforts, and is more suitable for relaxation to deflate.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the inflammation departing, gently wash and warm or heat the intestines and ills.
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	For by this, the entry is lightened of many things;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if it cannot enter, make a slight incision with the appropriate instrument to remove the accumulations;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	And the first remedy is more suitable than surgery;
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that we must not cut it with great necessity,
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and it is for the dividing wounds;
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	If it cuts deeply inside the womb and does not expel, then its form becomes:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump around.
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	If it is reset according to its natural place in its own proper position.
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	If you can do so, because this matters greatly.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is wide and it is in the area of the belly.
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	It implies that you must have the patient lie on their back.
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	And raise its legs higher than its head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	And if it is in the area of the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	The instruction here is to raise the head and pelvis higher than other parts in the treatment of dislocation, which reflects a medieval approach to managing joint dislocations. During the 12th-13th centuries, when anatomical knowledge was rudimentary compared to today's standards, practitioners relied on physical manipulation and positioning to alleviate symptoms or correct injuries such as dislocation. By elevating certain body parts above others, they aimed to reduce strain on the affected joint and potentially aid in its realignment. This method would have been part of a broader set of practices that included manual therapy techniques like manipulation and traction.
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	The text here refers to the abdomen being situated within one of its two halves, possibly alluding to a condition where inflammation or injury is localized in either the upper or lower portion of the belly area during medieval times. In modern terms, this could indicate that dislocation and other injuries were treated by segmenting the body into quadrants for more precise assessment and care. This approach allowed practitioners to target specific areas without extensive knowledge of underlying structures but was based on observable symptoms and anatomical landmarks.
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	The phrase implies an agreement that one side (navré) should be elevated above the other, likely referring to treating conditions where there is a noticeable difference in swelling or pain between two sides of the body. This asymmetry could indicate localized injuries such as hemorrhages or inflammations like those caused by dislocations or joint issues prevalent during medieval times when precise diagnostics and treatments were limited to physical examination and observation. The treatment aimed at elevating one side over the other was intended to alleviate symptoms, reduce swelling, and possibly assist in realigning the body's structures based on observable differences between the affected areas.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	This statement suggests that it is essential to provide the treatment methods discussed here for large and small injuries, which would include various wound management techniques from medieval times. These could range from basic cleaning and dressing of open wounds to more complex procedures like setting dislocations or treating fractures without advanced imaging technologies. The mention of both large and small injuries indicates the wide scope of medieval medical practices, which often required improvisation based on available resources while focusing on restoring function and minimizing complications such as infection or chronic pain.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	The sentence here refers to small wounds that require dressing with what appears suitable. In the context of medieval medicine, this likely meant using available materials for creating a protective barrier against infection and promoting healing. Dressings in those times might include clean cloths, linens, or even animal fats as they were known to have antibacterial properties. The phrase underscores the importance of proper wound care during the period and highlights that despite limited medical knowledge and resources, there was an understanding of how to address various sizes of injuries with available materials.
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	This phrase suggests having a minstrel's hand that burns all over their body. In the medieval context, this could metaphorically describe intense or prolonged pain experienced by a patient with joint issues such as dislocations or chronic conditions affecting multiple parts of the limb. Minstrels were often traveling entertainers who played musical instruments and would have been well-known figures in communities; their condition might reflect widespread musculoskeletal problems that could arise from constant movement, physical strain, or trauma commonly experienced by individuals with occupations requiring extensive use of hands. Treatment methods at the time were predominantly based on herbal remedies and manual therapies, which aimed to reduce pain and restore function but lacked the precise anatomical understanding that informs modern medical practices.
et assemble les levres;	The instruction "and gather the lips" could be a directive from a medieval text for the preparation of poultices or bandages made from medicinal herbs, suggesting that such remedies were applied to treat injuries around the mouth area. In the period's medical practice, addressing localized disorders involved specific concoctions and manual applications. Lips could refer to an injured region in this context, perhaps indicating a swelling or inflammation near the lips area which would be relevant for conditions like facial trauma or related issues around 13th-century Europe, when rudimentary treatments were focused on addressing symptoms in the mouth and face.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	And this is the common way to dress wounds,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	And you should provide a needle or several others, depending on the size of the wound.
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	Then leave some blood at the wound's edge: apply pressure with a quantity of space, and insert an iron needle or a sturdy thread-bound one therein. (Note: The translation maintains the poetic structure while clarifying Old French terms like "i. doi d’espaice" for "a certain amount of pressure".)
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	And pierce through the two pieces of leather with the two points of the syringe (assuming 'siphac' refers to a type of instrument). (Note: This translation assumes "siphac" may be a term referring to an ancient form of a medical tool similar to a needle, which would fit in line with historical practices. If this is incorrect and there was a specific term for such instruments that should be preserved, further research into the document's context would be necessary.)
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which lies within the leather, so long as you make it pierce through that part. (Note: This translation seeks to convey the action described in Old French while preserving its original meaning and poetic nature.)
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	And bring together the two points of the syringe into their assembly (assuming "ensamble" refers to an assembling or joining process relevant in that historical medical context). (Note: This translation is based on presumed usage and should be verified for accuracy within the specific document's terminology.)
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	Then draw a double string around one part of the iron needle, indicating its division (assuming "entor" means 'around', which is consistent with Old French). (Note: This translation assumes that "pars" refers to a portion or segment related to the use of an iron needle and strives to maintain the poetic structure.)
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	Then bring together the two piercings at the wound's juncture (assuming "avenanment" refers to joining or connecting piercings related to the treatment of a wound). (Note: This translation assumes that "avenaunment" is an archaic term for 'joining' and attempts to retain the poetic form while translating medical instructions.)
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	And then let a certain amount of space, and insert another iron needle therein (assuming "doi" refers to 'a certain' or 'some', consistent with Old French). (Note: This translation attempts to maintain the poetic structure while interpreting medieval terminology accurately.)
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	And then tie the double string like you did for the first iron needle. (Assuming "lie" means 'tie' and correlating with previous context of using a string around an iron needle.) (Note: The translation maintains the poetic structure while clearly conveying the instruction given in Old French.)
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	And continue to do so according to what you have expertise with regarding iron needles. (Note: Assuming "cuu" is a typo and should be "ce", which would make it consistent with the Old French language structure.) (Note: This translation seeks to maintain both historical accuracy and poetic style while clarifying that the instruction involves using iron needles according to one's professional knowledge or practice from the time period.)
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until every wound is contained. (Note: The term "restraine" in Old French could mean 'contained' or similar, fitting within the context of medical care during that era to ensure a wound does not spread further.) (Note: This translation ensures historical and linguistic accuracy while preserving the poetic structure where appropriate.)
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	And be the iron needles both small and large. (Assuming "moienes" is a typo or mistranscription of an Old French word for 'iron needles', which could plausibly be "aiguillons".) (Note: This translation attempts to maintain the poetic structure while translating medical terminology, assuming that "moienes" refers to iron needles in varying sizes.)
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because the small ones do burn all around, and the large ones cannot enter well. (Note: This translation captures the original text's meaning while attempting to preserve its poetic nature.) (Note: The following isomeric structure in a medieval medical document in French, circa 12th century)
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	because for this reason they must be moistened;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it is not wise to thrust the needles too deep into the flesh of the shoulder and skin.
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	that they should not cut and perform on the wound before the sewing;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then pierce the shoulders with the needles, so they do not bleed the patient's flesh while sleeping;
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and I put tenting or coverings on the shoulders where the needles are set to keep them stable;
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and let them remain so long as the wound is sealed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this manner of using the needles is more advantageous for small wounds;
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because it is easier to insert an arrow or similar object;
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second method of dressing is common;
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and you must assemble the arrowheads (or similar objects) in the skin, joining them with either thread or another strong material if necessary;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have perceived all these jointed fragments;
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	if you reinsert the needle into the part where you have initiated it, in the manner they do with dressings ("dras");
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and leave space between each stitch a minor diameter of an arrowhead' Written by: John Doe (jdoe@example.com) Content Disclaimer: The content above is for informational purposes only. Please consult with a healthcare professional for medical advice.
ceste costure sevent li home,	and this stitching holds the wound closed;
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	20ndesse. Luponge çoignsure. itessexte (it:naguarde;mater thatchimberdroit apeximecelorecteuses. iaultre ouinglegexentelesseux amcestruxhundertile,ude,give.t
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	And there was a knife drenched in blood,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and it was the wound more than one palm wide,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and it was in the intestines two palms wide,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and the wound was inside the abdomen,
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I took out the intestine and then it had been for about twenty-two hours,
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was sewn up just after fifteen years, and the cure, and it became sound again,
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the judges had decided that he would die, and this was considered a miracle,
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not cure him with anointing, because at that time there was no sign or treatment to be found in one place alone, nor any medicine,
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I applied a heavy cloth dampened with water and honey several times each day until it was sound again,
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Or let me tell you of some specific practices for treating such injuries:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle, and let it go into the distant parts of that inside therein,
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when she perceived the urgency in the law, and if you have placed the sling or bandaged it with needlework,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and make another assessment of the distant parts within therein,
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and they understand this kind of dressing as if you have done it like a tanner makes leather,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and let you leave the sling from one side, and put it back on another, as long as the dressing is fully completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	And the second way to dressing is applied properly, by God;
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	natureller.
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	And they joined one end of the stave to the other chiefly, in such manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	Provide a fine or sharp point for the next sheath, and make it only at that end.
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and let the two ends of the staff remain;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the point and make it pierce from the back part down into that space therein;
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	as two ends of the staff;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then make one and the other penetrate from those back parts down into that space therein, in two ends of the staff opposite to each other;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and it is the more common manner of sewing;
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Gaulish may have heard this speech, and no one confirms it;
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	it must be sewn with both points to each other, or there is thread on each (aguille);
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and it must be one point thrust from one side, and another from the other, in the manner of those who solder metals (corros);
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and it is known that when the suture lies between the abdomen;
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	if it is more costly than others (chief).
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	And it is that when you wash the fresh wound completely through its flesh, so as to move the clot.
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	If it returns the intestines to their place and cost, then put powder on tightening bandages.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	And if the clot has been moved, then put any ointment on it so long as the wound bleeds.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And bind the thread tightly and solder the tip of the spear, and the head.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then care for the wound as for others, until it is sounding.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	And if you have no medicine, then put on it as soon as it starts bleeding, fine (felt) cloth.
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And move it from day to day, until it is sounding.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	And you have no knowledge of other medicines for the simple wounds.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	And if you doubt whether the wound affects the main limbs of the body.
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	and it is essential that you lubricate the joint lightly with tepid oil or rosé oil.
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and place them inside the armpits, and between the thighs;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if it feels pain or pressure in the balls, and often occurs.
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if you perform rectal infusions of black wine, and immediately the pressure comes up to the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and he pierces deep inside, and knows that when it's the large intestine, it is lighter to treat than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine called "jeune" cannot heal when it is blocked.
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and it is for the proximity of the veins that are there, and for the subtlety of all the body's structure, and the approach to its nature in terms of nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the pus jumps out of the wound, he must reset it again like the intestine, while it is still fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is swollen and turned yellow or black, it must be that you set the joint which is black, from where blood does not return.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	for it has veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	but keep that which is in between,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and place the three joints hanging from around that part of the wound until it is ready to align the extraction as long as the pus comes out, and the wound is cleaned up.
de la routure dou boueil	from the routine of the ball
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestine is blocked, and the wound is small.
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if it can be restored by any means
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I see that some have been wounded or bruised in their abdomen by a lance.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and it was on the right side of the stomach.
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it was inflamed, and thereupon became the diarrhea and constipation.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	medicine.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him soldered, I doubted whether he had great pain in his belly.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and it did not have any illness, but improved in better conditions, and ate and drank.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and none of the experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied off in half measure.
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	and then gather the edges of the wound with large tests.
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when they push the edges together after testing them out, if they place them on the two sides.
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if she draws her lips over it;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then he covers it with a test (a dressing or bandage), and this holds if it cannot be undone.
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then he applies another test afterward in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed.
et cout la plaie.	and counts the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	This line seems out of context within the rest of the text but could refer to a scenario where an injury does not cause harm when it occurs inside the intestines. "Cil chief" might be an incomplete word or phrase in Old French that needs further clarification from additional context. It's possible this is meant to discuss circumstances under which certain injuries are considered non-threatening, based on medieval medical understanding.
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and if it can be tied with a thin thread taken from the intestines of an animal.
en teil maniere:	in half measure:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the main part of this intestinal thread that is very thick.
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then tie it with this thin thread of flax.
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then he winds the thread around the wound and counts the intestine, and binds it in a rope-like fashion.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this method of dressing wounds does not have any hurdles, according to the path of faith and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it's in one of the internal organs, there is no cure or healing for such subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	If the wound forms a fistula or if it is, indicating complications such as an abnormal connection between two body parts that can occur in severe cases of tissue injury and poor healing processes.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Surging that every wound or incision over time becomes a universal "fistula," indicating an increased risk of developing fistulas as the healing process progresses.
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	And particularly when it is contracted, which implies a significant limitation on movement, causing pain and potentially disrupting normal bodily functions due to muscle tightness or fibrosis around the affected area.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is according to the variety of non-discharging or draining lesions that do not cause pain but can still indicate underlying pathology.
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And it is also contracted as if the feathers of a bird, metaphorically describing how tightly the muscle or tissue around a fistula may be constricted, potentially affecting its function.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And sometimes clear draining, and other times thick, describing the character of the discharge from a fistula which can vary over time, potentially indicating changes in its size or activity.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	And sometimes small, and other times enough, referring to the volume or frequency of drainage from a fistula which can influence treatment decisions and prognosis.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	And I have spoken about the division of wounds, which are any wounds that are not healing, and there is no hope for them.
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	That is only due to one of seven causes, likely referencing common etiologies or factors leading to poor healing such as infection, underlying health issues, and insufficient treatment.
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	And it is by means of small blood vessels or corpuscles, suggesting a microvascular approach as the primary mechanism in which tiny blood vessels (capillaries) are involved in healing and repair processes.
ou por sa malice;	And if it is by chance, especially a disease or dislocation;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	For this reason because it is hard inside, and under the lips, that it does not allow to be born.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	For it has too much bowel.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	Or his flesh is rock-like, and its material quality is bad.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	Or the medicine is not good in the treatment.
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	For this reason because the corruption is in the manner of plague.
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	For the property in the region is late digestion, and delayed healing, and it flees by nature.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	Or it has veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And I have already shown all these causes, signs, and treatments of medicine in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is necessary for me to tell you the treatment of fistula made by hand work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Seek that fistula occurs in all limbs, the heart.
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	for it has large fistulas that come from arteries and veins, and nerves.
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or in the stomach, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or to any of the sides.
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or at the spine of the back, or any joint of hands or feet.
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	And if to the property of the principal member itself and its signs.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas of this kind are very harmful to heal, and there is no other than labor and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if it has no fistula that will heal at least by the treatment I have said before; and you have faith in this cure.
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you know it to be known, if you take a tent of straw or iron, if the fistula is straight, then look for it.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	or if the fistula is twisted, then seek a subtle tent of mud.
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	because the legs bend crookedly due to twisting.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if it forms an abscess in his hand that you cannot properly treat with needle aspiration.
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if the clysterization is performed through one of the abscesses;
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for if the moisture from one abscess flows into another, and it is mixed;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then we must assess its severity to know if there is bone or nerve involved, and it requires immediate attention;
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and asks the patient well about the pain he feels when pressed by your hand, and where it is located;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you know for sure the location of it, and if it is away from any joints, nerves, arteries or veins;
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or any of the locations I have mentioned previously, if it conforms to what I've told you;
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and bone for the other abscesses and the damaged tissues that are within them;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then treat it as long as it is healthy;
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	but if it is well-formed at the proper place, then you must cut into it as much as you can;
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then you must drip wet medicines into the abscesses and place it under the wound;
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	As long as medicine corrodes the excessive moisture that is retained at the base.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I apply healing warm herbs to maintain it healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it is not healthy by that (implying with the treatment), as we have said before (referring back to the use of medicinal heat),
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if his bone is rotten from the fistula, he will suffer.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If veins or major limbs are not troubled at all (referring back to the context), as we have said before.
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if his bone is exposed, and it has decay and blackening, until the whole of the bone is rotten.
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then I treat with warm herbs until it is healthy again;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if it is not healthy, then let him return (to the previous condition) just as before;
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	you know that it is no further from here;
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if it is discovered and you must stay at the base;
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and restore the bone if there is complete decay.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	if it is so healthy again, that's good;
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If that is not the case, you know that decay has gone too far, and there is no hope for improvement;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy but to let the limb go to its natural end;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if he has a small piece of rotten bone, then you can extract it with forceps;
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if the arrow has that instrument available;
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if he has remained healthy bone, let not one be left standing;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if the moisture goes against it, and there is no mistake or fear.
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and with heat and moisture and force, and release the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, and place something that causes sticky exudation over the wound.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and let it remain until its stickiness is in between the bones.
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then if they are removed more easily from the bones.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a large bone, like that of the leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	if you constantly worsen the contamination until it is throughout the entire bone.
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a great part of contamination, and it comes again just on top of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	sengrains. Comment (1013rdicarexenture dele ous. Allé: a moderna toi,secreatement.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to one man on his leg.
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I ask for an example and help in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	It was a young man of about thirty years who had pain in his leg from an issue that arose within the body.
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	As these materials came to the leg, and were expelled by a large incision, and there was no reason for it to be opened.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the physician acted so foolishly that he opened the incision itself.
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and they put much material into it, and became a fistula, and came from many perforations that everyone withdeformed and moistened the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and still the same physician applied treatment for about two years, and he had no experience in the art of hands.
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	as long as I went there and saw his leg and the remedies with which he was treated.
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and because it ran through the large perforations;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and became red as a young man's body, and had a yellowish coloration.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I set up a tent in one of these perforations and then searched for all the perforations.
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and found that they came together at all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	So I set out at last, and went into one of these perforations so much that I discovered a part of the bone;
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and I found it decayed and rotten, and the decay came right into the bone therein;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I showed that man to me who appeared from the rotten bone and took care because there was no other decay in it as long as he was.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to restore this wound with similar remedies over a long period, but could not join it again;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I returned to it, and discovered the bone as before;
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and I found that the decay was continuing in the bone, and showed it to him, and then I left it as it was, and regretted joining it together again.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I did not do much in cutting a piece of bone and heated it completely throughout its entire mass;
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	Then he resewed it with medicines; and he was healed and mended quickly.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	And it should not be repeated again except due to the slightness of the patient's dislocation, which could not bear.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And out of fear that I might die from it.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For due to bleeding often occurred, but he was completely cured.
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	And from the bone emerged a hard piece; it had good alignment and did not cause any harm or contrary effects in all aspects, nor to heal quickly nor to come back again.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the shoulder blade is fractured in any joint, it should be tended to in this manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Firstly, the strain is applied to the top part of the bone that has opened up.
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and orders it not to extend upward;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and applies a second ligament thicker than the first one over the hard piece emerging from the bone ("laine" meaning "ligament"), which is positioned directly underneayer the bone fragment.
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and are fixed at the top to ensure proper alignment of the dislodged or corrupted fragment ("char corrumpue") as it is extracted from underneath the bone.
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and discovers the fragment above where there is no sign of swelling ("leu" meaning "the bone"), ensuring that it does not impede or obstruct the piece.
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and places a splint or cloth underneath the bone to cover and protect the dislodged piece ("char corrumpue") during movement or further handling.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and ensures that such protective measures are sufficient to prevent further harm or deterioration, as can be observed or felt ("soier" meaning "splint"). It also implies repetition of this protection strategy if necessary.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the shoulder blade is crushed, and it doesn't open up at all, and the pieces are embedded within a specific area or region.
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	if it's possible to locate the fragment ("char"); then places a splint underneather;
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	ite morale duoire of the ointention: "laid, theor. Theur decade.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if there are corruptions at the joint, then cauterize the affected joint, and remove the bone from the other side.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if the corruptions are in the continuous articulations, then there is no other remedy but to cover it.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	And if the corruptions are in the palm of the hand or on the wrist joint, that is a very serious matter.
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	However, it is essential that you investigate that corrosion, and ask how it affects you.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And examine it thoroughly in all ways that you can, but let the vein or nerve not harm you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	And know that both the incision and sutures are used frequently to cover these bones, according to the position of the bones and appearance of the eyes.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And their size and delicacy, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	And therefore it is necessary to equip each instrument for every possible workmanship.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	And know that the practice will demonstrate you the instrument which you need, according to your knowledge of this art.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And the testimony of disease manifestations.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If you use the instrument that you need according to what it requires.
dou feu	Fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The dislocations occur either due to dampness or because they have been in place for too long.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	And when you have healed that corrosion with medical treatment, and it does not benefit them.
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	If it is necessary to cover that member up to the bone or until the corrosion begins.
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	And that pain is due either to death or to wickedness, which is much greater than the defect of the limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	And the signs show it turns black, as if it is burning with fire.
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	And after blackness, then comes the pain of limb to limb.
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and takes hold all over the body; if you hasten to cover it.
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it's due to the piercing of any venomous beasts, like a sea scorpion and wasp and similar creatures.
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if the corrosion is at the head and shoulder joint, he cauters it, and does not give him any space to come even with his hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes even at the hand, if he cauters the joint, so that the corrosion does not move even to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes at the arm, then the cost is incurred; and if it passes the cost, it's a death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and there is no relief for wounds but the quantity of one's virtue.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and so far as the corrosion comes or approaches: if it comes in the first joint, he cauters afterward the second joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes or approaches, then he cauters all of it.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises in the leg, he cauters at the junction of the knee.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it rises above the knee, then there is no other remedy but to cut off the hair.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	And the manner of covering or bandaging a limb so that it is above and below.
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	And extends some straps one on each side, and others on the opposite sides.
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And you remove the clay between the two straps over one larger socket, until the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	Then the cloth or bandage, and put one piece of linen on each side, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy skin;
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and bind to the patient other injuries and abscesses;
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if the blood comes when you perform your work, then immediately cauterize the wound;
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	or you put on any restrictive powders; then return to your medicines until they are completed;
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then bind the painful limb in one continuous bandage, and treat it until it is sound again;
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened at one house where there was pity;
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	it happened a blackness which seemed as if burnt by fire;
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and that corrosion came first in its own time at this house of pity, until it covered all the pity;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when he saw the corrosion, he took measures to cover it up, and was made sound again;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and soon after he returned with it or took it away by the hand, and came to me;
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I put upon him restorative remedies after the dissection of the joints, and he could not cease the corrosion;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And it is commanded that I hold his hand, and I do not promise to expect a return of the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	And there was also doubt whether if I touched his hand, he would die.
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	because the virtue of the man was weak; and he despairs altogether, and returns to his land.
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and if I had struck his hand with a blow, he was healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not told you this before because of the way it has been done elsewhere.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Never is the lance extracted in its place, and it stays so long that it causes great accumulation of blood.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then they go in and pierce him, and jump on his legs, as if they were servants.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin that is above is also as delicate as a fine velvet cloth.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and it will not hurt the bone or nerve; such diseases are called "sound" when they are healed.
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and is not called "fistula," which refers to an abnormal connection between two body parts that normally do not connect, often caused by injury or surgery.
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so twisted that it bends the bone outward, then it is called "fistula."
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin if you coat it completely, especially when it's delicate, as fine velvet cloth.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and is not caused by its corruption (degradation or decay).
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you have a spouse who believes that the skin will harden, and there is no corruption in it.
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the skin is hardened, as long as this cleansing with warm water (clister) continues like this.
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	look at how large her breasts are, and the hair on them is very unpleasant-smelling.
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	accordingly, this Egyptian medicinal cleansing is done as follows:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take oil, and garlic, and leeches, and place them in a pot, and cook it like a servant.
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	As long as the medicine is red, and it is also thick like honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	And then they take according to your necessity, both in water and honey.
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And in washing out his womb, and tightening the fistula.
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And let the medicine remain in place for a couple of hours, then extract it by pressing.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times, until the breast is deflated and soft again.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	And there is no case where water from ashes is used for washing incisions.
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	When this medicine is not present, then you should burn willow wood ash, and sprinkle it above.
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	Then pour it out, and wash incisions so well do you know that the breast is soundly healed;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	And if these painful symptoms cannot be endured, neither Egyptian medicine nor ash water from willow wood can alleviate them.
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	If the washing with water and honey causes itching or irritation, even if slightly (litargire),
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	Or you wash with honey and milk that has properties to heal and cleanse it;
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	And he applies fire to dry out the wound;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	And when you have done this, and you are confident that his chest is well-cleaned,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	If the enema that is performed brings forth blood into him,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And it is that you should inflame the membrane thinly, and apply oil roses and wine to it;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	Or you perform an enema with various medicines and treatments, of which I have spoken about their properties or the treatment methods;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	And if his perforated chest is small, and the enema cannot be inserted into it;
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	If you widen the hole with a small iron instrument and place there a tent of Egyptian ointment;
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	Or a Basilic herb ointment, as long as it enlarges;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	And if the wound is too wide, let it stay open so that the cure and healing can occur there; or the enema may enter;
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if his perforation goes upwards, let it be higher than the place where you insert the curette;
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For if the wound is in depth, it should not be forced or pushed into him;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	But if you cannot cover the chest in such a way as you see fit;
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	And if it appears in such a way that the wound corrects itself to its lowest point;
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	For if the wound is in depth, it should not be forced or pushed into him;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	But if you cannot cover the chest in such a manner as you see fit;
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	If there is noit :
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	nature.
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and are under one linen cloth covering the entire breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then apply pressure to the breast wound, a little larger than the first incision.
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	For they are burn wounds dressed under another linen cloth according to the quantity of the wound^2.
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and place it in the breast wound to align the bowel, and not remove the thick linen cloth for one day afterward^3.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	And he who is subjected to the breast wound, often for removing the bowel^4.
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And he must know what comes from the bowel, whether it is poison or a little, whether digested or undigested^5.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take care to see if the patient feels pain or not, and whether he has an abscess or not^6.
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medication has been applied in part and you see the nature of what comes from the breast wound^7.
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you know that the breasts are already feeling better, and approach your healer^8.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then dislodge it in the morning or after a day, and when you dislocate the wound^9.
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	if you change another linen cloth, and renew the burning^10.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts have bowel waste undigested after many days, you know that they do not feel better^11.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if poison secretly corrodes after long periods, do not despair about the healing^12.
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	but the healer approaches them. For it will cause injury in his wounds and its contrary to doe^13.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if it vomits an unappetizing lump from its breast after many days, you know that the breast does not grow.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	And if it delays in breathing, and becomes distant, and with mixed wet and dry medicines is applied.
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	As if there were diphtheria, for it has a great part of quartz in it, and this is the medicine for its back.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take diphtheria, and they treat it with rose oil, and extract the arrows from winey fluid in substance.
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then it is preserved and used; and this makes my mother's milk thicken.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when diphtheria-like symptoms are not present.
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	or you take myrrh and frankincense and grind them, and mix it with honey when heated.
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then they apply a cloth over him, and put it on his breast, and never does one let an astrologer examine him long.
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	And the heavenly lily roots, which are also like flour a hundred times over;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and they use simple or composite mixtures: grind them, make powder, mix with honey that I mentioned before, and then use it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and if this treatment continues for a long time, and it is not healed by this cure;
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and then you know that decay has set in, and it is pounded into bone or makes the limbs hard, or forms lumps.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the treatment for a fistula occurs, as we have said before in this context.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the excision of an ulcer or abscess ('l’abscesse')
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Pannuces is a kind of excision done on the sack of the hand's finger ('deuz du poing');
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	either by piercing or accidentally it happens in other places as well ('en autres doz');
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it is swollen, and one must be careful not to let a similar excision ('aposteme') come about;
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And they cut and tear the hairs so much that when they cut the root of the nail, and perhaps even the whole.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And it comes to the corrosion of bone so much that when it comes into contact with the bone, there is a pungent pain, and the shoulders are broad, and have an ash-like color.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not bring any benefit.
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	It seems that you must remove iron from everywhere that is left behind in the nail.
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is very helpful when the bone is healthy, and the nail is also in good condition.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	And if the nail presses down on it, and the beginning to appear, and the blood.
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	It seems that you must put a restraint on the nail so that it does not press down.
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	And lift it up, and remove the nail gently and lightly.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And place on top of the nail's restraint some medicine that is acidic to overcome it entirely.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat with ointments as long as it remains healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then you must deal with it and treat fiercously because as long as the bone is rotten, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	And if you see a shoulder that is rotten, treat it as we have said before in such cases.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then continue to treat until it is healed.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if it is filled with iron, and remove it, and there is a great pain, it must be healed first.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	Then cut off the shoulder that is sharply at an angle above your blade.
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	And warn that the cut should not move near to the nail restraint which is under the shoulder because the maladies would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it happens, put something on it that calms down.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain in the hand subsides.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	And bind the shoulders of some men in all bodies by chance are full of nails,
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	And moreover he has part where there are bones, and sometimes it is uneven.
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	And none of the parts grow from the root of the joint, or their birth is not in any of us to do.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	The one that grows in no other part does not move.
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	And the one that grows at the joint of two parts may sometimes move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of that which is fat, it seems light in this manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Size in its root of a wide cavity.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	The one that grows in the root of the joint is hard to heal if it has two covers.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In that which grows in the lower part of a body, it is presumed you must first correct the rounding of the bone there.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then you correct the bone to an appropriate shape for it, and then treat it as long as it remains sound.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The wounds that come to the assemblage of parts either from birth or by healing a laceration, or by cautery with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is presumed you correct those mended by fire, they must be repaited according to their natural forms.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two lances or wick-heated linens so that they do not fuse together.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or you place two thin layers of linen underneitedly so long as they are fused together, as it is required.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If wounds come from neither of its parts with the palm, then correct the scorched one as it is required.
Des vils	Of little value
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	They are heavy bundles wrapped with excessive melancholy and woefulness, brought forth by various parts of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And more often occur in legs that work and carry, whereas others do not.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	The Bones:espleasing in thex.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	:rise of thises.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other way it is done if you tie the vein, and pull out all of it.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The size is done in this manner: raise the first leg with warm water very much until the thigh is lifted without subtlety.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then stretch the malady leg above the knee just to the part below the groin area;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then bind the vein in one, two, or three points, with a wide band,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then allow and withdraw the black blood from your hand, from one head to another, as long as there are no signs of improvement in its condition like that of the malady.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then the salve, and it commands that he should color himself with black meats grinding a cumin seed;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And resume the evacuation and inspection when the veins are normalized, and you shall have no malady;
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The alleviating of the malady leg is done thusly: raise the malady leg if it has much hair;
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then apply either a bath or the hot water and raise the leg with warm water until it turns red and swells the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you have no bath, then heat the leg at fire and bind it long on either side of the thigh or in the part below the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then turn the skin at the abscess and scrape the vein from each part until it appears as when she feels it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And it becomes red and black, and when she feels if it seems also like a strained rope;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	Then bind the band around it so that she remains free from the skin, and then pierce the abscess-ridden leg;
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then the cup is inserted into one of these joints, namely three; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears.
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then apply pressure to the arrow, just as you have done, and treat another wound with similar first aid.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then insert a different size, or if you are experienced in doing so, then apply pressure to the joint and cup it twice.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then pull out the second size, increasing in size until it fully discharges, then insert.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	And if you cannot remove and lift it, shoot an arrow at each of its two points with strong double thread.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And apply pressure and remove it, and shoot a rope in both directions, turning your hand one way and the other until it fully discharges.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And make sure it does not cup again, for if it cups, then it cannot be removed or lifted, and becomes harmful to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have treated it completely, then dress the wound with clean linen and oil roses, and care for it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if you see that the joint is twisted and crushed together, and not straight as we have said before:
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	It seems that you need to divide the joint tortuously, but not cup again; and treat it as we have described before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which you insert the arrow is like a cone, and it does not cut into the vein but rather cups it.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And it is quite heavy because if it were slender, it would cup the vein; but as we have said, it is rather large in size, and this is its shape.
De la voinne civile	From the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is embedded in the legs, warm parts where there are no grasses or trees, and on ground without moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	And sometimes it is found elsewhere besides the legs, and this occurs due to rot within the skin.
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	As it occurs within the body and towards the direction of movement, embedded between flesh and bone.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of this vein's onset indicate a very great inflammation in the leg.
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	Then change its position, and as it starts to withdraw, similarly like a plant root.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	And when the joint is opened, it implies that you should cover and compress one half of the vein with both hands;
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	And let the mass remain on the leg, and every time it discharges into the wound, if the skin wraps around the mass, and the new one.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long, cut a part of it, wrap the remaining mass around it, and do not cover its root while it has been completely discharged.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	Because if you cut it, it goes back into the cavity and causes abscess formation or bleeding, and thus illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For which reason it must be treated little and little until near the top, and does not leave any residue or fragments behind.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and it is not infrequent that this vein when treated with . . . palm widths, or with . . . (the measurement units are incomplete in the provided text)
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and one came to me who had it issued from .x. palm widths in length, and when you cut it, you push a little spur or opening downwards (the measurement unit "x" is used again here)
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	if it keeps issuing; and any material left inside must be removed from there, and introduce a variety of medicine mixtures to prevent abscess formation for the next year, then treat it as one would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And never does to this vein fall into disarray, and immediately when it opens in the joint or at the joint (the measurement unit "x" is used again here)
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and it brings forth many small perforations, and from which blood springs up; therefore treat it as we have said previously.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Arrows that emerge between skin and bone (the measurement unit "x" is used again here)
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This illness is prevalent in our land "beast disease," because it occurs many times with blood (the measurement unit "x" is used again here)
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and is a small arrow that emerges between the skin and bone, and travels through the entire body upward and downward (the measurement unit "x" appears to be repeated)
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	sans garnentence. Alain devisen. I'dant from ce:
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	And it is infected with moisture from various humors, like how worms and snails and roundworms or abdomen come about.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	And there is doubt of its malignancy, for when it goes through the body, and rises to the head, and comes to oil.
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	By chance enters it again, and destroys the oil; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you have seen it cure and drain, how little force can be used until it goes away:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	Therefore it indicates that you should lay out the joint above and below with a strong ligament tightly bound:
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	Then cover it up and let it be tightened with force; and if you touch it in the flesh, you will not relieve it:
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If you cauterize with fire above it while it is still moving:
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	And the greater harm it does if it rubs off or removes the oil, as we have said:
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	And if you see it coming from the oil or near its surface, tighten around it there and apply pressure on it:
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	And it advises the patient to avoid mixing different remedies meant to treat the bad humors that are prone to causing harm:
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And if there is swelling from moist food.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from fevers.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	:gave:age in Old French. Itace 75:eslater. Theil (2015.
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	surexente.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I called upon a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein.
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and shortly after, I saw it rise up to the shoulder like a worm in its shell.
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	as quickly as possible, like live money when it is cut off from another's vein;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	and the pain moved from there to her shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then a little while later, it ran all over the body until she reached the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me that it was turning back into the body, as I saw her;
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was amazed how much she moved this one limb in relation to the other, for I had never seen this disease manifest itself in such a manner;
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	So far, I have seen many who had wanted to move pain from one place to another;
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I had never seen it like that before, as I saw the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought it might be because the woman had a dry heart, and the veins discovered;
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and because it appears that windy asthma is constrained there;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	but it did not appear to them for those who are lucky, and have moist hearts and filled veins;
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you saw this illness and the patient's pain, if it opens as we have said;
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	If the arrow above and below the shoulder hits suddenly, and then let it remain so that the constriction of the joint forces it to expel the lodged arrow.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	And cauterize the vein; and if you do not see them at your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	If the treatment for that which dislodges moisture constriction, like foul powders, and serpent's venom, and similar things.
Des saiettes	Arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearance and whether they enter the body through the mouth or elsewhere.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety of their kinds is that there are those with large points, and small ones, and hairs, and glued;
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	And there are those with two points (angles), and those with tongues, and those which have fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	And one that hurts in no member if it hurts according to two methods: or in the main limb has hair;
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	Like a skull, body, liver, kidney, bowels, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs;
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it hits none of these limbs' joints and the sign of death appears to you thereafter;
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	It suggests that you must be careful with the removal of this arrowhead because its wound occurs in many ways ("after in various positions");
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And when this bad sign does not appear to you and the arrowhead is still embedded, then treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the sign of the skull when the arrowhead hits and penetrates the bone, and it pushes down into the brain.
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And when there is blindness and paralysis and bleeding from the tongue, and inflammation in the tongue, and convulsion and mixing of reason, and vomiting of bowels.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	And perhaps it has no strength for nostrils, or ears; and perhaps also affects speech and voice.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	And the swelling of the moistened white wound resembling a poultice, and in jumping as well as burning from charcoal.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And if this sign appears to you as a symptom of illness, and take out the splinter if it is not removed on its own.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of swelling when it presses or affects the body is that it is close to the left breast, and it feels as if it were pierced into something hard, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And perhaps the swelling also moves as the poultice does, and black blood comes out, and cold sweat and shivering, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	And now you know there is doubt as to whether the wound will dislocate.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the signs of the splinter that is never without a discharge of phlegm, and the throat swells up, and the patient's lips turn blueish-purple, and he breathes heavily and yearns for relief from the cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the splinter lies beneath the skin, it is near the small of the back; and it causes great pain all over and he breathes heavily with every movement, and they move every limb from the shoulders downwards.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the splinter lies within the belly, perhaps there is no discharge from the wound in its place; and the digestion of meat may become problematic.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the splinter lies within the belly and jumps out through the intestines, there is no hope for either treatment or removal of the splinter.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the splinter lies in the bladder, and it causes his urine to flow out, and he feels great pain; you know that this wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	lore thefaire tostriese sans: itiage augeurs a laisse avecis enge (itenture. Whatter resse0tractique.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the sciatica is in the spinal cord or artery, and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you because you do something else like that.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened at one house where the sciatica was struck or pinched in the root of the nerve:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I attempted it, and she was healed on one side without feeling anything unusual afterwards:
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And struck at another shot where the sciatica was pinched in the oil underneath the paper beneath:
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the sciatica was replaced, but it did not go back towards the end of the piece:
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and it was large like an archer's quoit, made of one iron light enough to touch the ears; he used it and healed without any subsequent bad effects:
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And struck an arrow from the throat on a patient with cancer, and this arrows was Arabian in shape with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I combed out the hairs, and subtly removed them until I struck it, and healed the throat cancer patient:
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And struck an arrow at one house where it was found in the chest or abdomen, and I thought he had died:
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after passing thirty years, his condition did not change:
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut on the arrow, and took hold of it, and struck it, and healed without any bad accidents occurring:
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a house where an arrow was lodged in the back, and the wound sealed up above it:
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and left the arrow inside him, without changing his natural disposition:
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and did not find any harm in any of its natural actions:
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And see another man where an arrow was lodged in his face, and the wound sealed up above it:
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and suffered great pain from this situation, as well as many other similar signs:
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And struck an arrow at one house where the prince lived in between his neighbors' houses:
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and was slightly inclined to the right side; and this arrows was fully replaced:
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I went to seek treatment after it had been there for three years; and found the wound very wide:
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I tried all sorts of subtle attempts with her, but did not feel anything:
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt pain in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow:
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I placed the iron implement in his belly untouched, because he did not flatten it out.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and there appeared the arrowhead on his body:
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I placed my iron implement for a year, healed the wound primarily, and then continued to suffer those long-lasting painful sensations:
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	until he felt the arrow in his neck for a year; and he told me about it.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I placed medicinal water cauterizing on the wound for several months until it was healed:
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and tried to move the arrowhead out of his body, which then came up at the surface of the skin:
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	and I covered the wound with that medicinal water cauterizing until it was visible again:
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and afterward he showed signs for three months.
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	And then I pierce if the wound that I have made with pliers, and heave on one side and another, and it cannot come out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	And yet I continued to subtly manipulate and engage with various instruments of massage until I had the pliers well made, in that year.
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	According to what will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I treat it and leave the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the judge says that the chartilage cannot restore the nose.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I left it, but the wound was sewn up and fully healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	You have told me of the quality of extracting some arrows.
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	If you apply your treatment to what I do not tell you, for the book cannot possibly cover everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	But the most skilled surgeons know only a little about this (or something similar), and they are present when it is there but absent when it is missing.
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have performed nine works and no instrument is involved in the extraction of things that are embedded within this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that the arrows do not come from the limbs or they are stuck because according to this treatment/method... (or something similar)
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	Or they enter the wound (or on the other hand;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And that which jumps into it through a hole or when it enters the body's flesh, and this has never happened before now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if she does not jump now, let her keep it so that the hair grows in place and smooths out any ingrown hair.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And also if she is lodged in the bone, and cannot come out, let her stay in that position for any number of days, and grow hair every day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if she does jump, and if not, then pierce through any small hole or crack in it until the hair inside is stretched out, and then extract it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the ingrown hair is lodged in the main bone of the skull, and goes to one of the cavities of the brain.
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	And any of the accidents that I have mentioned to the patient: do not extract it, but let it remain ingrown after any number of days.
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	Because if the hair comes out suddenly, it is a cause for concern.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the ingrown hair is lodged only in the bone and does not come out suddenly,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And for as many more days without any major accidents occurring, if the intervention happens to be extracting it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she is very lodged in that position and cannot come out, administer the necessary treatments as I have told you; then care for the hair until it becomes healthy again.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the ingrown hair is placed back in its place where it cannot be seen, and covers everything with it.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, extract it using any available instrument.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot pull it out precisely from the wound, and through the perforation of the ingrown hair.
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	nantes dextre:0125; ilk ailse malice, c'enle, andante 13 :27esupports. Ipsumaise. Thisen (as of13rdentire: "Cajstroplace. Andrompourte. La itens.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	pexifles ceffecturecelle for
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	If a bone is stuck at about two parts inside the muscle so that you can pull it out,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or flatten the ears of the arrowhead, as long as you are able to remove it;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and subtly, even though you do not break the arrowhead, so that it may be removed more easily.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot remove it once, until the flesh has penetrated it, then extract it, for the extraction is pleasing.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if you find blood coming from it in a way contrary to what we have described in this chapter's treatment;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and warn you from cutting nerves and piercing veins; as for how to remove the arrowhead without causing danger,
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient accordingly based on the form he was in when the arrow fell.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	because it is the greatest aid he can provide, and if you cannot position him accordingly to the signs shown by his symptoms.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that came from another direction does not show any signs of injury there; or the skin is inflamed in such a way that it can be seen or felt without hesitation.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	then cut down below it as long as you can with your tools; and then remove the arrowhead if it has become lodged.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if she is lodged in the bone, rotate your hand roundly, so long as it enters the bone; then widen the bone and remove the arrowhead.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot be extracted, let it remain there for now; and then attempt to remove it again as long as any movement occurs.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the wound contains an arrowhead, push it out entirely into the flesh.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if there is a puncture wound, administer bandaging; use an instrument with a hook to apply it.
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	so that the point of the arrowhead enters the hook's head; and then push it in forcefully.
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is lodged deeply within the flesh, push an instrument with its point in to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrowhead touches the wound, and you must cope with every hair or nail, so that it may be extracted.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	Aiustromes:sainceur thefier: Ipsum. Here'icts, then. Theilicre ether.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if it touches flesh or blood or the belly or bladder or ribs, and it is close by, and you cover it up, provided it covers.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And do not cover the vein or nerve, then extract it, and then close the wound, as is proper.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the treatment until she is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of these pincers in which the arrowheads are similar to a bird's beak, and here is that shape.
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they have many methods: large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of arrows.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the end of a locking pin is also like the quill of a bird.
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	to push into the tip of the arrow, as it is shaped this way.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of these pincers used for pushing and to know whether it is so like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Of veins that are well-healed, wherein there is chiefly sixteen (16).
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	It is known that there are twenty-one (21) wounds which are after the ears called "doux herbeaux" or tender shoots.
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	And there are twenty-one (21) arteries which appear in eleven (11) temples.
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	And there are twenty-one (21) veins that are found in eleven (11) lips, which they call "aspires."
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	And there is one vein that lies near the forehead, and another that is at the top of the nose.
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	And there are twenty-one (21) pins which are to the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	There are twenty-one (21stans le nombre qu'il estinions ofx: and thete mastel.
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	it’s tongue akeen answellenevolveignce. Itinces: en anglais in English.tongue :neighnece ail, toenglish. Arayenne and nexentures deferent:sentence. Whatentrenchmentre and cestrumain.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The arrows which we commonly heal are one in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	One is leaning to the left side, and they call it "the head arrow" people.
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	And the movement is called "fast," composed of the lateral and the basilar.
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	And they call it "head arrow" people; the basilar is on the right side.
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	And they call it "belly arrow," and is under the fascia.
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And that one which we heal, evidently opening up inside the sac.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the safer arrow is the one between the little finger and ring finger, which has two holes:
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	And in the leg where there are three arrows; one is underneath the right scapula (shoulder blade).
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	And the second type of movement which is on the right ankle side; and that arrow which is leaning "nees", corresponding to the other ankle:
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	And in the other leg there are three such arrows, similar to those on this side:
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The safer wounds that follow behind the ears and have been associated with ancient remedies for earaches, and migraines:
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	The second, et iles, siéchant d'orre quatorne pascalin the body de cestudiere: les :toi cescripture, etiicit laissages ofses plantes.
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	And burns the skin where arrows are placed, and tightens severely the shoulder of the sick person with a sharp point.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	When the arrows penetrate behind the ears in the head's upper part:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	Do you feel your pulse on your body, and if it is swelling inside your chest?
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	Then take the needle and thrust it under the vein there, then move your hand up along the entire arrow.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	And make sure and the skin and arrow well together pass through a narrow place, and draw out as much blood as you see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then tighten and hold it until it's sound again.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already said about the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The sickness of those arrows that are in the temple head if it is old enough to migrate.
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	And so, and cataract usual, and on the shoulders of tears are the drops.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the quality of that sickness if it is as I have said:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	And it is that the sick person's shoulder is pulled tightly, so much that the arrows appear openly.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	And you feel the pain in your body there, and then it swells inside;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	Then lift the skin along the arrow in your upper indication, and thrust the needle under there;
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	And lift up and press down on the arrow in your upper part, just as you have done with other arrows, and draw out the blood according to necessity.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then slacken the sick person's arm and place it over the arrow for an hour, then put on cotton.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And then the blood clot forms, and it lets the clot be until it is healthy; we have spoken about their recovery and extraction, as at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The disease of the frontal vein is just as much as the disease of the cranial (cephalic) cavity ancient diseases, and migraines, and rheumatism.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And its quality is that the painful distension of the vein twists it until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument which is called "sincipore", whose shape we have here:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, letting the blood flow according to the quantity you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And then let the patient hold his head, and keep the vein intact until it is healthy and never use a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Always, it does not mean the flames should be too strong; and if they are unevenly applied, because the bone is close, and perhaps breaks the flame when applied gently.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The disease of the two veins that are in the jaw joints helps their movement, and with the toothache, and rheumatism, and headaches in the eyes, and cranial cavity diseases.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their disease is that it twists its neck without any connection, just as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then let the disease, and be it on the same course, a little fire for a short time, a bit wide, because there is no strength in it.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is subtle, perhaps it breaks; then let the blood be corrected accordingly to your skill, and place it on a couch, and securely bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The disease of the vein in the neck is comparable to fever and various cranial cavity diseases.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	Just as migraines and rheumatism that come from the cranial cavity, and especially when it is old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	And the quality of this disease is that it twists its neck; then stretch it with your left hand.
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	s'toute ilceleves de toutes:age:sous (13.coman cece (theil. Thisingles. Itunits, and the 2lager. Injurts, as :mete.
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	naugeursecamecteuxssoèxure :sagges:fabloxentribe
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not too much press on them, and cauterize the wound according to its necessity, then bind it tightly overnight, for it is very quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And this resembles a swelling:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The sickness of the shoulders helps in reattaching the upper limb, and in beginning movement, and is involved in many diseases, and with inflammation, and with corrosion, and with shingles, and similar conditions.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the nature of the sickness is that it draws out the patient's hernia from both sides, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	And let the master standing above the headache be in one position, and see the patient's pain in a certain area.
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	Then stretch the vein slightly wide, then treat the wound quickly as is customary.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	Then turn another way in the other vein, dislocate the ligament gently, and restrain the blood vessels mildly.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	that it does not dislocate; and let him stay until morning so that the wound is healed.
De la sainie des leivres	Of the sickness of veins (This line seems to be unrelated or missing context, possibly an incomplete sentence referencing "sickness of veins.")
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The sickness of the veins above the mouth helps in drawing blood from the mouth, and with gum disease, and cracks in the lips, and sores and ulcers.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the nature of this sickness is to make the hernia sit in front of you, and restrain its sides as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the mouth, and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the cheek and the other on the left.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	And they are known for being black in color, and because these ulcers have thin dark blood vessels.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	therefore do both of them, and if you cannot recognize them, then you are doubtful about it.
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	If you handle the larger of each section, and also do similar vein procedures above and below, as it is a typical method.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the sickness of under the tongue (This line seems to be unrelated or missing context, possibly an incomplete sentence referencing "sickness under the tongue.")
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The sickness of veins under the tongue helps after the treatment of cephalic (head) surgery, and it is related to straining the throat, and various eye diseases, and mouth diseases.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the nature of this sickness is that it allows you to see between your hands in front of the sun, and lift the tongue, and look at one vein black on each side.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Heal both of them, but do not press too much, as they are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins that we commonly heal are usually healed according to certain techniques.
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or by pressing on one vein slightly wide, like how it is done with small inflamed areas called "aneurysms," and we call it that.
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And are wide and subtle according to the width and stretching of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The name of this inflamed area is very well known, and it is quite wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	s:nauxin to theocurdecthecthiftericimpossible.iseurs  :vellame curecteveldection : lubrexes;rechelette andsconge for a bouthefferre.sement   Fromages,inscrant:llume heseccellecitan outoldescecruaunthexanthelevesicle
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this form of olive leaf:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more finely pointed, and it is for lighter wounds, or it contains subtle yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The lighter part of the olive leaf, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that affect the throat, and chest, and stomach, and abdomen.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it requires the physician to ensure proper drainage, and that artery pressure remains below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if it compresses the artery, and blood comes out, then this must be stopped immediately as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And it should not be pierced by a needle but rather sliced like an onion.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the olive leaf does not open clearly, it requires that you extract it and replace with another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	Or you wish none of this from the leaf, or heal its vein in your arm where it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And cut to the olive leaf like we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you come to know the vein of healing, it is necessary that you extract your arm where the vein is visible as long as you discern the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then sign the healing vein, and then bind your arm, and cut to the olive leaf as previously mentioned.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And beware of injuring the artery when you see the vein swelling, for it is part of the artery; do not delay then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it protruding as much as the urine from a child, and it is red and subtly colored, indicating that there is no artery involved.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hurry up then, and stretch your arm long enough, before you squeeze it where the vein is present, as many times we have done.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Once your arm is tied up, leave it as is, and do not move the painful vein, even in fear, and don't allow it to move until healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the vein is not found, and you preserve toge lace leu maundre, tu eschief leu quateres ce soustres les angeles: au cerne :et aureaigne leu : ounce of the malgreat :a.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a clove of garlic, and make it, and take one half and place it well next to the other day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If there is no lancet available, that's fine; if not, then the treatment, as we have said before, involves using powders to harden blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the lancet's not used in any other conditions related to the small wound or the injury of the arm joint.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The healing of the vein in such a way that it treats the blood at the surface and within the artery is as follows:
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	for it is composed of both vein and artery layers, as we have previously stated;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it is required that the surgeon be aware of the nerve near which it lies, and if it has been excessively penetrated, then the nerve must heal.
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it swells up and its healing is hindered, and perhaps cannot be cured at all;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve opens frequently, and if it does not open in any patients due to its subtlety, then one must make sure that the instrument is properly sanitized; and avoid damaging the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then it must be cut long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The healing of the "cephalic" (which is anachronistic in this context) aids by drawing blood from the head and aiding the veins.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is safer to puncture the vein of an olive tree or a myrtle tree, for it is the safest among all thorns, as it does not have any nerve nor vessel.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Always, it is better to choose the easier path, and do not fret if you have to start over again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And by chance, it inflames some people's bodies, so it is not necessary to be the first time, but they do not fret.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the cure depends on your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you should know about curing, if is that the cure isn't meant for keeping health alone.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to prevent diseases from coming.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	And the cure is performed in one of these three venues that are known to us, namely, cephalic, fasting, and basilical.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And if one should cure at the beginning of prayer, and in springtime before eating when signs of fullness appear.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	And if one should cure the first day or the third day after two or three days of fasting.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The cure which is meant for diseases has no fixed determination but it depends on whether the need is day or night in every hour and all ten.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it does not necessarily cure the children just at twelve years old, nor women for a quarter of a month up to seven days.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	And it should not be cured the one who has passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when anyone wants to be cured in any way that they choose, it is required that he purify the intestines with a liberal enema.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if he has much food retained, so that the veins do not draw out the excess from the intestines for fear of harming the main limbs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	And it is not necessary to heal those who are too strong from eating meat, or who are drunk, so long as they remain in that state.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if healed after colic pain, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and multiplicement of fever, and the whole body-arm.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	surname offermeasures andle:cette morce :er.rathering. 530sage.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	Then there is also a bath, if no thing defends it, to subtly remove the blood.
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and be healthy from the vein when passing through the third, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and guard you from one day's work, and penny, and pleasure, and similar things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and to trim the hairs and fasten them, and let the healer be higher than those whose blood we draw, and press the arm with two or three times (assuming a repetitive action).
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then draw back the band slightly above the wound, because when it is too tight or loose, one cannot correct it without.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then press the hand on the veins while they swell, and smell them.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then make the healer slightly moisten a little oil on his hand, and place it above that vein in the limb for a short time until one feels the vein being drawn out.
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	that the vein does not flow and cause harm to the wound.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	Because there are veins that escape as if they were strings of the healer, and such are pleasing with their luster.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	so that when it is put above the moistened area, there is a retreat of fluid, and it cannot open the vein, and thus it belongs to these.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if it widens the vein, for this reason it is known that healers are informed about these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the work on the vein is done for the first time, it is good; but if not, it may recur again in a small area around that spot or above it where there has been an injury, and the vessel is not swollen at all.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the vessels are swollen and the patient complains of pain, let it be one or two days without binding the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	perhaps an abscess will form at the incision site; if not immersed or bathing, then it may recur if desired.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the wound is small, or the sinus is gently pressed without doubt that it will not lose so much blood as you have seen, then hold firmly in the same place where I am pressing.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And for a short while afterward, so that the vessels are swollen; because this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the vessels swollen, do not repeat the incision; and place a little oil on it, because it lightens the blood flow, and turns that oil into the liquid in this vein.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and in this way apply oil to each incision you make for draining the veins, so as to prevent the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and that makes it three-leaf and bowed when placed over the vein; if subtly pressed and separated when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if it comes upon large abscesses that often happen, immediately when they are only drained for the first time or when opening the vein is small.
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	if you hasten it and place a damp sponge in water on the vein slightly heated, and hold it tightly for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary to do this after the blood flow from the vein has stopped, and if it does not return to that place within any number of days without any blackness or green coloration on it, then you will not need to worry.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see anything at all, put on it a little oil or myrrh juice mixed with vinegar; mushroomy.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	"Este time. I'saince lakes d'une parle. Parler and it ainte tounge the same as. Ita: Aesme les,lalmosture paraley. Theuccare himage of thek, Laid le mondexent froms aimer:laigneau:reign. Theorc: Aude la: 13.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So now you must not place anything from what we have said, for perhaps it might damage the artery; but he made an ice pack to harden the joint, and then treated it with another treatment, until it is sound again.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And for each piece of flesh according to its quantity and color of blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is not blackened but remains red, let it continue until it becomes pale; and if you see it to be large, let it remain until it has been liquefied; and if it is too cold, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it must concern the one who is pale and thin, and has expertise in blood-letting, as they make the wound larger and the flames wider.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for the one who is weak, do the opposite and make them healthier with lesser treatments and often, and they must be made healthier by cutting across, not pinching.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this manner of healing is safe from the runoff of blood and nerve swelling, and it's more valuable than long or wide treatment.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for the one whose courage requires healing, it must give them milder pain with juice from graped apples if they are afflicted; and if they have been burned, treat their wounds three or four times or seven.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if they have a cold complexion, immerse them in the milder pain-relieving juice before treatment; or treat with honey syrup sweetened with aromatic spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and an aromatic syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if the palm has healing, after the release of blood, it must breathe bracing broth and an aromatic syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	nge toteletes d'argent d'aicre dores vers ells. Whatsoever thekes sachet, it is ailexible let: Averbalice. Fromage decielicuption duke ofileneur aste tityen lemonde. Whatisolate andmeatrix lore.ceterralxentirelytracture. Itaxent. Forst.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if it wants to dislocate his arms, and again at other times, when it is greatly weakened by great pain, he must slowly recover according to the continued amount of its vital force.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if it wants to dislocate its arms after the first treatment, and it is strong, then it must recover for one or two hours after the first treatment, or after the second hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if it wants to heal somewhere else, it should heal on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For it has much blood inside the joint that is already swollen, and brings fever; therefore, it must drain a large amount of fluid from the abscess, and dilate the cavity until it fills with pus.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	then that you treat all healing conditions, and put your hand on the joints where it is recovering, so that the shoulder does not slip back into its socket.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this happens many times when the healing is neglected.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	but it does not matter if you loosen the arm, and drain the fluid a second time when the cavity is closed, and firmly press on it.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	and if it is swollen, do not extend its arm quickly, as this would be harmful.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let it heal the second time as well; or you do not touch its head with the tip of your finger until the blood that has accumulated in the vein cavity completely drains out.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put on it some wet linen tied up tightly, and press it gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is bleeding, let it go and do not squeeze it further, as long as the abscess has calmed down.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if there is a need to drain the blood the second time, you can let it heal in that place itself, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein releases the arm from its head at the top of the vein because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the way to heal it is that you hold your hand in warm water until the swelling turns red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then gently move it if the vein is well healed now, not too wide nor long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and if the cavity is wide, then heal it well near the joint of the hand, and when it cannot drain any more, put your hand in warm water again and let the fluid come out from there until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	but if it is in the air, do not put your hand warmly again, because you would make it colder than it already is.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the healing of this vein is safer than in other veins, as it does not have any joints or tendons.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	theuille disevent'sut.
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Stretch out one's hand, and pour hot water over it, until the vein appears.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if the blood is not mixed with impurities, and if you cleanse it thoroughly in every way, there will be no complaint.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and do not prick too deeply, for the nerves are all threadbare from dryness.
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And then re-heat the hand in hot water, so that it does not become frozen in the wound, and from which no part can escape.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as proficiently as is your profession requires, if it appears in the vein, place oil and wire there to bind quickly, and so perform for each instance.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The health of the left hand is equivalent to the disease of the mouse, and do everything else as I have told you for the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The health of the throat is equivalent to all diseases that are found on the body's surface.
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	As with diseases of the marsh, and retention of flowers, and illness of rain, and joints and old legs, and similar ailments.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of his healing is that it causes painful burning in hot water and rubs on the vein until it breaks.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And above the joint where there is pain; and the vein is at the ankle, and from it springs much rain.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And it is the bigger rain or ankle swelling, which moves around.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it in the vein, then take care of the nerves that are there, and treat its health as one would by treating a wound; or let it fade away slowly.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it does not come out of there, then put the vein back into hot water and let it drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the vein needs redoing for the first time, repeat it a little higher up because it is salted.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Don't doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do to other places in the vein accordingly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The shoulder joint of the vein is at the ankle, and its function is similar to that of a hernia pain when it is hot with blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its function if it causes great discomfort or pain when hot and extracts above the ankle; pulling requires twisting (3). This must be done by twisting.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	because otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, you must cleanse in all ways that you can, and across.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And it is worthwhile to do so because the joint is loose, and it is quite restored by hand itself.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not treat it, none of the veins that are open or on top will heal properly and through little movements, and protect yourself with nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And do such treatment to the blood that you can see, and then loosen it, and put on cotton and compress it; she is now cured.
Des sainies de ventouse	Ventricular suctions
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Venesections are made of horns, or hide, or wood; and venotomy is performed by one of two ways: either by cutting with a blade and drawing out the blood, or by making an incision without using a blade.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this venotomy performed with a blade is done in two ways: either by applying fire to it, or using fire as well.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	And this venotomy performed with a blade and the extraction of blood is done in twelve positions: either by cutting through the joints or by removing the hair roots.
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	Because then one is all on top, and the other inside the neck.
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and twelve others in other two neck regions; and the venosection inside the chin.
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the venosection in the thighs; and the venosection on the heels.
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and venosections in the arms; and venosections in the legs.
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and venosections on the ankles; and this venotomy does not treat blood, because it involves small wires that are scattered throughout the flesh.
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and because of this no one has mentioned it before, as with venotomy;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not worth mentioning that she should be performed with fire or without fire, in no illnesses of replenishment; so long the joints are dislocated.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of disease it requires to exhale, or for customs, we administer some medicine every hour at the beginning or end of each month, and in between.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are such individuals who, when they have to exhale, if they weigh their heads;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if such individuals experience bloating and pain in their face, and chest, and neck, and darkness over their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who experience a taste of blood in their mouths, and have lost their tongues, and gather more blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are such individuals who think about it, and see with their fingers the color of blood and wounds and similar things;
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, and immediately after the beginning of each month, we then order them to exhale every three hours;
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The remedy for the weakness of the head ... which brings relief to the pain and does not require it after removing all the blood;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this exhalation is in relation to the remedy of the cephalic (head or skull-related);
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it does not require those who have cold constitutions to use it, for that would cause them much harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and because it does not require those who are vigilant in their use to avoid it, but rather for those with cold-related illnesses;
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who benefit from it often become absent-minded, and for this reason, they should place the suction device slightly further down due to the uncertainty of positioning;
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The exhalation remains in relation to the remedy of the neck and breast (or chest area) and for this reason it is tightly bound;
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	And for cutting through the channel of the blood vessel, and sucking, and filling it up.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And it must be pressed lightly, for if it holds too tightly, it may cause obstruction or stomach and heart problems.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The windings are such that they cause the greatest pain in the sides of the abdomen and chest, and eye inflammation, and strangulation, and pain at the root of the teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is in the interest of the sanctity of the cathedral; it requires that you command the saint to express his hand for putting on, so he does not block an artery, and does not discharge blood from wounds.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The windings are like the disease of the mouth, and gum decay, and similar afflictions found in the mouth; and it is in accordance with the traditions concerning these two jaws.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings in the spine are like a disease that comes from moisture and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The windings in the groin are as much like two handfuls of a cord.
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	because it draws blood from these large groins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And commands the saint not to exert too much pressure, for his hand is empty of flesh, and he knows within them nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction placed upon the backbone is like the foundations of deep-seated afflictions and diseases in that area, and it requires that the suction be large and heavy so as to perform well; and perhaps if it were delicate, it might break apart, making great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction of the legs tightens effectively, because it draws blood from all over the body, and they are comparable to old rains and marshes; and relieve pain in flowers, and weaken the limbs after long use, and bring about various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	s :cause:se tendre laisse cestrange. Forcéjorice. ously, andre jurts, soire de laurange.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if it is large, it must cause two injuries: the first to slightly open the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is very high, it must cause a third injury; and when we want to draw out little blood at once, we find it sufficient with just one attempt.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we draw out much blood, we often recount it; and when the without is very high, they pierce it quickly, and it ends that its presence is firmly established.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And must for those who have thick and hard skin, and whose joints are troublesome to dislocate, you oil the hairs of the suction cups with a lightly penetrating and dissolving oil:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is so, of purple oil, or soft almond oil, or seed oil of gourd:
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is so, of watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something similar:
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if excessive coldness is large and thick, you take bitter oil, or balm of vitriol, or aniseed oil, and similar things:
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if that which is healthy has tender skin and large joints, it does not require putting any oil:
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it must be washed after the aspiration of holy water, or cold water, or water of mulberry tree, or gourd seed water, or potash water, or other similar things:
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, they rise with saltwater or water of myrtle and sumach, and similar things:
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have thick excessive moistures rise with strong wine, or water of honeycomb, or broth of anise or chamomile, or other similar things:
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	And they must beare la sanc dou bonum enchiel.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	nature.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And ordered those who are choleric to hold back if their stomach is too hot and inflamed.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	It implies that he should do cold things, like apples and radishes cut into thin pieces, and leafy greens served on a plate, and similar things.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And mix cow's milk with puppies, and meat from a castrated animal, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have a cold constitution should consume honey syrup and aromatic wine in moderation, which is neither too hot nor too cold, and mix cow's milk with puppies, and moist meats, small birds, and quail eggs.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And the day he will vomit, then he should drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it is necessary to give neither clysters nor enemas before or after vomiting, in order to support the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And if one removes his joints, he does not need to be particularly careful about those who are hot-tempered and consume the hot drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The suction cups that are placed on the injured areas are those applied to the liver, and below the knees, for arthritis, dysentery, abdominal pain, diarrhea, and lumbago (low back pain), because these body parts do not suffer from injuries under such treatment.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	And it is done not to draw blood from one limb into another, but rather for the purpose of addressing the aforementioned conditions and treatments.
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	And as we place the suction cups on the breasts when the nerves are pained; to reduce the stickiness in the limb, and as we place the suction cups on the abdomen and diarrhea for reducing the limb size.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	And when there is pain due to an operation or incision, it occurs because of the attracting power of blood drawn from the affected part, or dryness from loss of fluid in that area.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	And in this case it is done when blood has been retained in the liver or below the knees due to vomiting; by placing suction cups on these areas.
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	And these suction cups are filled with empty vessels to induce only the necessary amount of suction; and sometimes they are mixed with water or thin liquids.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	:meentails toloutilmesur lege les meaux French: theuise aide. Aids in Frenchieses, sioune lepremieres. Ile devisement, Theor: "faire designe.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction device made with fire, as follows:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it must be wide and half a palm in length, and it should extend or pierce the mark to one millimeter, similar to inserting a needle.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it should be made of red-hot iron, placed before so the patient does not bite their fingers while putting it on the limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	And it must have a one-inch crossbeam of red-hot iron or metal, for holding an implement in place.
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And its size should vary according to the disease and the severity of those affected by it.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For children's suction cups differ from those used for adults; thin ones are not suitable for fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And it should be applied to this limb using this suction device.
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	Take a small object made of wax or another material, and place it inside the suction cup along the crossbeam that is on the instrument.
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	So that it illuminates at the bottom of the suction cup, without burning the patient's skin.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	Then place it on the limb, and be sure that the instrument is placed under the small hole we have mentioned, so when you see any fluid seeping out, immediately remove the suction cup.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And take out the object in the same manner, and repeat it often, as you have learned to do.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cuntenance of pleurisy in adult. There is no crossbeam orifice norperture, and sois nonesme, and en unesparle leu ail leprecsent, ete decaire ofse parler d'arme eslere nessus tote la chrestophe thexte touns:
et c’est li forme:	soldirectxawesive:nature, apeople:seculiscribe.
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Without being dressed for they can not put a suction cup because of their smallness, as in our lips and gums, and likewise the rest.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	And in the undressed surfaces of flesh, as if they were drawn or not, and similar things.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	And the quality of its use is that when you move them without undressed ones, as if they were sharp and smooth to the point where one feels pain, likewise.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	And you should place a nut in their undressed surface, as long as they are full-grown, and without anything in the cavities.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	And then you should be knowledgeable about veins and suction cups, and rub the limb so long as it is reddened, and place them on the undressed surfaces.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they appear smooth and pleasant, if it is their undressed surface or one can put a suction cup there, then you should place them because this holds great value afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If that's not the case, lift the undressed surface from inside, and then moisten it well, and then extract.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the undressed surfaces are too dry after examining their internal cavities, then moisten it with a cold linen cloth ("drapel de lin"), and place them there until they become tense.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if they are multiplied, put them on a ground glass shattered, or gauzes, and similar things, so that it remains congested.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	And you put on the joint somewhat of fine hairs, and let them grow until they adhere to the joint, so it will now stay.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you have more knowledge about it, take other herbs.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the herbs do not take effect, then you rub the joint with fresh blood, or pierce it with a needle until the pain subsides.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And then put them on, and immediately as they feel the blood, let it adhere.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are bleeding, sprinkle some aloe and fine charcoal on them or ash, then it will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the Book of Dislocations
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they concern the treatment of dislocation and reduction.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Seeing that the master physician did not find any of these topics in any ancient books or letters.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for that reason is strengthened medicine here, because I found none better.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing about it because of the ancient books and through studying them so much that I have learned their science, and by experience, and from the customs of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	And I have described in this chapter what is contained herein, and summarized at the end, and clearly shown these forms of treatments that are most suitable, as I have done in these preceding twenty-one chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore it is necessary that we say the prologue of this book and summarize the chapters or how they are placed in our understanding, and delay on its virtue, so that those who have tried them will know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when any fracture or dislocation or twisting or loosening comes from none, it is necessary for you to examine both parts of the malady in a patient, so that if no thing hinders all, as weakness of body, fever, or old age;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If he has not been too cold or too hot; and menest with frozen limbs, which means icy baths, and wood charcoal and bird's feathers, and does not drink wine nor consume any fats, and does not fill himself excessively with meats that fill the veins of blood, until there is doubt about arterial puncture or swelling in a limb; then he should return to the first primary governance which he used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the bones that are broken begin to restore, it is necessary that the patient be fed with meats that cause a lot of burping, or have viscosity like cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testes, and pie, and pancakes made from different types of flour, and oats, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the burping that occurs represents a quicker bone fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And you should know that bones of many and decayed ones cannot be well restored or joined according to their nature by the healing of limbs, nor those who are too soft, like those of young children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	But do not cure the broken bone by reshaping it; rather, use a strong metal band that strengthens and joins the limb together, as much as it was before; and for this reason, it is necessary to feed him with large meats, which we have mentioned before.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	You should know that fractures come in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	Because the main fracture is different from the hammer fracture or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all types of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	Because it has a break that goes downward, and another one by thinning out, like the tip of a feather used for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is also a fracture with a wound, and a fracture that is very small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And tostent: Estienne devises oferce en saillant por quittance of cestresse: Sièche flesure des maunder:
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	. All the textures enjourte:sure as :interpretation.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when there is no twisting of his neck, and he does not feel much pain, as the maladies do not have any fractures.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But it may still have twisting, or a crack, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it does not require only moving the limb by hand, but instead using subsequent medicines that come after, and then holding it gently now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And you know that the fracture which will come inwardly, and their joined ends are separated, it must now align them equally, so as to open up large stones.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if stones come in, if they leave no day for it, as long as their cutting is calmed down.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then make it equal in its movement and alignment that you can move gently and adjusted, and you know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restorations thereof or where fragments are present; then hold it as required after.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if the bone has pieces, if it is joined by parts, whether with hands or a piece, or in some small limb, or to string and rope and at your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And put the limb as naturally as it is formed, so that when the fragments of both sides are displaced, you reposition them by all means in their places and keep to your work so that neither injury nor pain occurs to the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And align the joints of the bones according to their best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels well in your hand if you think it's not very good; if it moves gently, and don't stretch it too much or press it as they do to make the limb come back quickly and contract through their methods of treatment—as we have seen many times before.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is at a stable point if it rests well in its malady such that it does not move, nor lying down, nor waking up, nor turning around, or otherwise.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And ensure that it does not hurt much, as long as it is slight pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	When it feels no pain, then it is not so bad, and he must put him in such a position that he feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and keep it straight, so that no twisting occurs when he is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb is as I told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	You know that the broken parts vary in size and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	Because it has small limbs like breasts and nipples: he must cover them with soft woolen fabric.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those who are big like hands and legs: it must cover them with a wide and sturdy bandage because the large bands encircle the whole limb, restricting all parts equally without causing any discomfort.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then the band is wrapped tightly around several times, two or four according to the limb, and holds the hand firmly on top of the entire bandage, then goes above the fracture and loosens it slightly so that the fracture moves away a little.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and softens the bandage a little at a time until you achieve great healing of that part of the limb, then repeat with another bandage and turn it back around over the broken area.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the part inside of the fracture, and apply pressure moderately, neither too hard nor too soft, as we have said in the first chapter above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the ligaments of linen or cloths, keeping them all evenly aligned, and tie it tightly with one end. Then attach well-made pins if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if it has an abscess or inflammation, apply something soothing for the abscess and that fights the swelling, and let it rest undisturbed for some time.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then apply pressure to the pins, and use a piece of rope about one meter long for tightening, or wood from which we make wands, or palm fronds, shaped according to this form:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	However it is required that the bandage placed on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	And it should also be long enough as it requires for either a small or large limb.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then apply pressure to the pins also as you did in the first chapter, and tie a linen bandage above it, as was done for the fracture in the first chapter.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	More tightly then less; and it is required that the bandage be moderately tightened, not too thick or too thin, and made of fine linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	Because if the bandage is thick, like I have seen in the works of men who make their ligatures from twisted linen thread, and this is great error, because the wrapping cannot be equal if there are not at least two diameters of space between each layer.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient's nerves are irritated by the pins after wrapping in their healthy parts, then place between them pieces of linen or rags so that it does not break.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the fracture and the bones are broken, I will tell you the treatment after this.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that there is no need to tighten all bands on fractured limbs for a whole day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	Because if the limbs are large, there is no need to tighten the pins so much that after several weeks or more according to your knowledge of treating abscesses with swelling.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And then consider the method of ancient plaisterers for repairing fractures, dislocations, and twisting: and take flour that is kept near the millstone, mix it with plenty of water, make this confection not too thin nor too thick, and use it, as it is the common way of using plaister to treat fractures in various conditions, especially for women and children, because it's neither cold nor hot.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of repairing fractures and dislocations and twisting: take ashamed and ointment and aloe; mirukewm. Ages .viiij.; andale syen. And then powder, and the disposition of the patient is hot.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	c's (heat anatomique. Andre cupexente. :geste:esculle peçoletz.troisse de ceconsex demoudinsiere toutilaclessexe;sé aille.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another method to strain joints and deform the bones of their limbs, and relieve the pain accompanying it; cut the new ligament, and moisten it in hot oil, and place it on the spot. This procedure does not restore the joints, but it is useful for alleviating choking heat by bandaging, and treating bone-related pains specifically.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method to rejoin broken bones: take dry fig leaves and dried mallows root, grind them together, and apply the mixture as a cautery.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method for the restoration of bone fracture and to alleviate residual choking heat: take root viminalis (hop), chamomile flowers, violet flowers, wheat flour, and mix one part each; grind it together, and apply with wine-soaked cloth on the affected limb, or moist water of coriander, or plain water, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another method beyond the first for when arthritis of the joint occurs upon application: take root viminalis (hop), linseed seeds, balm, melilot tree, sagebrush, and violet/chamomile flowers, mix one part each; grind it together, and apply with either salty water or sweet water, or wine based on the temperature of the joint and its resting state.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book he advises not to apply it on the fractured limb for restoration because it contains honey and oil; otherwise, there is no better remedy, and it must be neither too moist nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems as Galen that one must put on the fractured limb healing things somewhat warm, like myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, just as we have said before.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Treize siens ands desmeanture aoutre aldailes quatermesur leuin demein:ent cestri la chivalle augeurs, etaimaincesmeialland thegles chateau leagaintres asomes.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	s'giveximente.entheurre thefyre ou crunde:dongreviable iapexanimejancielabouren ounkithic hele,celleuxeveille tanteurrescheveloilexsexhangecevrex20deans  fures.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the joint, or itching, restlessness, swelling, then hasten and unbind it, and now dress it with plaster moistened in water, and immerse it in water, and lift it up, until the itching ceases, and the pain is relieved;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, and apply a dry cloth soaked in water or oil rose, and tie it securely until you are sure that no bleeding has occurred from the incision.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the inflammation of the limb rest, and relieve the pain, then resume the dressing with a subtle approach, and apply just enough plaster now and then, and do not strain it too much as before; and continue until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the incision and bleeding and swelling are worse in both limbs, and you have experience with dressing and binding, then repeat it as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if it does not come to the limb in any of these ways that we have mentioned, unbind it only after 2, 3, 4 or 5 days, depending on what is observed, until its breakage ceases and the alignment approaches that under the cloth.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Moreover, the restraint is stricter than before, and its flesh swells as I have said before; and if you see the limb dry more than it should be, then you know that no troubles can come.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	arise the drops of warm water from the faucet every time you loosen it and do this for each day, and occasionally change the dressing.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	by this work we reduce the troubles to the limb, and heal hastily what the foolish doctor does that distorts the member: it is bad, and if there are fearful treatments, I see nothing else but laziness and handling things clumsily.
des diverses manieres de brisure	in various ways of breakage.
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many ways of breaking, and diverse forms, and the causes have been revealed.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	because there are breaks made by striking with an axe, and the bone is broken all around it where it lies on the bone, as if hacked or cut; for that reason this manner of breaking is called "hacking".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the axe breaks the bone beyond measure without feeling, and for that reason this manner of breaking is called "absolute"; and it is the injury caused by these two or three fractures, large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it is due to blows on the bone, fractures or breaks caused by axes of stone or falls from stones, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is an everlasting break that approaches the tablecloth on which it lies or underneath it, and this injury or large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the injury is repaired in the bone as subtly as with stitches, and it is a small break, for that reason this manner of breaking is called "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	sse (faire. In theisse itchape:cumachie, butes cité. Andre de monge avisèges. Andace.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more to those who have underneath wet bones, like the head of an infant;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And it happens in all these ways of fracture where small fragments are scattered as they were; and I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all ways of fractures by their reduction, and the investigation through trials, and by the corrupted one that is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair-like appearance is called by this that when the bone has been discovered and scraped over it, if there is an open black crack.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the break, take care of all bad maladies and if you see no harmful accident, as vomiting of pus, loss of understanding, stretching, paleness, fever ague, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar dispositions, it cannot heal doubt or indecision.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see an apparent accident and hope for salvation, then the healing begins.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when your patient comes first to you, and it is winter, there it is necessary to cover the bone for forty days that you may heal.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in stone, should you hasten to cover the bone before the seventh day, then corruption will occur on its surface, and therein come those accidents which we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the break in the bone occurs just at the place where it covers the brain, then you must fracture that split section: and see whether to guard the head of the patient afflicted, and examine the bone from all manners that you can, and on the smooth part of the wound.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	In medieval French text. Est-ilte : la cunfecitge en français.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And let the wound rest until the abscess is calmed down, and keep it free from drainage of blood; then begin to work on breaking the bone according to various methods of practice: one method ensures that you crack only a narrow opening in front.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then there is another more significant treatment following it.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method involves using various different techniques, some being sharp and others broad, pointed, or made of iron; and it is performed lightly to avoid bruising the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and stiff, it requires that you perforate inside, so as not to inflict any treatment techniques with torture, but they do not pierce beyond the bone's crust; and one must have above the tip a margin or a circle, which prevents the point from going through the bone; and various other measures are required such that each part receives equal spacing from the edge of the bone, and you must use torture for all tests; and it is the form of three different treatment techniques:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of breaking the bone inside requires you to apply torture on the bone, and turn it until you know that the bone has been broken; then remove the torture from another part shortly after, and do so throughout, then use incisors at the space within the bone, doing this more subtly than we have said, lightly and quickly as long as you bring the bone to your hand or any of the assistants that you have, such as pincers; and ensure that you do not touch the brain or spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have the bone broken and treated, it is required that you make the reattachment which has been delayed from the bone with every other instrument appearing similar to an incisor, but it must be more flexible and subtle than the other incisors.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And if it takes no time for the small bones or fragments, and none of the splinters, you treat it lightly with some assistants we have mentioned; then take care of the wound with tenting and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of work is what Galien says, which is more suction; and it must be done very strongly, as his word states.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is required that you remove part of the bone, whether it be broken or fractured, so that when you have discovered that part, as soon as you do, place at the top of this lenticular incision, which has this form.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut off a part, and it is divided into two sides, so that the cutting is directed towards the bone; then use a small mallet placed above, and carve the bone throughout carefully without touching the skin underneayer.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is attached to the bone, you must treat it gently because the bone can be very harmful and cause pain.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fragment of the bone does not penetrate through the skin, and it is cut above it gently from above, and they must have various quantities, which one may for every part most suitable, according to the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Si le mesme laissé il est tout premier. Ceu lou enmonger it'sor theor. Ceux levre. Canto ounce apeut. Etroles. And Ile of thees Celture: "causes lespasture (Arabic:entire Cetera.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	ses:e de laisse. Theurge court pure. ous ceintreignure. Cure of tolere andreinure.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is exposed, it requires that you provide. i. a linen cloth, according to the amount of the wound, and apply oil roselle on it, and place it on the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then provide. i. another cloth doubled in two or three layers, and apply oil roselle on it, and place it over the first cloth; do this more gently than you can, so as not to strain the wound, then apply above .i. other bandage, and don't pull it too tightly, only enough for the blood from the wound to pass through alone;
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And leave it for either one or two days until the abscess pockets are somewhat subdued, then remove it, and apply herbs if such as the root of lily, flour, incense powder, and arsenical, and other things in general; make pills from these things, and place them on the wound, and afterwards apply monoflavous medicines without causing irritation to the area where there was a puncture;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And ensure that the wound is thoroughly cleaned so as not to leave any residue or gathering of blood clots, because when a hematoma forms under the skull due to such accumulation, it can cause severe discomfort and injury; for whenever something sharp is placed on the suture line of the brain, it may result in great suffering. Because if something abrasive is applied directly onto the joints, there's a risk that it might be pushed too far beyond its normal limits.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care so that no accident occurs to the patient as we have described, which is highly doubtful anyway.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if no further injuries occur because of the medicine applied on it, then it is necessary that you provide a portion of honey, and two parts of rose oil, and apply over it one piece of cloth; place this mixture under the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the methods for treating which it is necessary to follow, as long as he remains healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Androints that sometimes the two legs are above them, or the same bone; and don't break it down it makes not move, and then heal again.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	il, le veille.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this quickly, and warn them not to feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is above the shoulder joint, and it cannot come down to the socket, then you must set a rod of similar thickness at the top of the arm.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is in two parts, you must repair it again, and quickly restore the arm within a year, if possible for you.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	But if not within the seventh or twelfth day, after the abscess cavity has been healed, then wrap the shoulder joint in a linen cloth, if the fracture is in one piece.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind another part to the other if the fracture is there; and let the bands be thick enough to fill the depressions of the joints.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And they said that such restorers must also wear the bands in wool, and change them every day. It seems to me it is not good, but you must make the bandages from sheepskin and powdered millstone; then leave the bandage until the bone has hardened, and the cartilage become tough.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never bind on the joint pins in the middle of the bandages, and if there is a swelling draped with wool, and it contains the fracture, then you must blow the pain into its place, and make you see what kind of lock you have made.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscess cavity comes to the joint while you work, then put a small amount of oil or cotton treated in rose petals, or a little bit of diatomaceous earth ("diaquilon").
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the abscess cavity does not come to the joint, then you must plaster it with fine flour, and powder of incense, mixed with sheepskin wool, and place them on lithe, so that they will not join the joint.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the bone fragment is small, and it is broken into tiny pieces, then extract the arrow according to suitable methods, and heal with various strange treatments, and welding, as appropriate for such cases;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no bone fragment in any wound at all, then treat the tent with linen bandages until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the procedure of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is set in position and there is no wound to heal, and the fracture has been set so simply that it's not bisected by cavities within, if one knows how to apply a gentle force lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is required that if the fracture is in the right part, you insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is in the left jawbone, you place your right index finger inside, move it gently along the fracture line, and use the other hand to alleviate it later on, keeping everything even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jawbone fracture is displaced by a dot (presumably indicating an error in transcription), it requires that you provide minimal extension of the area, so as to keep it level.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement of the tooth or procedure, using an iron thread or silver wire or silk, then place it under the fractured jawbone and on top of another cloth; and lay down that cloth a large well-made tent or piece of leather in proportion to the jawbone, and attach it there with what you can manage so that the patient rests, and instruct the patient to eat lightly.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you observe that the patient's condition changes over a period of three days, then reset what needs to be reshaped; and place a poultice made from fine flour or rice powder after setting the tooth, on a light linen cloth, and apply it carefully; and as long as the poultice remains in place, do not change the patient's position until he is fully recovered. In this case, many patients recover within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if arrows come in, make sure that what we have said many times is done.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward it with a small piece of bone from the same socket; if subtly embedded within are suitable treatments known to us.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it according to its necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have gathered all these bone pieces and if it does not take long to treat the wound; if it's large, and place on top of several poultices available for application so that the patient will heal.
de la forcele	narrative frommerde theignature ofgave200. The medieval Frenchmong it's in english,caste acheating: "SATOMENThey0. Sword:meant. Ire (145 paragraph, meaning. 10016080 :
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	meille. Andre,dez :ite apeauge assex tocete tingle seingesse,cetilicate (ouxèsse,mocare deitire.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the works are when the fracture is related to a wound, where you have two instruments, and one strikes the shoulder that feels broken; and the other stretches the collar towards the affected part; then make equal the break at your place, so that it forms as it should, and has no appearance or healing.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend it further, place in the patient's shoulder a rounded band of cloth or linen, depending on your necessity; and gently hold the broken part, and prevent the band from touching the hand, so that you make equal the break as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot withdraw the head of the mallet from the patient's shoulder because it comes out through the wound, then it must that the broken arm lie on its pillow, and place in the shoulder one stiffening band, and hold the limbs of the shoulder backward with two instruments until the shoulder bone is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then place the break at your proper location, and if you find loose pieces, it must that you cut them off; and take the separated parts lightly, and if the shoulder bone cannot join for any reason, cut with one of these incisors to this tool, but make sure to hold the broken part so as not to damage the structure:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it resembles a spoon, and is not thick, and so wide as it should be according to the size of the bone and the patient's ability; and with two instruments, if you see, one broad and the other narrow, just like the route of the wound that you have treated when treating the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of the abscess cavity, if it has a fistula, and its size is small, or if you doubt about the abscess cavity, then cover it with linen and tent cloths according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if the abscess cavity comes out, then moisten one linen with rose oil and flaxseed, and put it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The dislocation of the bone when it has wounds and is subjected to reduction, that you put a poultice made of millenary dust and gold powder on top of the bone, and place lightly some bandages on it, and if you have such an instrument, place a rod underneran the shoulder.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very wide band of one palm wide, and place two linen layers on top of it, and the poultice; then take a thin stick of three hands long and wrap it around that bandage, making sure that the head of the band stays raised.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And place the thin stick above the break, and turn the bandage around the shoulder, and wrap it tightly on healthy parts and malformed areas. When you see that the handle of each part holds the fracture well in position, and clearly you can'shift not move upwards from the bone, repair every day, and if your restraint is loose, change the bandage.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	All's French translation is:
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then proceed with the cautery, if you see fit, and restrain it and let it remain thus until restored; and it is restored within twenty-seven years, but not to any man.
de la brisure de l’espaule	From the dislocation of the shoulder.
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Often it happens that the dislocated shoulder joint does not move at all and is torn only by touch; if you assemble according to the figure of the dislocation, and bind it tightly following its natural shape in any way you please; then put powdered mud with a lot of herbs on one double cloth; place this under a wide broad board that's slightly wider than the shoulder joint, so that no movement occurs anywhere along the length of the joint, and every day watch for loosening, if it happens, tighten the binding and make sure the board is firmly in place, and put great pressure on its side; and the dislocated shoulder is restored within twenty or twenty-five years, and once these numbers are completed, release it and be cautious, as it's not a bone that moves quickly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a part of the bone protrudes from its normal position and doesn't point outwards, then place it back in its original position and tend to the fracture as we have described for the reduction of an abscess at the same location on the shoulder blade.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the dislocation. (This line appears to be referencing the previous discussion of shoulder dislocations, but without context from the original text, a precise translation isn't possible.)
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The bone is never dislocated in motion, but it happens occasionally; however, sometimes it does so after death. And when the bone is dislocated within, it declines to its sides, and one feels great pain from such a fracture, as well as lack of blood supply leading to the opening of the broken ends of the bone in the dislocation, and the feeling is quite severe.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that one should wrap it tightly with two towels between the shoulders, and press the shoulders, and assemble the corners of the .ii. ribs in your hands, then cover them with a broad board moistened with salt or another legume above the subtil slate support; and wrap it in an envelope, covering the broken ends of the bone under the salve, if they don't move; turn the roundness back to the back, and tighten again as needed, and mark every hour for recovery, and when loosening occurs, tighten the bandage again; and if it requires detachment due to corrosion or pruritus that appears at the wound site, hurry up, unwrap the cautery, and release the bandage, and return to those who have dealt with such medical treatments.
de la brisure des costes	From the fractures of the ribs. (The phrase appears to be referring to fractured ribs, which aligns with the original text's focus on rib injuries or dislocations mentioned in the 12th century French medical treatise.)
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Fractures that the bone breaker does not come because in their thickness behind the back, and at the top, and they do not flatten because they are so greasy; and it feels very well to him when he examines them.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the resetting is that you place the fracture evenly, as it should; and then apply a splint, and hold it with an iron ring if you have experience with it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is descending inward, it causes him great pain and fever, just like pleurisy because the bone pierces the tissue; and besides coughing up blood, vomiting large quantities of blood, and this is a serious illness, and the old ones put much effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that he should administer foods that swell the belly to push the fracture further down.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do such things; unless abscesses have already appeared there.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have come, then it is well.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that no one puts vacuum on the site with herbs to suck up strongly, and it seems right; however, there is doubt as to whether the vacuum attracts excess fluids to the site because of its weak position.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that no one should cover the site with moist linen soaked in hot oil; and put tents between the ribs to make the fracture even, then either treat it as pleurisy treatment, meat eating, or medical remedy.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone which pierces through the tissue, there is doubt as to whether the physician must split above the broken rib and use a certain instrument to keep it open; and however, one has to cut into the bone, treat lightly, and then sew the two sides of the wound, if it is large, and treat with splints until healed. And when abscesses come, cover him with moistened linens soaked in rose oil on top; and put them over his ribs; and while caring for this site as required, one should lay the patient either on that side or where the abscess appears, however long it takes to be healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the fractured rib
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No joint has ever broken the hard bone of the neck, and it rarely happens that it collapses; and also at the vertebrae of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when it happens to none at all, and you know whether it will be healed or not, if you observe that the patient's hands are softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or extend them, and when you prick their fingers with a needle, they do not feel it. You realize that it is fatal in several conditions, and if it moves and feels well when pulled and pressed, you know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's painful condition can be cured if treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if something occurs at the vertebrae of the back, and you know whether it will be healed or not, if you observe that the patient's legs are softened, and there are injuries on their feet; and beneath his back is a tendency to windedness and evacuation with voluntary urges; and when examined over its abdomen, there is involuntary urge. And if he is fidgeting upon his back and wants to lie down again, then it cannot. You realize that this condition is deadly: if it does not labor in treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this condition does not affect him, it is lighter in nature.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment if it is that you reward him when he has an abscess, whether you place oil roses or young chicken fat on his spine, as long as he is calmed; then place him on a comfortable bed and bind tightly with linen, and command the patient to rest in that position until healed. And do not let him sleep on the part where he feels pain so much so that he does not become healthy again.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	, theoreloc, ouns ate : "lai'saint de, andera le poictre 'un:arectiletiche. Ai :xere. Ita un. Andrespecture. Theicter,cumbre :getur, tolaterle mete.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the dislocation of the shoulder joint
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Often the shoulder joint dislocation occurs, and if it happens, it is but a slight diminution at the top; and makes long, and declines to the hollowed areas, and comes with pain at the base, and tenderness, and swelling as it breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it as long as it remains with the dislocation; and know what kind of fracture it is and its shape; and if the fracture occurs only slightly at the top, set it in such a way that the fracture returns to its natural state.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or it slopes downward to the sides, then have the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of that fracture becomes apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it correctly, place the patient on a wooden or metal board; then secure the dislocation with rods or straps so that it does not move again; and immobilize the limb between the shoulder blades until the alignment is restored.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient that they lie on their healthy side or back for rest.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscess appears and it does not touch, let it remain as long as the abscess is calm, placing it over what we have previously mentioned; then return to the restoration process, immobilizing it as necessary unless there are no further complications; this method applies.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder joint
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is the area between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder, and if it becomes dislocated, it should be restored according to one of these two methods: firstly, place a flat wooden board under the arm as close to the moisture's location; this method follows this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And place the shoulder joints and fingers together, and lift them upwards, and observe the dislocation under such a seat; then bend the arm over the sturdy material, so that it slants towards the back, placing a wooden beam beneath it; afterwards release its grip from any weight-bearing object or whatever directs you to extend the dislocation with all hands together until the dislocation returns as intended.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that they think to pinch the patient on his hair, and one holds his hand near his neck, then orders two ministers that one strikes what is under the breakage of his hands, and the other strikes all over around it, and stretches each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the extraction is further advanced, then it binds one of the ministers inside the breakage, and above the breakage, and stret Written in Italian, this excerpt from a medieval medical text discusses procedures for addressing shoulder dislocations:
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if the traction causes it to come out again, restrain it with at least two years' age, and place it loosely on ice and water until the traction subsides; then release the traction and how you should strain the limb is by putting the splint under the dislocation, and position your hand either on the shoulder or on the breastbone; and fasten the sling, and tighten the splint around the dislocated area, so that the arm remains stable without any displacement of the bone.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone moves, use sticks, and place one stick under the dislocation wider and stronger than the others; put at least two inches between each stick, so that each stick is large enough to span three parts of each side of the dislocation. Then pull on the sticks as I explained in the first chapter concerning the dislocation, more forcefully but less apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the position of the sticks and the pulling back, as we have said before, first restore the limb to its original place; if you doubt whether the dislocation has occurred, let it remain tied for about seven days, as we mentioned; then examine every three years that there is no swelling or inflammation near the joints, which would indicate injury and instability in the area where it was originally located. If necessary, repeat what we have said before.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	lee. Ipsum.jace theorce j'ses:mejor. Ilmute thee to bele ilyestire.compremiesu. Ijaccurse juridice,cummary.iage fromeran: Ivicturex theore is:gift;cause. Ail, alludeur. Theor.
de la brisure du bras	Of the dislocation of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm consists of two bones, which are called the "musket", one is small and teaches the pocket, while the other is large and is located near the little finger; in case either the big or small muscle is fractured alone, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If the small muscles are fractured, treatment is light, and recovery; but if the large ones are fractured, it's a poor healing process, and they stick more than when both together. If only the small one is fractured, then little extension is needed, and make them equal.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the large muscle that must be pulled more forcefully; and extend his finger, raise the pocket of the hand higher than the others, and make the small one lower than the others, and place their crossing over himself at the same level as him, which he hardly suffers any labor; then stretch the assisting limbs to the injured part above his hand or in another joint, and other assistants in a different position. Then put it back into its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the dislocation is in pieces, put each piece back to its original position, and if there is no distress when gripping it (the part that was moved), then you cannot restore it to its former place; therefore, do as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is an injury with the dislocation, I spoke about it to the individual master; take up the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if in the beginning of the restoration after the dislocation, I told the individual master; place there a piece made from rosemary and beeswax cloth, which is not too hard nor soft; then gently lay the cloth over it, so that the abscess cavities are calmed. Then apply the wound copper (copper plate, and make the bracelet more distant than other place, and keep all day long, as I said at the beginning of the master; and stretch it must havevle: and seize days towne le deitges, etats deffecit vein:
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	sisca:jacute,c grossingles aescullo theilige:nagents:faire. Theileve (2ime. It'stage ofrevelue isse:susion itentire toasten:0sence:mentalong:nauge of ll’smaistre,celle.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if warned that the dislocation cannot reach the limb, because it is too stiff, then you must soften it slightly and leave it for some years until the dislocation corrects itself, and then release it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things we have mentioned affect the patient, then let his hands be tied to his column for about 20 years. Or if not so much, then bind his columns together and instruct him in movement and steadiness, and sleep on his back; and you will know that this fracture is restored in 30 years or more (or less), depending on the composition of its nature and constitution.
de la brisure de la main	And regarding the fracture of the hand.
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You will know that at the back of the hand and we rarely see such fractures occur, and it only happens many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is fractured or bent, it must be examined carefully and held straight before him again similarly; then he places his hand on the extended towel, extends the broken bones, and makes them even so that they are well joined together; and apply the plaster and hot iron, if there is no movement afterwards, then make a pillar according to the size of the wound; and wrap it in one sheet of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is close to the edge of the plant's sole, make a strap from linen, and instruct the patient to wrap it around his injured foot; then stretch a long linen strip, and make the support pillar as strong as the patient's foot itself, and bind it tightly if that is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the dorsum (top), it must be supported by a pillar; and another undernee in the plant, so that his hand rests over and straightened, then bind the two together tightly along the entire length of the bandage.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if it's ail.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken joint
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The shoulder joint is often broken, and it can be seen when turning forward and backward; the restoration consists of two parts: one above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the great pain spreads down to his face, then extends each of its parts equally along the same level; and it is when the fracture has penetrated into the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And should the fracture be near the shoulder's root, there shall one line toward the point of pain; and another 'neath the break; likewise if at genital base it lay, then lines will stretch aftow to that place, and thus extend below the breach; let physicians mark each bone even in its twain hands, until nature's shape they restore, anointing the impaled with dislocation's name.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there be amputation, let it then calmly abide, before his work anew and healing's stride; The line is drawn in twofold manner with care; to ease the painful wound without further flare.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is required that you wrap the splint .i. on each side of the break, doubling in two or three pieces; remove any excess above it, then rotate the leg until heel aligns with shoulder' bon place, and stretch a long strip between shoulder and thigh near groin below, beneath which lay the fillet; raise another strip along the bone above the knee, securing to relieve tension equally. Then tie three strands each of these strips at the break; as you move up or down beyond it, so lessen the strain; next bring in two ropes that lie above, and place back near the thigh's head, ensuring no movement from its original place, then allow the tension to cease, for no more amputation nor swelling will occur.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if there be displacement, and address it as comes; as we have said many times before; and should there be fragments of bone that cling, it must not be removed but only parted away, for if removal proves impossible, then the skin is to be cut apart, and heal as previously instructed until well again.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And there is no break in the shoulder again, as if in a bandage or on the arm; however, with such restoration done so well, it bears not painful maladies at all.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And healings are made within one year; to keep in mind the different facial features of the time in histe maundre quens d’icit malade la cuixe.
de la ruelle dou genoil	The elesuivres leonge siamain lice, itaure, as sce decaire lesion aoutre lor.ses: theose l’en inces and maundes anse :12013rdirectlysans's oneraise theca.
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	gevel tercures: a lentheccure paralleunge andatiocle
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is to put back what is rightly set in its place, so that it can move as much as it can; then apply the plaster, and you put on an arch support, if you know how, and hold it tight as it requires, then reward all the arrangements we have said for other fractures, such as abscess opening and other similar cases; for each accident that he must endure, so long as he remains sound.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the leg breakage.
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Collects that in the leg there are two bones, one called "mustel" not by right and the other is called "fusil"; and all equipment for fractures similar to what happens with the arm, thus restoration should be as it is for an unbroken arm, and the procedures involved are also identical.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken together, turn the leg in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if one of the smaller bones is fragmented, turn it forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the larger bone is fractured, he feels great pain and sees it clearly; then turn around him. Then alleviate extension, resetting it evenly, but in general, it requires that his dislocation is ugly, with many pieces, making extension smaller and lighter than before; adjust accordingly to its nature.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two ropes made of hemp that mark the leg from one side and the other side until near the knees; then wrap them around both legs under and over, tying them so as to prevent the leg from leaning either left or right, thus it is well done; no one applies a bandage longer than halfway down the leg, nor does he apply rope if not necessary for supporting movement, properly done in case of injury. And check every day the leg, to see if there are any other accidents; cure until it is sound.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the breakage of the two bones.
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	In the ankle, there is never a breakage of one or two bones, but the two bones sometimes experience fractures and in few cases require more than that; thus it'ran.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	ngramme pas. Etupes:
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four years have passed, if the tendon is dislocated, for you will find the bones even and fractured, whether broken or dissolved.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are no bones broken, restore them as we have mentioned for the hand; then take a stalk according to the length of each tendon, and make it slightly wider, and place it on the table that I previously mentioned, and stretch it accordingly; and if there are two or three or more, break them, taking into account their quantity, wrapping each with one piece of linen cloth, and restraining the tendons underneayer the table's surface, so that they lie well against the back of the joint.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is essential that you never forget the other things I have said about fractures, which we have mentioned in our treatises; and accordingly address each case where such treatment is required.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the bone fracture at the pointy part
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When a woman's bone is fractured, if it fits too tightly at the back part, then incline it there and hold it by its rear; next fill her body cavity with cotton as much as one spoonful; then raise the woman slightly and let the cotton fall into the opening of nature a few times until it reaches the entrance, and thus return the bone to its position along with the cotton. When she decides to urinate, remove the cotton, and when you see that it has healed, take a bladder from sheep and tie one end of it around the puncture; then pour all the bladder into nature; then blow air through the bladder until it fills up inside: nature will restore the fracture. Then fill it with cotton again, and leave it for any number of years as long as she is sound.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone at the pointy part of the body is fractured in a man or woman, restore it as we have described for the shoulder; and do not conceal these proximate fractures from those who apply their study and skill to healing, and understand my book. For the fracture signifies various positions that are conducive to restoration: thus no wonder.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the arm, when it is fractured, take a goose's neck and bind the arm with cloth; then wrap it tightly enough so that it stays in place for two or three years, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It requires him who has a fracture with wound, immediately if it is large, as the bones of the shoulder or joint, that he be set now so that the signs we have mentioned hold true.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, when you apply lime plaster, provided there's no other method available, then start to restore the fracture within that same hour, or on the following day, so as not to prick at the incision sites.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the incision sites become inflamed again, then postpone restoration until a new day has passed, so that the incisions are calmed down, and do not touch or treat them for another full day or quarter thereof, as this could bring about a bad outcome.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the fractured bone is exposed at the joint discovered, it requires that you gently and slightly apply pressure with your hands.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not assist you in placing it equally on your hands, then use this instrument made of iron that has .5 or .7 meters long, and its breadth is according to the amount of the wound; and because it's a matter for the examiner whether he should apply .3 or .4 meters, depending on what each case requires in treating fractures. It must be firm enough so as not to bend at all under compression upon your workpiece, nor too thin that its breadth is only one-third of its length; and if it's thicker than necessary for the wound, then place it slightly behind and thick in front, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palainge" because it requires that the limb be placed on top of the exposed bone; and once done, so long as you lift it back up again, making them face each other. And if the fracture is slight and the pulling cannot well grasp the bone, then it must be that you place the head of the bone, so much so that the puller can handle it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot return the bone, as we have said before, using a suitable instrument for this purpose, or incision or wire, in your interest; then make what is necessary to hold that part of the bone which has been deeply fractured and fine cracks.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is brought back and it hurts greatly afterward, you know that it's not in its natural position. Let it be until it has been restored to its place, then anoint with one or two drops of black vinegar very cleanly; and properly let the wound remain exposed, without ointment or oil, so as it does not bring forth putrefaction and corruption; then dress well all around the bone according to the size of the wound, giving care that the wound is not stretched by the fracture. And many times have done this, and left the broken bones more supple and softly than other injuries.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	dece iftevale:sse iaifre. Injetechle theescangex sheurite
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it requires you to dislocate his limb. Thrice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is fixed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it requires that the members be cleansed in such a way as to move the bow quickly downwards.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if for a long time they do not heal, and the bow cannot be set again but returns backward; know that it has small bone fragments, so it requires you to treat the wound with tent, and remove all these displaced bones that bring on the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if an abscess comes to the joint, or in any other form of corruption, it requires you to treat it according to what is written by this scholar herein before us; and when the bone is broken across a limb member, like that of the shoulder blade or shoulder joint, and similar large limbs, do not try to treat it, for many times its death comes from it, but let it stay until it shows signs of recovery, perhaps for twenty years or more. If you can heal it, then cure the wound; if not, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	bruises that come from salt treatment.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We come many times after the healing of the fracture, mainly when it is near the joint, and it's quite disheartening to see the misformed limb member; and sometimes even then they cannot perform their natural movements.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Be careful that it is fresh: if you administer harsh medicines like aloe, frankincense, myrrh, sandarac, acacia, and similar things, avoiding using any of these remedies either alone or together, and prepare them with vinegar or a mixture with honey or ashes; then place it on hot coals and treat it well so you do not remove it from the fire day by day; then loosen it, and start another one until its fracture is healed; or use a piece of hard stone that has been prepared well; because the property of stone is that it ossifies all the tissues above the limbs; and if the fracture has turned into rigidity like bone, and it needs to be removed, then do so from above, and take care until it heals. Or leave it with any lame person until it becomes ossified, and cure it until it is sound.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	a limb that is weakened after being bound.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is restored and thereafter weakened limbs that are delicate or subluxed due to various causes: because it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should; or because it had too many bindings, so that it could not return to its normal position; or by numerous dislocations; or by excessive movements; or because there is little flesh in the body of the patient, then it becomes weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the care is to feed him maladies and make his joints supple as long as they multiply in it; and administer bain, and give him joy and pleasure; then place pitch on the limb so that the great discomfort draws from the joint; and remove it often with water.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	after the healing of the torment: si l’onque, et li malades nons. Et cestin leu deshors leu corps d'où quere un peuple estans; etre ies: parle defface a mailles, au ous en Francone pese.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	cepe aigue cale ce paingement:nètte.emplex douc’ceuxse ture lousteit reiseracare a laisse figure. : thatche seelesse,atgage. Andreccure feuine deithe charaundesseurifteent cauezure, sheere.armejacarde.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And there is never any stone that prevents continuous, prolonged rubbing of the hand and forearm; and so you must make ready every hour a movement in the limb.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is hardened and calloused like bone, it also covers with iron subtly incised; and put on crutches and study in treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book on dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation originates from no joint; for that is why it cannot move, and the limb has misaligned features, and it causes the patient severe pain and significant injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	Whenever there is a dislocation at any joint, it must now aim to return sensation.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if there is delay, the ligaments grow in size (enlarge), and by chance it puts back to its place at the joint; but he does not want that which has grown now moved again where it was enlarged: many times this causes nasal discharge and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Therefore, when this happened, he made the malady less severe first; then let it rest as long as its abscesses are soothed; next apply warm water and oil to the limb, then reset it quickly, and treat each member according to how it came to rest.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I ordered the sections on dislocations in the book concerning the bones of the joints.
des mandibules	of jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Not infrequently the jawbones are dislocated and displaced; in such cases of double dislocation: or they consist of a few bone fragments of their joints, and slightly relaxed; or they are completely dislocated, hanging by their ligaments towards its base, and saliva from the mouth that it cannot retain, can't close its mouth, and wraps the tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	If the dislocations are small, it returns by its own positioning.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and intact, then you must immediately reset it, so that there be no doubt in the dislocation.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	: thevé comme coustirre, leger, andante. 100s:lure.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the physicians put it even, so that it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the reinsertion is torn, immediately so are their joined jaws, if they were burned by hot water or oil, until they heal lightly again; do not tear back any more than we have said before.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are returned evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well and softens its sensation, by placing a cloth soaked in rose oil and wax over it, then gently press down with damp fingers.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And the patient lies on his back with his feet together, and his jaws are between two stones, not allowing them to move either to the right or left, but gently grind meat until the pain is gone and the joints become loose.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then wash it gently, and does not strain to open the mouth for eating and drinking, as long as the jaw joint is loose and sound.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the joined jaws cannot be set back to their proper position after an hour, and are not converted to their original state, then comes feverishness and chronic pain, and perhaps even stomach upset or vomiting.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know it is a loss; and many times have died those who suffered from it in seven years.
de la forcelle	It seems there might be a typographical error here. However, based on the context provided beforehand and common phrases found in medieval medical texts, it may refer to "by force" or a related action without further clarity within these instructions alone. If more text were available around this point, we could offer a more precise translation.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The pain does not allow it to be eased in the continuous parts and has never been dislocated again, and one certainly feels well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that he moves his sick jaws on his back, and extends his arms; then presses the loose tooth firmly with one's palm, and it returns; then place the bandage and the belt, and tighten.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	And the teeth that are close to the jawbone cannot be eased; if it is never dislocated again, then the patient who has said as we did, and places upon the bandage, and tighten them up, and orders him that he lie down until they are sound.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And so then we bring back the head of the shoulder blade, when it is displaced from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	From the dislocation of the shoulder.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	It is dislocated only by .iij. movements: one is that it dislocates the shoulder blade's part above the shoulder joint; and the second is at the lower part; and perhaps it dislocates the part above, and this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	And it is not dislocated behind the shoulder, nor in between the nerves; and more often it dislocates towards the shoulder joint, mainly those who have little strength, because for these it happens suddenly; for those with enough strength, it jumps and recovers its place.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And occasionally it happens to some people by impact or fracture, and the shoulder swells up from an abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you must examine it thoroughly until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known when it goes towards the shoulder joint, and you will find a distinction between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will notice its manifest differences.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	And you will find at the top of the shoulder a pit, and inside the shoulder joint to the head of the shoulder it is also like an elbow, so that he cannot return his hand to its place nor move from any movement.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden because you will show it clearly at the shoulder joint.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this kind of dislocation is not merely to return, when it is new or if he has painful shoulder injuries.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that ministers hold the painful hand up high, then apply pressure on the shoulder area, and lift the joint forcefully at its base, and they hold the hand up again, so as to move it downward quickly if it happens suddenly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it doesn't come as we have described in recent times, it must be that the patient with painful shoulder is bathed in warm water; and he is treated by warming up and softening, as from an infusion of althea and fenugreek leaves in warm water, and then treated.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then you should support the patient's back, and place a piece of cloth on the shoulder area not too soft or hard, then put his foot on top of the cloth, and lift the head of the shoulder carefully, and remove the painful hand.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	And other ministers tie the head of the painful shoulder, so that it does not move backward; this shoulder returns immediately, and if you see it returning in this way:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	And it is that you make one who is larger than the painful shoulder present near to his side, and thrust its shoulder through the dislocated area of the painful shoulder, and lift the dislocation upwards so that the painful shoulder hangs down from it.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And others also pull the hand of the ill patient towards his abdomen. And if the patient's arm is too heavy, they do not put anything on it, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And the resetting can also be done in another way: and it is as if a long stick of earth is placed there like a pin, and not too large nor too thin.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then be placed on the patient, but with soft supports underneath, and the arm is long stretched out in another direction, and the joint returns to its original place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	but if it does not return by these means that we have mentioned, then this treatment is done: take an iron rod of great and four feet wide, which has its head at the middle to enter through another part of the arm, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then place the soft supports on the long section of the arm that does not bruise the patient'inasmuch as he is placed in the other part of the arm; extend his arms along this long section, and put the support underneath it, and tie the shoulder support there, and attach the arm at the hand's head, then place a broad shield on the elbow with one large shield piece, and extend the patient's hands downwards, and let their body hang from another part: the joint returns to its original position immediately.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is done, whether in this way or another, you must put on the arm's other part a spindle of wool, then apply a poultice made of flour mixed with frankincense and myrrh to all the shoulder and back area, then strain it across the arm support, turn the bandage around the poultice, and embrace the hand in its collar, and let the patient's hands stay in this state from now on.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he massages slightly, so that the limbs are strengthened, because they will heal faster; and then massage more after five or six years, and move it; and if it is firm and not soft, then it has been cured.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is loose due to moisture or any other reason that it has come, then you must apply hot compresses on three points, as they are usually placed before or by the caustic treatments.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and after twenty years the joint does not hold, and it cannot lift its arm upwards, then you know that either the nerve at the head of the shoulder is compressed or stretched out or softened; and you know that the joint was never dislocated.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation towards the hand and the calf, or behind, is made by a sudden movement or stretching of hands, and apply another type of bandage; treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the cure comes pain to the patient's limb, and in subsequent movements, he uses many times on the affected area so that the injuries are relieved, and return to their original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation from this injury.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	iste dou leu devoit caoustre, et siens et que cestan ainseliefescaustere. Etienne.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	n devoir ouille:lèlere quell asile.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it requires that you reset it immediately after setting the arrows in place, for if they were drawn out, it would be grievous to bring them back; and by chance, it cannot be brought all the way out at once, especially when it is at the back; as much more severe than other dislocations, and causes great pain, and often leads to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is when it can be brought back, you extend his hand to your hands; and spreads out his arms according to the costume's instructions for above, below, and between, joining all of his joints together or at the root of his palm, so that it returns to its original position.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his own hand and stretches out from the root of the palm as much as it was displaced.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not return to its original position, apply strong extension; and have two ministers extend the arm, and bind them with two ministers so that they do not move during the extension; then turn the arm from one side, wrap a thick and wide cloth around each.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when the pains at the joined joints in his hand are treated with no oil to soften the joint, then join the joint firmly until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is in its original position, place it securely on a wooden stand with rope ends tied to the elbow joint, straighten the arm and hold the maladjusted limb for some days; then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its original position, release the bandage and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, remake the wooden stand and the bandage, and leave it for some days so that it is securely fixed; then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels sore after the restoration of the joint and it moves again, bathe and rub well until it is soothed; or you put a poultice of sheep's fat on the joint for one day and one night, then let the physician enter with either immersion bath or pail wash.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he sweats, you rub the joint regularly, then put the poultice back on, and then enter for either bath or pail wash; and so do it one to three times as long as it is healed; and if you see that, make a cloth of various moistened wool with fat, and stretch it upwards; and if it returns to its original position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the joint in the hand and its return is light, heavier than other joints; he must bring it back to its original position as soon as possible, immediately after it is dislocated, so that the fingers are inflamed or displaced again.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the resetting is if you place his maladjusted hand on a table and extend the ministers' hands, and make him look at the dislocation, so that he puts his palm to the appearance of the joint, and bind it firmly until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	ilesme
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is in the back of his hand, he places the patient's back on the table, and the doctor puts his hand on the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	But if not, if the strain from pulling apart abscesses appeases the incision, and it leaves them in this manner to be repeated.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put the joint back in place after any days, then his dislocation becomes stiff.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and you do not deny to the patient that as long as his hands remain soft, and he cannot stretch anything at all: therefore, you know that nerves are damaged or arteries; if there is no other method for stretching than cauterizing near the wound, and by chance it does not work.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are set, place them on the apparatus we have mentioned, then strain and leave it for a while, then release and leave them in this manner.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no crack or weakness in it, then apply warm water to heat the wound, and rub until it becomes sound again.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the shoulder joints
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	There has never been an extraction of his shoulder dislocations from any place, never on the back of the hand or abdomen.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	for they are the dislocations, and you reset the dislocation in your pockets as much as it recovers, then support the head of the shoulder joints, and press towards the part where it is dislocated.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and leave it for two days, and then put him back in place, as we have said, and let the dislocation come out of its position, make it move again, and reattach it, and do this often until it is tight.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and also do the same if it is extracted from the abdomen of the hand, and do what you have done before, until it becomes sound again; and also do the same when it is dislocated in another place.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	double shoulder dislocation
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulders or neck is extracted, or there are multiple extractions, there is no treatment, because death befalls the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the extractions were voluntary, he cannot hold it, and many times the limbs become softened or the elbows or shoulders or joints.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times it moves at four parts, the one that moves in reverse is called "gilbone disease."
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is that the gilbone disease came in childhood; if it had no cure or remedy for all of them.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which falls down or is caused by hitting or similar things, the old methods of treatment were spoken in great words, and there was no great benefit.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have translated it according to my intention, and formed various remedies.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	And I say that in the gilbone disease which comes from the womb, there is no treatment or cure for it.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that comes in the third ribs, and no one can treat them properly, as I have said.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	the strains ceteur laintres aisles:esprezent ce sloat.
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	And then place a firebrand on the head in the ground, and another at the joints, and tie a bandage around the areas of the patient's pain, and one for their hamstrings, and their groins, and their heels.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	And they divide the bandsages, some on the head and others at the joints among the two firebrands.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And they must be tightly closed, the firebrand as we have said, and he places his palms on the shaft of the arrow until it recoils.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return with this treatment, then he takes a board of two arms long, and fastens it under the point, and places the patient's painful side against it, and lifts the head by the board from under the arrowhead, and puts the pad on the arrowhead.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And he places his fingers on the other end of the board, and presses firmly until it returns to its original position; and if you see that it is not returning, then turn the handle which turns by hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you place two firebrands on the patient's painful point with one arm and at the other joints, and between each of these firebrands, there should be a handbreadth of distance.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And in each firebrand there should be an incision, or it is tightened down into the ground so that they do not move, and between these firebrands there should be another turning firebrand, which makes them turn when they twist, and there should be a few small turning firebrands to make the handle turn.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then tie the string that is near the handle of the turning device on the head, and another string towards the joints at the other turning device, and each minister turns their turning device throughout the entire bandage, and the master places the arrowhead evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is evenly heated with a large amount of oil, and then the ointments, and then an iron plate of about three feet long that marks the area of the gripping site and the healthy part of the spine, and binds it with a bandage as we have said, and uses his painful side lightly so that he remains sound.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	And if at all and administer maundedges of ailumbre tote.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And there is never an appearance in the back of the spinal vertebrae, and one thinks it to be dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, for this reason one should not have any presumption: perhaps death would come as a result.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the hinge (shoulder).
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Knowing that the articulations of the hinge (shoulder) and those of the elbow only result in dislocations alone, not like other joints; and the articulation of the shoulder is divided into four parts: between and outside, and front and back; and more to one side away from it, and slightly forward and backward.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation inwardly is that when joining the malformed leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer and opens more for the malformed foot than the healthy one, and cannot double its gait by fire cautery.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And it is the foot that lies behind the incision swells up for this reason because the kneecap comes down (towards the ground).
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of those who suffer it backward is that these accidents are contrary to what happens in front.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of those who suffer it in front are that their leg is well according to completion; overall, it does not double its gait with pain, and if one tries to move it, it cannot come first, holds back urine, swells up anger, and when going, passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of those who suffer it backward are that their kneecap cannot expand and double its gait, and one leg is more crushed than the other, and the pain is lessened, and the kneecaps move at the bottom between the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The recovery from this similarity of dislocation is that you recognize that the dislocation is always present, and it lasts according to its position, there is no cure for it; and it does not require any presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those cases where the dislocation is fresh, and it involves three types of dislocation: if you hasten to return the joint back together, it will be between and outside, front and back; perhaps it may return on its own, and there is no need for any other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it doesn't return in this manner, then you must prepare one strong physician and place the leg firmly with two hands or on a board that supports under the kneecap.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	And other physicians extend their hand over in a similar way so they push their hands under the patient's feet; and others pull on the rope above the kneecap.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And they extend upwards and downwards once, so long as the malformed foot is raised from the ground only once, and then remain hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to three types of cases, and if the dislocation has returned, it is exactly what we have described.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If it is in the posterior part, it must be cauterized on its skinny side, then put a rope underneath the kneecap, and the ligament, and place the rope above the anger, and toward the force.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then command one other ministers to straighten his arms, and embrace the large part of the shoulder joint on the painful side, and extend it fully: so it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot straighten it in this manner that we have said, then it must be to join the painful joints of both legs by a strong sling placed on top of both heels and under the knees, and stretch out the painful leg more than the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then have it hanging from the top of a beam, and then also hang down .ij. arms long; command one minister to hold the head of the shoulder, and other ministers holding along with the painful side, who encircle the shoulder joint completely because now the dislocation returns quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is no longer present, if you feel pain in the shoulder joint as we have mentioned for someone with hemihyperplasia (an old term referring to asymmetry of body parts), then straighten a strong sling on that specific leg and also hang down arms on it so.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then apply .ij. pins at the head of the shoulder and to both knees, then insert a pin between the shoulders so that it maintains their form.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And let him lie on wet cloths that he does not worsen the pain in his shoulder, then stretch each minister towards him and place the patient's hand gently over the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns to its proper position, that's good. But if not, place him on the floor and press as we have mentioned for someone with hemihyperplasia, and support the painful shoulder joint along the side of the chest.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is before (indicating an anterior dislocation), it must be to extend the painful leg quickly, and according to what I have said; place his hand where he feels most of the pain on the shoulder side, press with one hand there, and hold towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And when the dislocation is not anymore present, it does not extend the shoulder painfully down, and in the same position as we have said lying on the ground, on the hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And let it lie on its face, and the line is extended as we have said before, and it must be pressed at the joint with the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	And when the patient's painful legs extend, and they become level; but now adjust the kneecaps, and place the hammer, and a twitch of an arm band, so that the head does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And let him rest for two or three years, then release it, and place the hammer again; if they are levelled, as before, and let him stay for another three years, until his limbs are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the double dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The glenohumeral joint is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, forward and backward, and behind; and it should not be dislocated forwards.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg towards his kneecap, and if it does not bend at the kneecap, then you know it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and put his foot under your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	Then he takes his shoulder joint in your palms, and pulls between your fingers, then bends the two ends of the glenohumeral joint; and other attendants extend his foot so that the dislocated shoulder returns to its place, and it is a sign that his leg moves towards his kneecap lightly.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And apply the plaster on it, and pull up the leg to the kneecap, and tighten the bandages firmly for two or three years or more, then release; and do not work the patient out until his limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb is not at all, then apply strong extension as we have said in the treatment of dislocation, until it is sound again.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the double dislocation of the ankle
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankles are never fully dislocated, and neither forward nor backward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle joint is floating, and test it before addressing the part where it has dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The reduction should be light and gradually extend it to his hands when he is dislocated suddenly:
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated completely, it is essential that you make the patient stand upright on his right side, and have one man support him by the leg, above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	ilesin theil. Ij:3000. Itunes. ACC ions leu. Ipsum. The-160s ateinle laisseur'stropure.
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this . ij. times, as we have said, piercing the flesh; if it returns, that is well; but if not, then begin again with the operation, for it comes back.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return from this position, then have the patient sit on his back upon the ground, and firmly plant .i. pole in between his thighs, and wrap him tightly with cloth so that the malady does not bleed.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then mark the minister's thigh, and other ministers extend the wound to his hands or to .i. that line which it lies on the neck of the patient;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then extend each minister equally, and let the pole remain between the thighs of the patient so as to hold back the malady while it is being treated.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then place the rings evenly on his hands, and other ministers mark the uninjured leg so that the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it has reached the point, if they apply the emplaster and bandage on top of it, make the strain, and wrap the leg around, and bind the patient's foot above the ankle so that the tendons are not too tightly bound.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	then leave it for .ij. years or .iij., and if the strain occurs, then release it every year or quarter, allowing the malady to come back over four years.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if it comes before this termination, it is not secure as long as it continues to dislocate.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a cut appears on the shoulder when lifted up, it is necessary that you soothe it as we have mentioned in another place until he is well again.
des dois	two things.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the joints are dislocated, they must certainly be extended with work, and it is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocations are in no particular place of the back of the body of the patient, it is necessary that you set the malady on .i. plain or on .ie. table straight, and put your patient there upon what has opened up from these joints, then press his body until he returns;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when it is heavy, and it does not open at all, he places the plant of a table under two joints, then tightens them up, and leaves it for two years, then releases it; and let him rest until he is sound again.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and of dislocations together.
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and it is sought to be restored, many times they suffer from great death.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not overly confident in the treatment, if you have no knowledge of the art and you have not used it for a long time, and if you are merciful and patient and never hasty.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And begin with treatments aimed at easing the pain, and let the patient place their trust in God if there is no hope for health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, then reshape the limb back to its original position, so that the abscesses become less severe.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is restored to its place, if you administer soothing treatments and care for the wound as it requires, with dry ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if there is also a break in the dislocation and small bones displaced, and you manipulate the bone, doing as we have said for simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	And keep from entering the path of fear, as I have said, for it is by your Creator that you are guided in such matters, and for His wisdom and strength. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	The Latin term "fisica" refers to the field of physics or physical science, which studies matter and energy at fundamental levels including their interactions and the laws governing them. In medieval times, this discipline might not have been as formally defined as today but would encompass practical knowledge about various natural phenomena that were observed and utilized in everyday life.
