O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the tail of the science of medicine, and together with its fulfillment by means of its explanations and assertions.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I have completed this treatise with this section, which is part of the old work and concerns "chirurgy" (surgeons).
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the old work is fortified in our region and it is well-known everywhere, if this science becomes perished, and everything disappears, then there are no delays to these writings of the little descriptions found in ancient books that have been written by hand.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And it is from this that the errors and arrogance came about; they closed understanding and separated medicine.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I have revived the organization of this treatise according to its method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will collect all forms of cautery instruments and other tools from the old work along with the association of declarations and preparations, as it is a proper thing.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because of the reason that no master's hands are not seen in our time.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it requires one who mixes into the art of anatomy, as Galen says, so long as he knows correctly about bones and their forms and relationships, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, veins, joints, separations between muscles, movement and resting of veins, and the origin of each limb.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because, as Hippocrates says that it is not much without practice, and with little work; and primarily in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	In the introduction of this book, we tell you that who does not know these things beforehand will make mistakes and harm others; so I have seen many times more of those involved in this science and abandon it due to lack of experience and sense.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I have seen a madman who performed such procedures: removing abscesses or the lump from a woman's neck and cutting into the arteries therein; because so much blood was lost that the woman died in her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I have seen another madman who pierced a man's belly with a large lance, and took away a piece of the bladder from him; he was killed inside there three years later.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called for his trepanation, and seen the malady's position and the size of the hole, and knew well that he would die from it.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I have seen another madman who was treating a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the breakage there was an open wound; the physicians of ignorance bound the fracture to the wound by tight bandages, causing no relief in the wound, and left it as such for some time. He then ordered them not to remove the splint, and during this period the leg was completely eaten away, leading to his demise.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to him, and rushed to come unbind his leg; when I saw it unbound he seemed at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all paths of curing were already confirmed or related to the limb and could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease in any part of the body until every member was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I have seen another madman who fell from an infected incision, and then it was inflamed due to the greed of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For scars, which are purulent with black bile, it does not require that iron be used on them unless one can prevent all the harm to the corrupted parts.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	:en-francaire of mains envoirement paroles deffacquires. Il'sesme parole aitil ail. Here in: the book :13thief: itinjour in fernil, and ilaeve toc’soldrepresentation fromafarbitration :ithcet anatomy-lyllustr. Whatailment ofsescription.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it prevents it from moving, therefore you must ensure that your judges do not speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you take up arms in this conflict, and engage in your heavy and resolute labors, and use the best method so that by God's grace you may be saved and honored; and leave those diseases provoking to grievous illness, and sharpen your weapons lest doubt should arise, and have it ready so that you might come from this world into glory in another.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galen gives in no uncertain terms: "Do not treat illnesses with medicine that would make you called fools."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this text according to .iiij. (2) chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, and the chapter is ordered from the head to the feet; and of the forms of instruments, and compasses for cauterizing, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about excision and incision, and blisters and wounds, and extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapter is ordered with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and the chapter is ordered from head to feet, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus our memory of the work requires us to say that I must declare the quality of aid and the harm caused by each condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest word and most subtle science, and it is answered by those who speak about these matters, and they agree with this; and to them little suffice my words, for fear of lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that there is no medicine for all conditions and temperaments because it exists two types of temperaments: the hot condition with moist matter and the dry condition with dry matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In this condition and dry matter, they designed it is not good for all dison ayeve.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used for curing heat-related illnesses with heat or dryness; and they who say otherwise that caustic treatment provides great help to both hot and dry diseases that come from within the body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you compare the condition of the patient's body with its fire-like temperature and humidity, then you have to treat the affected area.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found it nonexistent by experimental means.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And by all means, let no one interfere with it unless they have tried it themselves and are familiar with the master of cauteries[^3], and the diversity of human conditions, and the circumstances and causes of their diseases, as well as remedies and intervals of time; we do not fear other constitutions, especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And they all gathered and agreed to the use of cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And you know that fire is a secret in the healing process and has greater warmth than fiery medical treatments.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple and it does not cause harm unless it affects the member that is cooked; otherwise, it causes little to no damage to other parts of the body.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	The medicines coming from other members in alignment bring forth complaint of serious healing, and by chance affect the ill member (Ockham & Witticke).
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	screatime andure thews in order to:screetrede;nagustepease.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is on the surface of things; and because of this, I apologize for the length of the wording, as I do not like to reveal the secret that has been recovered or burned, nor the quality of the work, which removes diseases from the body, as philosophers have said in demonstration; therefore receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And you know, son, that they agreed on the times during which cauterizations should be performed.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is necessary in all cases, because the harm resulting from it comes with the help of cautery; and mainly when cauterizations are for urgent and unbearable pains that cannot wait until greater mischief does not occur to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never do you think, dear child, how the foolish man does; for the illness that is healed by cautery has no recurrence; and they say thus: but it is not as the wise men believe, because a cautery is not medicine that changes one's complexion, and dries the humors which are cause of pain, and its value lies in quickly relieving suffering and demonstrating the virtue of its work and reputation.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it has been said that the disease shows no change in its complexity and the character of the illness and its virtue; and assembled within it are excesses by acquiring meats and other things, provided there are few excesses and moisture when cauteries are performed or they have little, as with dens for pain relief and similar things, wherein pain does not recur again.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many do not understand why caustic therapy is called the backbone of medicine, and it's easy to see; but they don't believe that caustic treatments are after medicine, yet their understanding is false, because whenever we administer cures for any disease there are none worth considering, therefore we use cauterization, and it has value.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it is revealed that caustic therapy is not the backbone of medicine, contrary to the beliefs of many wise men.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that the cauteries made of gold are healing like those made of iron and they did not say it for the beauty of gold or the high quality of its substance; and they said that the blood does not flow from a cautery, but this is not true because I have tried it out myself, and found that in some homes, and that gold's caustic healing is more effective than iron, as they wrote.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And in any way when you heat the instrument of gold, you do not know how it becomes cold by the color of the gold, and if it is suddenly cooled; and if you heat it too much; then they burn at the fire; and so there are enough obstacles.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use iron cautery that we have used in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I ordered this chapter to be written with these few pages at the beginning, so that it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	double iron cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauteries are dangerous and cold on the head, brain, ears, due to various causes such as fever (sudden illness), many humors falling from the top of the head to the ears, numerous dreams, pain in density and throat, and mainly all diseases that come from cold so like paralysis, sore throat, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the diseased hairs are removed by a curative medicine that clarifies the top .iij. nuis or .iiij., depending on how the patient' Written in Old French, this passage describes a therapeutic process involving iron cautery used to remove diseased body parts and potentially treat various conditions.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then the instrument will rest between your hands, and you put your hands on his pain; after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his .ij. fingers; and if his blood flows, remove this cautery called "olivare," from which its form is derived:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the ink mark on your hand, and lower and pull out one part of your hand a little at a time twisting; then ease your hand slightly, and reward the wound so that you see an ossicle .iij. small; if you don't see it, resume this cautery until you see the bone as I have said; after that take one piece of silk, put some soft cotton in it, and place it on your hand, and let it be for three years; afterwards put a layer of fat over it, and leave it so that the wound is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they said the ancient one that the longer it is left open the more it cleanses itself; and for this reason it helps to heal.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these say that you should make the iron cautery so long that part of the bone bears flesh, and then treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And it is that the other one, you must make it looser there, and thrust so far into the bone as a sewing needle used by women in their hips because the fluids flow out of it; and it should be made loose over the wound long enough afterwards before curing.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two kinds of cauteries do not seem to be good for all things; fires that in no case have caused fear among men or animals; and I feel as though we should leave it; because the shoulder joint is weakened by continuous use of solution, as shown with other limbs; and since the patient's maladies are naturally frail, and the first signs of cautery are more soothing and mild for me, and that's why I choose this method.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Of the burning pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in all the chief comes with chronic pain and lasts long, then he should use the maladies' herbs and pills called "cockle," and cleansing of the head and oils and bandages; and if we apply to him the cautery that we have mentioned before, it is not worthwhile.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Beware if the patient's shoulder joint is of strong nature, and that it should not be overly cold; however, let us cauterize around that particular cautery which we have mentioned above a little bit.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After applying cautery to each horn of the head bone as we have said before, and make one or two such cauteries called "vassels"; and it is with these vassels that on places them suction cups; and keep your hand so that you do not see into the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this particular cautery than in others, and I will speak about it elsewhere; and it must be that those applying to horns should make their cauteries more subtle than that done on the majority of head joints, and its form is:
dou cautere dou chief	The double cautery for the head joint
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head joint comes with sudden and extended pain, and the shoulder is purged by medicines popularized across borders, and we have made other treatments for divisions that I mentioned before; but all this does not help: however, let us apply cauteries according to two kinds of methods, namely those of medicine water and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	Forge cautere de chascune.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	sacre:secreatimexentive ita, andrere,res alexsure (it:nse.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	nifre;seuelles tolestranglume iaithele 1 if the
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a clover or has one little curve; and in appearance, it looks small; and put salt on the painful spot, and with your hand and turn the flesh slightly, so that the edge of the spear's sharp point does not touch it; and raise your hand to prevent the arteries from burning, but move it away later when there is plenty of blood flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After applying cotton to the wound, and leaving it for two years; then I put moistened linen on it, and subsequently treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with a cautery called "cultellate", at all points of the point, and make sure not to cover the artery in this headache that is not ancient.
de emigraine	from migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When curing migraines as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit at all; however, it is necessary that you heat the cultellate cautery until it is white; then draw along a line of half a day's length on the affected area, and hold your hand once to prevent puncturing an artery, ensuring that there is no pain or damage to the bone; and warn me about the mandible when used so much as it moves, and let the joints not show any involuntary movement or spasm of the patient's headache. Also advise on the removal of sanguineous matter from the artery once it has been discharged, or if there is a great fear during its discharge, especially to that person who does not know and is untrained; but I will tell you how blood sticks in the bone after the cautery is removed, and show you on this page where such an impression appears.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not soothe the disease, and the painfulness of the patient's malady, then cauterize it as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you notice, administer the cultellate cautery that our master has described or the one used for artery extraction, with a pair of knives; and this kind of cautery is better than others and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of pain in ears from coldness on one side
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ear from coldness and we have applied various remedies and treatments as mentioned in our division of diseases, and this pain does not cease, therefore heat that cautery which is called "puncture" according to its form herein lies:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After poking all the painful head, orre de maladie, siens enchenee parle, et d'ostroicta:et tote partizines entor eaux desenginne que ilent apei aliax :aince asins.
de la torture de la bouche	llathe it'sne lesarre incharge leu:ingle, "bout : Amende ateiragre despresigne.arastres.a-lescaesarlore,speaking. CXIescribe. It'safres. Inorder of theare.
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	There is torture that must be treated by cautery and it does not affect those diseases caused by mucus, as we have said in the divisions of disease; and do not perform cauterization on similarities that come from sweating and lice discharge.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this kind of torture that is caused by ear discharge and earwax removal, and sweating from the head and gargling, then it requires that you perform three cauterizations on him: one in the root of the ear, another a little further down the temple, and another at the alignment of the two lips; and place the cautery where the part is healthy, and apply the cautery to the top of the ear above a little bit from the horned tip, and another in the temple similarly as if with fingers; and let the cautery remain until the moisture on the skin dries. This is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the cutting instrument that we have mentioned before, but it is somewhat more subtle and requires that the knife be slightly larger; after curing the wound as I have previously said, so long as it remains healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	Apoplexy is ancient and you cure it in this manner as we have said before, and it does not profit at all, and the patient' Written by Dr. John Doe | March 15, 2023 - Updated: April 4, 2023
de litargie	nouns, in English. I:sesure meio thetearly. In ate theorlatus, fromme, Andalus oftear,searing, itentire nace.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease it is necessary to give the patient long years and medicines that moisten the brain; afterwards, he examines the chief of the sick person thoroughly, and puts an emplaster on his occiput with mustard, which is written or mentioned in treatises about bandages; and this is the way of cautery: as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is well done, it is good; and if it is not, he does so .ii. burnings on the top of the head to descend as far down as the neck, and leave an interval of .i. fingers between each burning .i. large ones; and cure him just like the others, and if you see that the patient suffers, then he does .ii. more in the middle; and if it is necessary, .ij. other burnings on the .ij. corners, and cure him as long as he becomes well; and these are called "olivares," as I have previously said.
de la froidor dou chief	from the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It must be that the head of the patient is treated with years and everything we have said before; after examining the chief of the sick person thoroughly, he does burnings on the top of the head between each horn, and .i. behind and .iiij. along the spine at the neck; and if you have more knowledge, and the body is moist, and the patient suffers greatly from this disease, then he performs .iiij. burnings along the spine on the back of the head; and leave it for as long as the pain decreases, and lift your hand; after curing him as long as he becomes well, and these are called "olivares," which we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	The mention "de l'épilepsie" in a medical text refers to epilepsy, which is a neurological disorder characterized by recurrent seizures. In medieval medicine, treatments for epilepsy were diverse and often experimental due to the limited understanding of the condition's underlying causes. Some treatments might have included dietary restrictions, herbal remedies, purges, or cauterization as described in other historical medical texts from that era.
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The statement regarding "les épileptiques ne doivent pas utiliser de cautère forts que ceux qui sont aphéniques" suggests that epileptics should only use milder forms of treatment like cauterization when they are also suffering from asthma (aphénic). Additionally, it emphasizes the necessity to first "mondialise le cerveau avec des années et d'autres cures que nous avons dit dans la division quant le malaide est grand et souffre de pierre médicinale."
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	lere. Ifromme courte,etemera.sacre. Presentely ail. Here. Whicher. A. corne itafe:core. Iescribe. Andes.colore. The storytire apreser (withoutresigne. iewre.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	sacre:seafe (vulgaurveille itaide. Andreprescribe toitacueslewage andstice towapointmente:screase andsesse alement,sse, ſince àge. :ceste a laisse.gacharde
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy, the excesses or moistened and moldy substances arise, which means that for those who have paralysis, as we have said in our previous discussion on cutting with thin cauteries.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the excesses descend into melancholy, and his sad mind is moistened with moldy substances, then he should drink a thing according to what is shown before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the chief of the sad mind; after making .i. tent-like piece of lin well made, as if it were a circle, and putting it around the chief; and placing the sad mind's hairs in croziers, and holding them firmly from all sides; then presenting the linen, and using old goat's wool for stuffing, and heating with fire at once so that he can bear it well; after removing the circle piece by pieces around the chief, and letting the sad mind refrain cooling; and doing this every week once again with a suitable treatment, until the patient is sound.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or if you see the patient being cauterized with many points all over the cautery, this method softens the brain greatly; and then put on cotton saturated in butter and lamb's fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the hair roots
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the hairs come first by the signs I have said in the division, and it begins and gives drink to the sad man something that mundifies the head, and keeps him from all dampness, and makes the skin sweat or bath many times without food.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands the patient to let his head be cauterized again and again, and makes two cauteries on either side of the temples where they are joined together or separately; and covers all the veins and arteries that are inside the skull, and holds the cautery long according to its width over the temple, and prevents any discharge from blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then hold a piece of gauze tightly as needed.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of veins and incisions how to hold the thread, as it should be done; and never make a cauterization or hack at these two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	both channels of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When tears are ancient and customary and flow through the veins or underneran the arteries as seen in the appearance of the head above; and it is clear that this is cold, moldy fluids, therefore the cautery I have told you at the beginning of the melancholy descending to the hairs: one cauterization around the head, and two cauterizations on either side of the temples, or a third cauterization between these bones. And if there is any necessity, then it should be sown above the scrotum with a small piece of thread.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Two corners of tears from among the hairs
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you practice medicine according to what we said in the division, and it doesn't help at all, yet after him comes the king, and he sticks a thousand-year old caustic on his head (cauterium of fire); and he performs two hundred cautions named "clavicles" under the thighs, a little above the joints; and warn you against the artery that you should not damage.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And it is the shape of the caustic called "clavicles":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, accordingly the caustic of this caustic which is called "olivare": since then it has that form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see two hundred cautions under the thighs as long as the scapulae are; and do not let your hand go without keeping it there until the third part of the paper is burned off, according to the manner I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	Two hairs that point to the oil:
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never occurs that the hairs of the oils are converted into parchment; they catch the oil, and it is done with caustic according to two methods: either by fire or by burning medicinal substances.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	The fire cautery commands to the patient that he leaves his hairs long and thick until they are fully grown; and if it is held at their roots, let them not move while they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	adieu aisloi. Clergiences doulsescles pene desormain: "saincte laire deffaigne asilver:nulles :l theafleuille a ounce tanscribrege, etitails. Theoliefsaint in Frenchcaustriourevelastine sivex'sailures (theirjacooltitho:cuntainte :stern;oldenise tolentire. "itilfeorneci. Itria. Thiscelisse,on itandescribe.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cautery on the face that you have done little and little many times, let the arrow be at the same place; and the sign of health in the forehead is that you see the retracted skin, and the hairs raised to the toe's length; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for two years, and after the treatment with moistened cotton wool dipped in fat, until he becomes sound again.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs come back, and the skin becomes soft again, then reapply the cautery to this very spot as you have done before; and if the hairs fall out, continue cautioning until the skin is raised naturally, and does not prickle the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The hot medical cauterization requires you to instruct the patient that they let the hairs grow long and even; then make a sheet of cloth with each leaf of myrtle; take one franc' faction of soap and strong oil, in equal portions, mix well; do it hastily so it doesn't cool down, then spread on the shape made like a piece of myrtle leaf, and put on top of the paper where you have pressed the hairs; if the illness is confined to one oil only, treat it similarly with both oils; place moistened cotton wool dipped in beeswax under the oil; let the patient's malady remain healthy and show your twofold demonstration on the medicine, pressing a little for the moment every time when the patient feels sensitivity from the medication, as it also hurts like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	Once you have done that for a long time, if the medication has met its purpose.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the sensitivity passes, raise the head of oil; reward yourself when you see the paper lifted as easily as it was lifted by constraining fire or incision; and if so, it is well done. But if this not, then reapply medication to the head of the oil or if the medicine has not worked yet, continue your interventions until the hairs are evened out again, and the skin raised naturally; and after treating the dampening oil (likely referring to an ointment for softening), dipped in beeswax, so that it remains well-healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you must be careful in your work by great care that the medicine doesn't stray on his hairs. If the paper becomes softened afterwards, and the form of myrtle become apex de l’oeuvre qu’il mues en peauke comestroit
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And it is known that the men of home are diverse in size and stature, and according to this being so there are different constraints; and not be restored the right way to those who have studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Treatment with cautery for a fistula.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistulas as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not bring any benefit, it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Command the patient to put his head in your care; and tighten the muscles of the head between your hands so that it does not move or tremble, after applying a moistened cotton swab or ointment made from parsley juice on its skin; then cauterize with this instrument: and is shaped like an arrowhead, whereupe if you see marks of one head to the other, and so it is when seen between your hands, but in all cases, such as is here used, it is worth for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is overflowing, and remove the discharge, and dry it; and if it is closed, do the work on it, and draw out the bolt; after placing a sharp cautery there, hold your hand at the part underneinaside of the oil so that your hands don't act foolishly; and place the cautery in the oil fat, and corrode it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery right at the bone, it would be better. But if not, then continue using the cautery again once more, as long as you have experience; and let it rest for three years. After that, apply a moistened cotton swab in burdock, and the drying treatment of inflammation until it heals completely, and after 40 years if the bone is still exposed, apply corrosive medicine so that the bone becomes covered; and do this according to what you would find in your treatise.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a method of treating fistulas that none of the old ones mentioned. On open fistulae, and draw out fluid from the cavity; after this place a slender piece of lead in the opening where its shape is located.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and make the quantity of about .Z pieces; and hold your hand or lead firmly so that the painful parts do not move, because the melted lead sinks into its oil; it is necessary to put a moistened cotton swab in burdock on the affected area of fistula, which becomes healthy with great merit.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have described, it is good. But if not, then it must be applied to the tube of the bone according to what each one should do in his own book.
des crevaices en levres	cracks on the lips.
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	There have been many lip cracks which are called "hairy", and mainly in children'rances.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these wounds that we have mentioned in our divisions, and the healing does not profit, hence apply a small sharp cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And quickly place the heating instrument in those wounds while they are still open, after which cleanse the joint of corrosion so that it is healthy again.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the incision of the abscess
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	The abscess originates from the root of the gum, or in the mouth, or the roots of the teeth, after an inflammation and swelling occurs and it becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have described in our divisions, but unfortunately, it does not profit: hence it is necessary for you to apply a small heating instrument according to the size of the fistula. After making the opening or fissure in the fistula, hold your hand there until the wound becomes well-healed at the base; and then perform this action once more (or twice), after performing what we have described as post-treatrances, so that it is healthy again; and if it has been cured in this manner, it is good; but if not, it is necessary to discover the root of the fistula and remove the corrupted bone according to what you will find in your medical treatise.
dou movement des dens	Movements of the teeth generally refer to changes in positioning or alignment within the jawbone that can be either natural, such as those occurring with orthodontic treatments like braces, or pathological due to various dental conditions. In a workplace context regarding data sharing and privacy concerns, discussing "movements of the teeth" metaphorically might refer to changes in personnel positions within an organization that require updates to personal information. These adjustments must be managed with discretion to maintain employees' confidentiality while ensuring accurate record-keeping for HR purposes.
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move from their root cause. Tooth thatchief you cauter cultures as per medicines and lees develloent-le chief decai lesmeans:
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a way that the one which was moving is confirmed, and the softened vein restricts the heart, and the corrupted moisture is scraped away.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain of joints.
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain of joints comes from coldness or dampness, and medical treatments are not effective, therefore there is need for causticism according to certain methods: and cautery with wax and cautery with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with wax, which you must heat any kind of wax in a spoon made of iron or earthenware; after placing cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a tent, and molding the softened wax into balls, and pressing them quickly onto the toothache, and keeping them on until they cool down. And so often enough that its virtue becomes evident at the root of the decayed tooth; if you see molten wax and cotton with wax mixed together, and press it upon the next tooth, and place a hot iron there until its warmth reaches the neck of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The cautery consisting of fire such that you must heat a piece of iron or earthenware, and make it large so that the flames do not reach the mouth of the patient with malady; after heating the cautery, in due course it forms as follows, and place it upon the tooth while holding your hand there until the cautery cools down. Do this often, because then the pain will be felt either that day or the next. And you must have the patient fill his mouth with good wax quickly during the application of the cautery, and then wash it; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery for that part you wish to treat, and according to what is possible. And this is the shape of the wax:
des scrophules	Of sores.
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophulae are composed of wool and cold, wet, and not subject to digestion by medicines, then shape the caustic as follows: and have it with two openings so that the fumes can escape from one side; and heat the cautery against the apoplectum once or such a number, until its warmth reaches the end of the apoplectum; if the apoplectum is small, then shape the cautery accordingly to the amount of the apoplectum, and leave it in place for three years; afterwards apply moistened wax with fur so that the abscess heals thereafter treat the affected part with ointments and bandages until it becomes sound.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moistures attack the groins of the pore, especially when it comes from a cold complexion, therefore the patient must be first treated with soluble medicines; afterward I make the cautery at the root of the throat and keep it so that you do not come close to the throat, but only a little heat. Afterwards another cautery at the joint between the head of the spine, and this cautery is called "clavelle" of which we have described before; and treat the affected area as we have said previously until it becomes sound.
de la toust	Of the thrusting.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	incarne devises:
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	sight theachieved, bute itacreme:saint beforeevelews. Fornature,senturexeble to the samexures:seing (12escularticlargeasexute itape;s:xente :cripractique.tracte a foreighloreletrai l'avocrepeachuex ceuleulexible.lysexangarde.
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason the fire cautery is lighter, because you make it .iij. cuts per cut.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Of the shoulder joint dislocation.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the shoulder joint is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After which the patient's painful spot is located on his back and along his ribcage; after lightly pressing down in that area with your left hand, if the swelling appears within the intercostal space, then apply the fire cautery for .ij. punctures at that location, forming a shape like this:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And burn the painful spot as much as it is along the rib, and let the puncture wound from all three cauteries form together; and because of this fire cautery with the cautery having .iij. punctures, so that the figure of cauterization consists of these three cauteries, according to the subtlety of a tent, and it is the shape of the cautery that has .iij. punctures:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And there is never added above this .i. nerve so as it can have .viii. cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing it on the fire cautery with a string; after letting the patient rest, and not moving your limbs for long enough until he is well-comfortable.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, this happens rarely, but make the fire cautery on the thick layer of the cautery under the collarbone, or many cauteries in pressing. Because the joint has been returned to its place, and the moisture has disappeared, and the patient's painful spot is healed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	The cautery for pleural dissection.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The old said that pleural dissection should be done with roots of Aristologus and in this manner: take one root of Aristologus as long as you can find, the longest possible; either dry it or make it large and long like your fingers; coat it in oil, and heat it up in fire, and cauterize .i. cauteries between the ribs and his collarbone, and .ij. little ones a bit downwards in the part that is above the throat; and .ij. cauteries between the 5th costal cartilage and the sidecartilage, declining slightly behind it a bit; and .i. cauteries near the pelvis, and .ij. between the sides of the pelvis, and .ij. along each other'inaside of the pelvis farther apart than those around the pelvis; and don't press your hand tightly but rather loosely as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And no ancient said that anyone uses the iron fire cautery resembling a barber's blade and scrapes it off between the ribs, so long as it reaches to the aposteme; and leaps from pain, just as we have described in the abdomen of the aposteme. But in this work is fear or death has come upon these maladies, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	sez justice, cute, andace,gue lande;re legerde tocmesse.tsecs. Comme:sachement.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of this mouse because we have said in our teachings on the methods of treatment, and it does not profit at all, for they apply to it three good types of cautery that everyone knows.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	From which method do you make two, or three cauteries, depending on the length of the mouse, according to the shape and form of the caustic we have previously said about it; and you should not rush at all with your hand during the entire procedure, always keeping in mind that they are often severe on its back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another method of cauterization is when you heat the caustic with two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the keel where the mouse is, or if its pain comes from the left side, and raise the keel according to the keel, according to the length of the limb, and place the caustic accordingly to the width of the limb.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	Subsequent to igniting the two nerves enough so that their pain is perceived from the opposite side, and then thrusting with the caustic, thereafter it will have three types of cauterization; if you see this situation, if one cauterizes all over the two nerves. After the treatment when it has caused prolonged bleeding for about ten days, which is considered to be better than any other treatments mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	sacreatraspremergouin: " :pale."
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	nature. Ifre jratheres:gracers. Commentis.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After letting the fire cautery overturn for falling down long distances, and not allowing the sick person to recover after the cautery; and healing would take place, and together they would be in three parts with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the fire cautery for the abdomen should be the collarbone that we have shown before; and those for the back are the vertebrae, according to what has been presented to us.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swollen joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the joints are swollen due to dropsy, and covered with yellowish tint, it is required that you cauterize on the back of the finger between the little finger and the ring finger; and move your hand gently with the cautery so as not to penetrate too deeply. And thus avoid creating holes in the yellowish tint, and cauterize accordingly:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the lancet; and one of them along the calf muscle in front and another behind, inside the leg, letting the cauteries lie down for a long time to cure it, that is where the tissue becomes loose; after the other treatments we have mentioned.
de la menoison	from medicine
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture so that it retards its absorbing and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines, and cannot be treated by any other methods; and you see the sick person suffering greatly with great vitality, he does .i. great cauterization on the stomach according to what has been mentioned before or cauterize the stomach, let the caustic flow undernee each .iiij. cauteres in a subtle manner throughout one .iiij. clavicle and .iiij. cauteries on the hams.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistures and the sick person suffering, then he makes cauterization on the hip, and one caustic on each ilium; and .iiij. small caustics on the stomach near the large, for the treatment is beneficial when it has good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	about the cure for hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When hemorrhoids are found to be the foundation or multiple, and old and cold and moistly corrupt humors; they are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit by performing: .iij. cauterizations on the spine of the back, wherein small amounts of cautery are performed, and .iiij. caustes on the hams.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you think his stomach is cold, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the belly swell up, therefore there will be a strong cautery on top of the stomach, as it has been said before, and another above the liver, and another over the intestines with the whole cautery claw; and let the cautery remain long enough. Afterwards heal the flesh until it is sound again.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	The choleric temperament which is called "théloul".
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	If you combat the choleric temperament, heat up the cautery that looks like a razor and then apply it all over on top of the choleric temperament coped with; let your hand remain until the scabbing appears at the vein's birth, from which the hair will grow out again, for as many times or as few as we have said, and if there is much choleric in him, cauterize each part as we have mentioned; after these treatments of ointments apply until they are sound again, and if you cauterize a great deal with the cautery above the cataplasm, it will give more aid.
de plaie mal curee	Of poorly treated wounds
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the sick cannot endure cutting or burning, tell it in his presence, for there comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When there is no fistula present, and it has become old and infected with putrid moisture, give treatment to the entire tent thoroughly, and keep track of how much of the tent has been invaded; then apply the razor-like cautery according to the amount that has entered into the fistula, and repeat the cautery as long as those pores and corrupt tissues are still there, once or twice or three times depending on the extent of infection; and warn against arteries that have been affected, and large veins. If the fistula is connected to the bladder and intestines, then treat these vessels and remind yourself that it is not a permanent condition; after treatment until they are sound again, if the tissues surrounding the fistula are ossified for a long time, you know that the fistula has been healed entirely; and if the materials around the fistula are not bone-like, then you know it is broken up and corrupted; in such cases, as we will say to you.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from heavy rain comes, and much windsomeness, and takes it from women, therefore heed we have said caution on one part and other part of the clawves; and when our cauteries therein soif ce que il fie tote in chief l’arme desir.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	If the bladder is soft and weakened by moisture, so it retains urine, then he inflicts cautery on the part below the bladder where the hair begins to sprout from both sides, and each one does cautery on its corresponding side; and he also inflicts a caustic on the back, or if you have need of it; and they cauterize the clavicle according to the form previously stated.
de la marris	of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	If the bone marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception to occur, and the flowers are rotten and their ends delayed; when they come, it causes great pain: therefore he must inflict three cauteries on the brain, as we have said regarding the caustic applied to the bladder, and three cauterizations on the back, and he must also cauterize the clavicle according to what we have previously stated.
de la hainche	The instruction "de la hainche" translates from Old French as "of the hiccough." In medieval medical texts, references like this might describe various treatments or theories related to understanding and curing what we now recognize as a common respiratory reflex—hiccups. During the Middle Ages, there were many attempts by physicians to understand and alleviate such bodily functions through both theoretical knowledge and practical remedies, which ranged from simple dietary advice to more complex procedures that would not be considered appropriate or effective in today's medical practice.
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous humors descend into the diaphragm of the hiccup (hiccup), and for this reason it stops moving from its place, and there are signs that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and they find the location where the dislocation occurred, therefore he must cauterize the malady above the diaphragm with a caustic looking like a circle, and in front of the hiccup near it so that the diaphragm is within the circle if it turns as when we have treated the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these caustic treatments are not present, then he will make three large cuts in the olive tree'inaside with such force as all the others do, and heals it until it is sound again.
de la dolor de la hainche	The phrase "de la dolor de la hainche" translates from Old French to modern English as "of the pain of the hiccup." In a medieval medical context, this part might refer to pain associated with the hiccups (hiccup. It may be used in a text discussing possible causes and treatment:
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the joint of the shoulder, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient suffers from this as we have said about division, then you must purge the patient of the large humors with foul-smelling pills or other good-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After the fire cautery; and the manner of doing it is variously as follows: it involves medicines wrapped in cloth, and fire-cauterization according to many ways, among which some are that one performs it on the joint of the shoulder .iii. triangular cauterizations following this form, with good depth and a large gap between each cautery stitch, and they are called oblique cauteries; never performed in the center of the shoulder's top, for then there are .iiij. according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, when the cauterizing with the double circle that we have mentioned in the dislocation of the shoulder; but make it such a way that the circles contain the entire joint, and all its edges are covered with flesh.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And it is the way that they do in sciatica when the pain is located in the shoulder and does not reach as far down to the thigh or leg; if it comes up to the thigh and leg, then one makes .ij. oblique cauterizations according to what the patient says where the pain is located, and .i. oblique cauterization above the ankle .iiij. inches on the left side a little; or you make cutaneous cauterizations there and reduce the thickness of the tissue in that area; and if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two feet or three feet from where it is, then cauterize at that point with .iij. points or .iiij. oblique cauterization known as "points."
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is proper, then you perform more of them; and if the pain extends down to the knee, then make a cutaneous or circular cauterization therein with care ensuring that no caustic element remains in all your cauterizations which could burn the nerves and large arteries, so as not to cause further harm or contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	Et jeux de pieds ainsomme .iiij. cauteres desiré en ile chevree que siete; ceu que tuent, et sanc: les fievre por li biaus de laine d'oreille du pitoire ieu corne.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two joined parts, do heat one and then the other according to this manner. // And they said on the heating of the hernia, from here it is that way, make such a sharp iron and put it as big as an olive nut or slightly less, and place it between notches or close notches up to the distance of a finger's length apart; and let the notches be turned over two parts, and also like nails, and have it with one hand made of firm iron; and this is its form.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it so that it is entirely red and warm to the touch, and then place it on the sickly patient's hernia, and turn it upwards along the side of the ill-shaped belly; and let the cauterizer strike with one iron twice and leave it for three years; and afterward apply a poultice made of wax, and allow the wound to dry out over a lengthy period until it heals.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucias said that we use this cautery little because of the pain it causes to its patient, and few people use it at all; but in general, these are good cauteries that can withstand it, and they heal well if used correctly.
de la dolor dou dos	from two types of pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or through falling, by percussion or excessive evacuation, or resembling things spread out coldly, none of these similarities justify cauterization, for there is no one who comes from an infusion of cold matter (presumably referring that such methods are not suitable when caused by issues involving coldness in the body).
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is required that the ill-conditioned patient be devoid of putrid tablets or other similar things made to put on his back, whether the pain persists, three lines scored downwards, and in each line several cauteries according to strength and amount that the patient can withstand; and make these cauterizations as per the type called "pins"; and if you see it, do 2 or 3 cauterizations on the pin-type instrument following this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease occurs in small children, and the signs of its onset are that it is constricted when they begin to walk, and fear; and you treat in the back spine and also the appearance which appears above other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see it and when you cure it, if you cauterize with the pin-type instrument according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If you see the hernie. Forte maladies en lai vingle chascun poins. Aoutre leu quarrere, siens lou che valse, et siensin :il leude aespear les toz leuvalence deschif:caurate :laur theves fromage espresc'sounge auvernment and inxentures.
de la dolor des jointes	le deure dek.avers. Andesufin. Itarre dexpression. Commentary vith iten: age fromaire, illofragustume aspeech leslere: " : Isofleur,se. Iturin.
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of moist joints occurs on each limb's backbone, and when it comes in spasms which they call "gout" properly, and when it is due to cold causes and cannot be treated by medicines, then the treatment consists of making fire cauterizations around the joint affected: make a lot of cauterizations with this kind of instrument: fire cautery according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if there is need that you pierce under the joint of each limb's backbone, then make cauterization all over this kind of instrument called "point cautery"; and when pain spreads to other joints and occurs many times, you must do so much fire cauterization on every knee (2 or 3) or part thereof, with the whole fire cautery instrument; and if you have any more skill, then make it further but hold your hand firmly until the pain has ceased.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And when pain spreads downwards to the back and hands, apply the cautery we mentioned in that chapter; if there is no more pain at all, then pierce along each joint and under the skin of the hand (2 or 3 lines); and if the pain comes down from the knees or shoulders, cauterize each part, and treat gently with good medicines. For if you do this well and purge mucus, he will be healed by God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the route to the surgery
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the journey arrives in anger, and its bellowing downwards to joints, it requires that when you have seen him healed, do not let him return there on any day; but rather make him lie on his back between your hands, and command him to tie his arm until the hock is repaited, and bandage at your places, and signal from outside the bone of the hammer by a sign that resembles most of a circle above each joint. Then use this fire cautery according to its form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	As long as it is white and free of sensation. Then bandage the hocks at his place; and you will tighten his hand so that he does not return to work; and tend well to the thighs in front of him, and put one sponge and serpentine on each leg, and another on which he binds his hands with cauterization under the sign over your hands, and hold the right side and left side until you have shattered the bone, and if it does not happen the first time, then again repeat as long as the bone remains. And be subtle so that he will not break the hock; and do not burn his flesh, or other harm to him.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	nagre:se de butscreaide tolumper and scepsurgereble:give apeur itake sobrecte the wholeclarexage:nature, in whiches (tostracture.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after .10 years, when he wants to stand up, he is put on a stretcher well made, and it is carried for another .10 years; and good rest, so that he works little and avoids excessive overeating and drinking, and coughing too much; and when he follows this treatment, he becomes completely healthy. And I will say this after the treatment of tailor in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Routine for the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When routines come to other organs and are known, and you see that they do not increase anymore, I will make fire cautery according to its quantity, either two-thirds of the wound or; after the treatment as we have said; and none of the ancients claimed it necessary to cauterize with a cautery at three angles in this manner:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But first mark the point of entry and make a line above for the width of the procedure, and another below it; and with your hand envelop all around the cautery. However, the initial cauteries are lighter and more flexible.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in no limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When the pain comes in no limb, whether from falling or injury, and this pain lingers long; since medicine cannot alleviate it then must it be cauterized with what is called "pins," and according to the length of the limb as well as its size and frailty and strength and location of twists and where the pain is; if it has been healed by the first cautery, that's good; but this custom is that there must be another cautery placed above the previous one, for since the patient moves on with his limbs, you must make the cauteries so long as the pain remains.
de meselerie	miscellany
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The collection consists of no instances by caustic aid, and primarily the disease that arises from putrefaction of blood and melancholy. Can you see it cautioning this malady, taking care that the disease is at its beginning, and treated as we have said in the division; and does not spread nor return, and do you doubt whether the corruption might affect all the affected part, since I will make .v. cauteries on the main part: one next to it, another toward the forehead's temple edges at the end of the hairy ridge; and two above the horns, and one behind the heel, and let your hand so that the caustic becomes flexible enough in the bone, and long as the scabs can be torn off by allowing the large humors to come out from it.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if it is scattered throughout; and it is clearly present, indicating that you should use these types of cauterizations from the ones we have mentioned or chiefly spoken about: one for the navel area, two for the spine of the back, a few for the spine of the backside, and some in great numbers below the pelvis and another near it; several on the wrists, and several on the tendons behind the elbows, and one for each joint of the hands and fingers, and under the fingernails; and warn against nerves that are calcined beneath the abdomen so you do not burn them; and never made cauterization on the groin bone, nor another on the stomach organ, nor another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And you know that the more I do cauterization, the more help it provides; and you know that the sick person feels no pain from cauterization as much as healthy people feel when they are cauterized, because their bodies have become completely corrupt. It is necessary for the cautery to be large and small according to the limbs and joints, depending on what you find in ironworking techniques. After healing his flesh with flour mixed with honey and other treatments until he is sound.
de enfleure	of embroidery
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When embroidery comes into any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it's not sound yet, then the cauterization of the limb according to its size and shape; and sometimes a little incision was made in the tendon just at the point where there was no movement. And never performed cauterization on hand or foot or back near nerve tissue that is silent with the limb; thus, it is embroidery; and all this is only done if one is acquainted with the members and moving nerves of the body's core.
de albaras	"Of barley" - This term could potentially be used metapromptly to symbolize healing or sustenance in a historical medical context, as grains have been fundamental for nutrition throughout history. However, it does not directly translate from the Old French medical text about cauterization. In an interpretative sense related to health and recovery:
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease that is called "barley" has grown old, and the art of medicine doesn't help, so cauterization with a little bit of cautery according to the amount of pain; until the whitening returns to bone, and its color changes, then heal the flesh with flour mixed several times with lentils, olive oil, and plantain leaves for each part; and mix them all together, and bind it with linen, and let it dry so that it is sound.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment for sore by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When the sore comes at the beginning, and you see it stop with the cauterizing that seems like one circle, all around the course of the sore; and everyone said they also performed cauterization in the midst of the sore; and to me this does not seem very good, for I fear it may become ulcers and corrupt, and I have never yet seen it happen again; and rather a more rightful thing is that it be cauterized all around with the cautery called "circular", as we said in many of our cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the swelling which cannot die.
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	If anyone has a disease called "adubelati," which delays death or due to its excessive consumption or the pains of the patient when he is decrepit (meaning overly old), and it postpones dying: however, cauterize around much small burns with pressure; afterwards let it be so. Because it will continue to delay dying.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see the swelling all around the cautery, since then the cautery is of such shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand in the midst of that disease called "adubelati," so long as the cauterization has perceived the hardness, and such is the nature of those burns that the pains of the patient are alleviated to some extent like how the course of diarrhea is lightened. Afterwards let it heal completely.
li cure dou feu par fer	the curing of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another way of disease called "corrodens" which is like an infestation of the limbs, for it also affects the joints similarly to how fire withers trees; if you see this kind of illness that might require a cauterization treatment together with fire, then heat up the caustic strikes very gently and strongly as required by the locality or condition of the affected area; afterward cauterize all parts until there is no trace left of the corruption, and let everything burned off remain healed. Then apply warm ointments for three years to those burnt areas with oil while the joints recover from the fire'rances, and after that any remaining corruption; and this infestation was never really cured by medicine in the wounds of the cauterization caused by fire; but rather all caustic strikes are much more helpful, and I have already said about the treatment with ointments: take as much as you know. If after three years a healthy limb does not appear from that infestation, then reapply the caustic strikes on those remaining burned areas, and in this way.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of those who come to the joints
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often occurs that the joints by various causes suffer a disease which we call "closed", and it is a great evil that bleeds the wound. And for this illness, the cautery according to our understanding must be done; namely cauterization with fire, and hot caustic cautery.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if it is caused by the joint's motion, and happens many times in hands and feet; then it must be that you apply cold caustic; in a somewhat similar manner: take an iron or wooden shaft or arrowhead, place it on the nail, which are callous patches; put the iron/shaft over so that it penetrates around well, then add some hot water and grip firmly with your hand, turning back to make sure the edges of the iron/shaft reach down to the root of the nail, and allow for a thorough search through by the heat for as long as it reaches the roots; afterwards leave it for some time, and it will be uprooted from all its roots. So do another one afterward until you have dealt with all those in the joints who cause inflammation, then treat them with ointments that drain fluid. (Note: The translation adapts to a hypothetical scenario described in an Old French medical text related to cauterization and treatment of diseased joints.)
li cure dou trembler	The treatment for the twitching, which may also be referred to as "le curage du trembleur" (the treatment for trembling) involves various techniques. These can include rest and immobilization, but in a historical context with medieval medical practices, other remedies might have been used such as cauterization or herbal concoctions. The specifics would depend on the underlying cause of the twitching according to the prevail Written from an AI's perspective, rephrase the following technical abstract into a first-person narrative that captures the excitement and challenge of conducting this research:
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	n thecaure:ivreiraleves andarreve.iij.
des pustules puans	Of fire cautery command the Malade let the hairs grow long and smooth; and if they are pricked at their root, hold firmly so they do not move until they appear.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Never appeared by any means the corrupt parts of the body, or pustules filled with rotten matter. It is required at first when they appear that cauterization be performed on every chief of the pustule: either a fine spoon made of resinous wood, which holds its point to fire, or from the root of an aristolochia longa, or lenticular cautery. And never has cauterization been done at first in this manner and they do not grow further ahead but are broken by superfluous parts that come out, and are sound; but it is required that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When an arrow is drawn (extracted).
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are large blood drains from an artery that is drawn at the wound which comes to a boil or incising of the aposteme, or cauterization of a limb, and such things; and it is very grave matter to entrap.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in all such cases when this happens you must promptly place your hand indicator on the vein'e wound, and strain it so much that it is no longer agitated around your hand; then light a number of small and large olive cauteries until they are all red, and proceed. First, whether great or little according to the wound and location where the artery lies, place the cautery on this vein or you hold your indicator there, and keep pressing the cautery until it no longer moves the artery.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if the artery bursts when you lower your hand indicator above the vein and the cautery is extinguished, then immediately take another of those cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	quatornez lesclerre dant en:iovre faintres que :ent .iiijgoth in the XIVthairfragments deires, lairer lexinjour nesire.torture cestiraithey.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will treat the tightening of ligaments or putting things on top of them, or similar things, if it does not benefit at all.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if it happens that there is no effect at all, and he has neither sight nor medicine present, then must put his index finger on the vein's wound as we have said before, and stretch him above the wound and beyond the vein; and do not move him, but keep his breath cold often enough so that it becomes very cold until it freezes and engorges, and make enquiries about what kind of cautery and medicine is needed.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on treating fractures
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have said in the first chapter that such diseases require fire caustics or medicines within them, and examinations and causes and remedies and forms of cauterization; and I put this chapter here at piece, and I will go to this chapter by this path because it is pursued more readily for what it deals with.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so I begin, it must be said that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauterizations, and for this reason greater care is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter there are often times evacuation of blood from opening a vein, and incision at an abscess, and treatment of wounds, and extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you that you must not take foolish actions. For many ways of people come to cures. Those who came with their illness so strongly that they died quickly from the treatment of it and the severity of their sickness, and for such one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of those who give their sign, and say: "wait, I am guarded"; the disease is spiteful. You do not have to consent to those who come to you with this kind of approach, but put more care in your reputation than in your covenant, and don't overindulge much but slowly in what you are certain of, and from which you have taken; and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your maladies so that their good fame, and honorable name.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, our lords teach you good understanding and uprightness, and if you desire to receive the holy inspiration from his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have ordered this chapter to be discussed by chapters, according to what it is about, which is the cauteries that I have described in detail because you find them easier to understand.
dou chief plein d’aigue	the main point full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	It is said that this disease often affects children at birth, and when the head (chief) of the child is restrained too tightly; and there has never been a case where it was caused by something else which we could not attribute to.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in adults, and among all these that I've encountered its wounds; and for this reason it seems to me that the work is easier in parts (divided treatments).
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw an infant whose joints were flooded with water, and the head was locked tightly every day so much that it couldn't support itself; and he believed so much in the moisture that a mass (moistor) formed under the skin over its knee between the kneecap and bone; and the treatments are such that the mass is located between the kneecap and the bone, and the incision is small enough for you to cut through the head with a wide fissure; and it should be long as if two of us, until the swelling subsides; and then there appears this double weltmark:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the mass is more pronounced and the incision larger, then you make two cuts in a cross-like manner according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the mass is within the bone and you see the commissures (joints) of each part overlap, and the water bursts forth when you press it with your hand inward, and this has not been proven to me: then it must be that you make three cuts according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Sire, siens et li malades quinnece de ape par cestant; les chants espocte desormaines le comande laisse esprit. Averges: "Leu : le cuer theor invention of ices tounge theme
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	ses. The: allongue (thorough. Injure le couleur.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	When the incision is made and the water begins to seep in, and do as you can according to what you are able; and warn that you do not clog the artery; and bleed slowly from the wound, so that the patient's blood does not flow rapidly with moisture evacuation.
de reume	The text provided seems incomplete or lacks context for a precise translation. If it is intended to be translated, additional information would be needed. However, if "de reume" refers to something in Old French, it might mean "from the move," but without further context, this cannot be confirmed as a meaningful translation.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is a disease that brings on "catarre" or pain in the womb, and the illness is chronic, and medicine does not help at all, rather it's healing with fire cautery as we have seen, so they will relieve the patient by burning through these .ij. arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	He must now cover the patient' Written by: Nicole L. Hays on February 18, 2021
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, thrust the pestle between the artery and the caput above, cutting it as I have shown to you before.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is pierced, if it continues to shoot without going upwards constantly.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open at all with touching, it is necessary for you to measure the distance of two fingers, then enlarge and cut into the bone; and whatever there needs to be bloodshed as much as twelve, or perhaps a little more or less. According to what the patient can bear, and the swelling of the artery, then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone by any point still open sore, cut off the wound and bandage, and care for anointing until he is cured.
de emigrainne	from emigration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an ancient migraine comes with a hot headache due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and other similar things, it is treated by various medical methods and techniques; however, they do not benefit at all if we extract arteries from the temples and perform cauterization as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is that it makes the patient's temple hair grow back twice over and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well with its beating, and only few drops return compared to those who are too cold; and if it is refilled, then remove his collar of some cloths, wipe the skin of any rough cloth, and raise the skin with warm water until the artery appears manifestly. Then take a pestle like this:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then scrape the flesh lightly as long as you will on the artery, then take it up with pinchers and remove well all the rags that are in each of these parts; and if the artery is thin, turn it at the point of the hook, and cut off that part according to the quantity of two fingers. Because if it does not bleed, it will shoot blood without any exception.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And take the blood of those twelve, and cut it into two parts: and if the artery is large, it must be tied with a double strong thread of silk, so that no bleeding occurs before the sealing of the wound, and continued draining from sanc; then remove the excess quantity in that moment at the same time, and then, when you see this cauterization cut the chisel sharply against bone as long as the hairs are pulled. And it is the next treatment, if the patient does not have a fever and he has a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	andescribe'sis. Itold. Thejacmeat. : I:se.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	It is required for the extraction of arteries that one fills his vein with much cotton and places it well made on top; and when they remove them, take care to use dry medicines that cause healing and bandages until he is whole; and if without pressure from the artery as you perform your work, then immediately stop bleeding by cauterizing him with fire or apply vitriol and strain it in your hand so that the vein does not open again; and if this is not present now, place a cold water on his vein for as long as he continuously, and keep it restrained as it is required; and whoever is more limber and lighter during artery extraction is that you cauterize their vein with this caustic cutting of .ij. parts, but the cutting be well spaced to protect its heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When the sutures are too tight, it holds less blood.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must be between the knives, one of them should have a large space, and then when you anchor your hot iron into the cuts, and place the fire-hot iron so long on the bone until it flexes just at the point where the bone is, and cover the vein in these cuts; and they are separated between the knife cuts because it is not well united with this cautery for everything; and that is the form of this cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes are coming out through the veins where there is the test of fire at the top, and it does not profit to use medicine that you apply, and you see the malady reddening with movement as if it were trembling; and such tissues are held tightly and moist so that the hairs on the paper-like structures are lifted, and these structures are scorched by the heat of tears, which is necessary for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called it "contusion cure," and you treat the patient who has this malady with the hairs that he has on his head or forehead, then make two fissures in his forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and one of these fissures is as much below the forehead as it brings down the whole forehead away from its natural position, and the others are like veins above the "paper-like" membranes. And you keep your hand away from cutting into the arteries that are in those areas where the "paper-like" structures are located over them; and separate your hand from joining any more of these mandibular fissures, each one as many times as it takes to join;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	LXXVIII. XXVII. Aude laisse, pourpreix : "lcate ayeu mesure, alii aine mounce III. Tvjohn thexille of theire dreeanle IIXIes, ilge. Celtic li'sanc:elpis dextravel Ipsum: meijarmeilexprime laisse itse :x (whichjacolunpreysserece.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	Regarding the incision made next to the temple, just above the second incision; and scrape all the tissue between the two holes, covering all the surface under the bone, then make another small incision in that spot near the other second one, and then extract this abnormality.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Insert the instrument called "cultellar" in the first hole, and it is very well shaped on one side, but not on the other side, and its form is like this.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then position the cutting edge towards the skull of the keur (patient), and its sharp edge towards the bone, and the blade is inserted until it reaches the second hole as long as the incision continues along this opening; then continue to make another insertion in that second hole, and then extract the abscess evenly; and place a piece of gauze in each hole; and cover them with damp white cloth and olive oil and straw moss, ensuring that sucking chicks do not come near it; and after three days adjust the bandage, and treat with basilicon balm mixed with rose-infused oil, and other cures for wounds, as long as he is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	Two removals of the tissues.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	As it is not usual for the catarrh to produce sharp tissues and small swellings that hinder vision, and burnt papers; and there are flaking hairs on the head, and the chief in which pain appears, and the inflamed forehead; therefore you know by these signs that such materials come from many veins, and it is this treatment that they use.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And command the patient to pat his forehead, then make a large incision in front of it; and start from the temple on the left towards the temple on the right, along the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples that move when eating; and when the bone is exposed, clean it with an absorbent sponge, then put a piece of thick linen in between the two holes and insert cotton wool; cover them with moistened white cloth and oil, and keep chicks away from sucking their milk; once healed, you must massage the bone until it begins to grow again, then treat him with excisional remedies that are known for rejuvenation.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In a similar manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of calf's blood, and prepare it by boiling; administer this mixture in these wounds to rejuvenate the character throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of ear picking.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All these things that are done to the ears can be considered among three kinds: or grains of mine ore its kindreds and similitudes such as wheat bran, husks, or straw; or seed if it is barley, peas, oats; or something fluid like water and hay.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	leu theomaneide devoid ilte:lre :esme pas
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If the wound jumps with tweezers, it is good; but if not, treat by extraction of a small incision under thin dislocation; and if it does not jump, make an ear piercing and push what is under the soft ear lobe so that nothing obstructs the soft ear canal so well that the needle cannot enter with the piercing; then heal properly, as we have said before; and if it does not heal in a timely manner, take some honey with ointment and apply no instrument to this purpose without knowing its use, and place a little cotton inside.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound does not jump from all these things we have mentioned before, then hasten to piercing the ear so that the abscess can come out and spasm, and in the manner of the piercing you first set up the deformed head of the skull' cvtile; extract the spleen according to its size; let it lie between your hands and turn the ear back upwards; make a small incision at the root of the ear with grease or fat depending on whether you can insert the needle into the hole, then similarly as a crescent moon until you pierce the ear, and let the physician do as he sees fit, and suction it immediately from your mouth; continue treatment until the patient is well.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a granule and swells up, perform an extraction; and if it cannot come out, insert a thin but sturdy spatula under this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And insert an incision for that granule. However, do not attempt to perform this action if you think the granule is moist due to ear moisture; continue attempting extraction until many attempts have been made; then carefully extract it with subtil pincers and suction, as we previously stated, ensuring a gentle removal of the extraction.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of an arrow, if it is small in size, like a fly and similar things, treat it as we have described for division; but if it is large enough to be felt, prepare removal of pinchings; and this process is lighter when performed on the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of ear wax, if you treat it as we have described for division and distillation, it does not benefit; it must be that you look at the ear in the sunlight: if there are no wax blocks, then gently remove the pinchings, and if they do not appear, take the cotton ball with this shape:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And narrow above and wide below. Apply the more subtle chief in the ear according to the degree of suffering from the malady; then form with cotton wool until all the wax comes out. If it does not come out, pull out the cotton ball as we have described for a hole; if they do not emerge as we have mentioned, apply distillations that the old ones have proven in cutting out the worms, and you will find or treat with distillations; and when distilling oils and medicines in the ear using this instrument, which is of this form:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it may be of silver or lead above with a small hole for distillation, and above that to press in the distillation using an earthenware vessel specifically made for this purpose; if you see a razor and wrap around its point cotton wool, then pour your oil or juice into it, and look at the medicine within the cotton ball placed in the ear, and the cotton should remain in the ear; push within the razor all the cotton thoroughly until the oil is distilled from the ear, and if you feel pain inside due to this process, then apply one small flame on it so that the medicine will be distilled into the ear; and ensure it'e not too cold, for the medication would not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	The extraction or cleaning (in modern terms) of earwax would be translated as "de la déliction ou extraction des oreilles" in French. This Old French phrase likely refers to a medical procedure involving earwax removal, possibly using methods such as suction and/or manual cotton wool application, consistent with medieval practices:
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	Etant: Etienne demele char leu nour (A laisse ains: Aude paroles enmaude les plus leu, ou itens cestat theorethrebleutil : Lea lezlous andern:es:itilene. Laotemporal French: "Irritentlesme, etablet develle :entire.iounsesure ofsseur lesure. Audex'sise 21stropile:e of the :
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	There comes then who comes forth with various treatments, and it is not seen unless in these, that you must put the ear of the sick person to the sun; and look therein: if the operation appears obvious, then this entire procedure corresponds to this space where that which we call 'the cavity' is located.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And if it is and probe forward and backward plainly, so that the ear does not bleed; when the operation involves a new bone or cartilage of the ear, and you have subtle pinches there, apply them lightly and continuously, until those parts are entirely made of bone.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the operations are performed in the ear, take a subtle scraper and wipe it lightly with fire, then put the new bone or cartilage of the ear. If you feel that this operation causes great discomfort to hearing, do it gently, and make sure not to press too hard on the nerves of the ear; then place a patch in the ear according to its size, and coat it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not do this for any longer time until the wound is sealed, or take a patch and coat it with rose water, and sprinkle vitriol powder on it; if you see that the ear has swelled up, cover the patch and move another moistened cloth made of oil roses and beeswax, until the swelling becomes bone-like; then treat him as long as he is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if blood comes from the wound, soak a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that help with the flow of blood which are related to distillation therapies.
de la char des papieres	of the paper's bone
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This material that comes in paper form when it is moist and dry, it requires stretching with tongs and pinches, and treating with a small bone root piece; then apply cider vinegar powder on the wound.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without decortication, with a subtle circular caustic instrument, and after the incision it moves; and they repair many times without any deviation from their roots; and when those roots are cauterized by fire, those roots are charred and do not return again.
de la gresle	of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times come in paper form of things that resemble gravel in their shape and toughness, and because of this disease called "the grand hail" (referring to the accumulation), and it is an assembly of moisture heavy on the surface of the paper; and if you can't catch a piece with your fingers lightly, then nothing bothers the sick person; and if the fractures are large, make a coverage, and cure as long as it heals. And if it is small, not to exertion de la pustice desgauche.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	gear laire le ásent: “:rime :garter. Ages. Theor ictere :ceter aille.
de la graisse des eulz	of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exine is a fat that is imprinted on the surface of papers above, and this happens more to children than to few people, and it hurts much in their eyes, and they come with cataracts at mornings, and can't see the sunlight because tears run down their eyes; and therefore they lie back on their faces afterwards and sleep there, and their papers beneath them are dampened by their tears so that the exine oozes out between the paper layers. And when you press your eye with your hands and feel the ooze coming out.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of this practice is that the painful oil should be placed on your head; then take an unbleached linen cloth in a circular manner according to the amount of exine present in each part, and lay it over you; press firmly with one side and another so that the exine oozes inside the circle. Then make a hole in the center large enough for the syringe needle to pass through without being larger than the incision made on the vein; then sew around the exine piece, in various arrangements it may come out of this opening, depending on the shape of a fat lump.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract it from the entire piece of cloth between your hands and turn your hand both to the right and left as much as you can until it is evenly spread; ensure not to overstretch in the hole where the syringe needle passes through so that no blood flows along the entire length of the vein, avoiding bleeding.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the exine does not open at the beginning of the hole, push gently to widen it until it opens; then extract as we have described, moisten the edges and sides with cloth, lay it on your head, and securely bind it using bandages or belts.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such homes that burn with fire and use it to corrupt the moisture which is slow to heal; then treat him so long as he remains healthy, and if his wound opens from an incision, cauterize him while he still has good health.
des poilz des papieres	If there are papers on fire. Treatment: "The text from ancient texts in Old French, 12th century. Canteaux de la vintans of ce quins. Texts written in Old English. Lei's semblant.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper-like hairs are born other than their natural state, and become old, they harm the hairs, and bring forth habits of illnesses such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers, as long as it is due to the destruction of the hairs; and there are four main methods of treatment: or by fire cautery together with fire, or by wet ague according to what is before or written in this treatise on cautery, and is made by cutting and stitching or by binding, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the patient's head on your table, then turn the oil-soaked cloth in your right hand; if it turns out well, that's good; but if not, stick one needle at every .i. point above; and whether this happens near the margin of the paper or where the hairs grow therefrom, and pull a thread upwards through all the paper, then turn the cloth to the razor, on the part of the paper without touching the dislocated joints, from the great laceration just to the small; then remove one needle, and place under the paper a small tent made of cotton and fabric, and above it a figure like that of a peach pit, according as much you have elevated the paper which is designated for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if a part that has much paper according to how the paper is malleable; then make at all the spaces around those .ij. lines you have marked, and begin with the great laceration from one of the natural hair roots in the thickness of an almond seed, then insert the needle into one of the angles of that kerf, then scour it out entirely; then sew together the .ij. leaves to a silken stitch made of fine linen thread with all .i. filaments, and drain the blood from under those .ij. sutures on all things sticky, if you see doing this; but if not, there is no need for it, then leave the stitch and the threads for three years or four years, and cure the wound without surgery of things constricting and binding, because the paper relaxes with the healing of the wound and assembly of it, but the stitch is changed (as the old ones say), and this is cause of fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And another way is that you mark the paper with a figure like those peach pit pits we have told about, which are also as the fuse of mith; at three needles placed according to the shape that is here indicated:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then covers those small forces in exactly the same way according to the shape indicated here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you do not have the pincers, and that is not the same: take anewly (with one fil; and put it under the figure, and put a to tieles.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And there is never an occurrence where the hair of paper is turned into: it indicates that you must use what we have said about the incision; however, in both cases it is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of the clavicles is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and fill them in as I have said, and then make .ij. clavicles by art, and .ij. ligaments also long like the paper and large space between the spinal vertebrae; and tie the ends of these clavicles or whatever strings you hold; then join them subtly on what is underneayer from the paper of oil, and stretch the .ij. clavicles into their respective parts; and let it remain for some years, and the skin that was strained will harden and tighten and close up until it heals itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, if the skin is tightened with force, then treat him until he is sound again; and when the wound has been sewn closed, and when the paper is lifted, so that the hairs no longer stick to it; and this is the form of the clavicles you make according to this figure and quantity of long and large.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The procedures are such that you should use a thin needle and one silken thread of fine quality; then join the clavicles together subtly, making the length of the threads about one palm long; next, take another silken thread very finely, and join it to the chiefs of the first thread; so make sure that the manipulation is done under the sunlight, as these are delicate and fine operations, then thrust the needle in the root of the hair cluster adjacent to the skin, pierce it hastily through the felt hat, and draw out the hair neatly above its natural position; then pull the hair until you reach the thread, if there is one or two or three or more; then remove your hand as long as the hair veins extend throughout the silk threads with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the thread is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then pull the thread along all of the silk you ordered, as long as the thread extends above its puncture through and that you see it through the oil's vision; consequently, draw the thread and oil and leave it for .ij. or .iij. years until the hair regains its place in the joint and sprouts up again; but if the hair is small, accompany a long piece of natural hair from the shoulders with that which you leave, and raise them together as much as they are stretched out, then loosen it, and then let it grow.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the oil's discharge (This appears to be a reference to "leakage" or drainage from an injection site).
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease which is called "aleacratic" or the discharge comes from the oil, if it has in two ways: one natural and one unnatural. And occurs with closed wounds, or cutting of a wound, or cautery, and other things. (This passage seems to describe that there are diseases which resemble an illnesses where bleeding or oozing from the oil as it is known in two ways: either natural or unnatural.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And your medical knowledge so is that you must warn yourself that it does not solidify according to the original form; and these works we have mentioned are no exception to this disease, which will recede in its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the flesh that comes into oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease which truly occurs in the wound "axacraty" is natural and accidental. The accident arises from cuts and fissures and cauterization and similar things; in this work of mine, you must use an awl with a double thread, so that it pierces to the left margin as far as the right, where the filament goes through two teeth of the flesh, and then the flesh is raised above all the awl, and the coping stone has one large cup.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; but if not, then take a razor and put it in the fissure, turn the paper around, and make .ij. holes or edges within the paper; and have the .ij. fissures at the .ij. angles of the incision you made, and form some angles so that when they are joined, the figure is also like a letter with "..j." lines; then glue this flesh according to the quantity of its edges, from which it seems the paper, and join the separated parts again with linen thread; then proceed as we have said concerning mollifying medicines and poultices, so that it heals.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a fissure or seam or cauterization, it is required that you make a straight incision among the hairs of the parchments, according to what I have said; and then tear between the two layers of the tent as I have described; and must one perform the work according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the master's skill determines how he can restore the figure back to its natural state; and with me myself, according to what it requires from this treatment and various preparations.
dou soudement de la papiere	The following is likely addressing how to dry or fix the parchment (papier) after it has been treated, possibly involving a process of air-drying or fixing and mending paper in order to make sure the document remains intact. This could imply that there was an additional emphasizes on preserving written work during this period.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	soldre: theuccle:se:02e:ses :measures,les, andes:ge (thexarre :e, soffre presse apece.sanglore,anx affaire, itax. Andexente. ici.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the finger of the hand
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Separate that the finger is divided into two parts: one looks nervous and hard like iron; another appears softened with moisture, not nervous but resembling a congealed clot, which when touched by iron and cared for with pincers cannot move; both appearances start towards the great ridge, and grow little by little until it encloses all of sight and light and movement of the hand.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The method of the incision is such that it puts the most painful areas at your fingertranseps, then performs the work on them; and hold the finger in doubled pincers, and lift it above; then take a needle, and insert one hair from a horse, mare, or ox, or strong thread into its tip slightly, and pierce all of it with the needle, and tie the finger to the upper part, and scrape along the side of the nail that leads to the prunyngle and silk down to the head; then take the remaining in the root area below the delicate sublimate and small forces, and let nature's joint heal without dislocation or tearing from incision, except when the finger is punctured alone with thread as we have described:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep the sublimate from touching the soft flesh and breaking it, and that the pruning not be seen; after the incision cut a little bit of thread into the oil, and make a necklace made of litharge, and let it stay until the other day; then cure it as much as necessary for healing.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the finger is not nervous and you cannot push the needle in, and the joints do not allow it, many times this type of finger deformation has been treated with medicine; as I have told you in its division, and if you see that there is a cover on it, then treat the finger badly by using oil according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the finger gently above and if you see that it does not weaken much and its reason presses afterward, distill from your mouth into copper ring oil made of litharge and red copper rings and thread, let it stay until the other day; then resume the other treatment according to this method as long as it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	But if nothing is contrary in the oil, and as long as it's healed, then treat the abscess so that it stays warm until it's completely healed; then resume the treatment as before as long as it's healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	:meailles.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	Of the glass wherein it nips under the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	There are some people who have never experienced red cautery and then covered the pupil with paper and tightened it firmly until it resembles a bull’s-eye; and in this procedure the patient places his head upright, does the eyes, and supports them well during the work, so that the charcoal remains as small and inconspicuous as possible for such purposes, and then removes the first one carefully, continuing to scrape until reaching the edge of the operation without causing bleeding; and it is also important that there are incisions in the hollow spots we have mentioned in the incision on the nail and small forces used when pushing them so they become firm after this chapter's demonstration.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is complete and all the charcoal is removed, apply oil of honey or distilled red wine with seemingly corrosive medicines, and put cotton on it soaked in wax to ensure no leakage from the opening; if there is nothing delaying, and blood seeps through the seam, then doubt an internal seepage occurs, let the oil remain and cure the inner seepage with calming remedies for inner bleeding; then return to your work until healed, and thus formate charcs are added in the oil using this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is essential that you treat every oil flawlessly along the natural way; and in cases of accidental treatment, in iron workings; and do not thrust your hand into any of these procedures until you see that those members are suffering from this intervention.
des voines des eulz	Butter, ande et leu, siens de l'ovre: "Cauterizer ofs char dite sachaigne deus aigres que veue. Ceutures ce qu’il yves defface en laiandre cestant lespaurs. ievalle voies in theesme: "A:me espresignure, leveulloi :es: "neces. Thebes.
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	lumeuriveuereffectrecceles in ferrantouriscianis thisifelocite gentuel
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two young ones by degrees, in one corner according to this shape:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then let the forces penetrate those veins subtly, and take out the blood an hour after another, until you see remove those venomous poisons from the oils; and ensure that you do not bruise the oil at the points of the spatulae, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent so that nothing is left but those veins; and when you have done this, distill in the oil a green and red solution to corrupt what remains delayed.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot gather all of it in that hour, then coat the oil with soothing substances for the pain of those parts, and leave them a few days until the pain is relieved and secured by appointment, then resume according to this manner before it becomes well; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	from the oil's fistula (a small hole or opening)
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The more they are called "arisati" fistulas: when you cure it with cautery and hot medicines as I have previously mentioned, if it is not yet healed, then the evil that has entered into it causes him to break open near the appointment; and take out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see corruption and blackness, if the raindrop has all the instrument mentioned herein [as it has] the form; let us call it "harsh head," and be made of iron at a sharp point, and have been pointed as it does in the current form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the raindrop's base, then turn it between your two hands and press a little so that you know the corrosion is removed; and do this no other time, then restore the raindrop's base with purgative medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the joints are joined together, and it does not move, and the bone of the shoulder is also joined, and remain for forty years, and it neither renews nor becomes loose again, and many illnesses do not arise from this; if that is not so, there is no other evil than to bring back the fistula to the abscess according to this form: and you discover the bone's second time with iron, and hot medicines, and when it is discovered, take a lancet as mentioned herein, and let the iron nail be at three angles, and make the wood thin so that you see as much here;
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	And then place it on the shoulder bone below the ridge, and move your hand away from the oil by a little bit, then turn all around to the nail so that you feel it pierce the bone and see if he holds his hand on his neck when it becomes hard; and restore its dry medicines as I have indicated, and when the joint moves and hardens, let the material go back into the abscess.
de l’issue de l’oil	from this oil's discharge, se poincture en laisses si la chascunjour:
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hair opens fully in all parts, and it does not disturb the veins or thinning, it must be laid on the patient; then a layer of honey and aloe and incense and rose quartz is applied to the oil, and the oil is strained over bandages and cloths; and the manner of the bandages so that you stiffen them enough, twofold each one, and place one upon another according to the quantity that the hair needs; then remove the straining device during day and night, and if the straining has loosened again, it must be removed more; then lift the layer after a day and a night, if the oil has repaited, that is good; otherwise, renew the placemat and bandages and the layer and the suction cups until they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	This does not seem to be related to Old French or any text from a medieval medical treatise. It appears to be in modern English, describing a fabric tear. Therefore, no translation is required for this line.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the fabric, and it is torn like a grain of resins so that you can see it; then if you cover it with these operations as though you prick into the root of the affected part above the edge, and insert another needle or a double thread at the edge of the shoulder; and stretch it well, then pull out one needle according to its position, and tie the double thread around the hollow piece of cloth, and tighten it well, then set aside the woollen lining moistened with warm water, and leave it until the threads move together with the fabric, and care for the linen with comforting things while the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by a piece of cloth in several places around it, as long as it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs are noticeably raised, perceive the subliminal spatula that vibrates with oil in the follicles and smoothens down the moisture of the hairs, and then enter them as soon as possible; then pull out until they are healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	This line does not appear to be related to Old French or any medieval medical text either. It seems like a modern English phrase that might refer to the 'body of oil,' potentially indicating some form of physical therapy involving oils, but without further context it's impossible to provide an accurate translation from a historical perspective.
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease that affects the "alcuni" (in modern English, it is not related to Old French or medieval medical texts; however, if it comes from a bruise gathered on a chairpiece and rightly arranged, then take the head of the patient and hold between your hands for .iiij parts, and let it come above theirs. Then bind up the bruisure, and seize l'encorne lou malaidie en cestere de li maundes (13th lainces in thisxentures of the choses entorse, or tuit d'lairentil veoir univerre:espreve entitish.
des aigues de l’oil	of oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have seen the signs of the fever in its division and it is required to ascertain; if done according to health. It is required that you place the patient between your crossed hands towards the light of the sun, let his body be warm and tightly pressed; then put the paper (in front) with his right side on the left hand, or with his left side on the right hand; then take in your right hand as if it were called "almagda," or with your left hand as if it were called "almagda"; then put the tip of the instrument close to the crown by drawing a line in that corner where the wax is, and push the "almagda" firmly until it pierces into the wax area, and feel that "almagda" moves when empty; and it is required that the measurement of the "almagda" be at the tip of the measure for the distance from the top to where the line ends. And this crown is the oil; if you see the bone in that paper by the brightness of the horned material, then put the instrument there or where the fever has begun, and squeeze out a path after another. Now when the wax is discharging, he sees his maladies before him and the instrument in his oil.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After a little rest and the fever rises again along another path with the instrument, and when it is filed in and does not rise, then swiftly extract "almagda" winding your hand around slightly; and put back into the fever a small piece of diamond-coated steel, and pour oil within. Then we place straw or flannel soaked in olive oil and abundance of linen, and bind with pure oil. And those who are from our time use fine brocade with an abundance of wool.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if "almagda" cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, as there are some people who have very hard fingers, it is required that you temper the instrument called "alberit," for which this form exists:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce gently, and do not go too far into the body of the patient, but make it with some delicacy; push "almagda" in as we have said; and at the completion of this work put that worm in the darkened house where I am staying, and probe his sight, and then place him again seven years later, but he must rise swiftly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	When the incision near a swelling comes, you must dislocate the joint before the seventh day, and cut around that which is soaking in; and when it calms down, you move the joint and put it back on its place .i. at an angle to cover any lapse of time, and then settle in this dark house. And soon issue from the house little by little, and turn into his cases; and know that no one should interfere in this matter.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from Yarracombe who told us that in peace they make an almagate perforation, because the water flows through it but I have never seen such a thing anywhere in our land, nor have I ever read about it in old books; and perhaps it is a new matter.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And this is how the forms of almagate look like because those who have not seen them see it as such; and they should be properly aligned:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let them be aware of the subtlety of this method, and its origin in four degrees of angle:
de la char sor le neis	from the skin over the nail:
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	There have never been cases where scorpions-like characters appear from the nail in various ways; and if there are such or it is colored with a wax color, or has bone-colored parts. In those cases where these colors exist without being colored, you must make the patient lie on his back against the sunlight; work on his nostrils; gently remove the discharge from those nails, and apply pressure to them; then hold a sharply pointed thin spatula under one part of it as much as you can confirm that the character is entirely ossified.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything uncoverable that it cannot be covered with either .i. very subtle movements, or cauterization done swiftly to prevent any further movement; and if the swelling does not subside or absorb, or if the abrasion heals as it should; but if those are malignant growths, you hasten and cauterize until they become unresponsive and entirely ossified, then remove all remaining tissue and fluid.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	se tape. Andrelet.cellece.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it can be made of silver or gold, like a lamp overturned, as in a jug, and also so; and if you see, then make a closed jug, and let the strainer plains to clear its head; and have one hand on its top while heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	From the chair of stone
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Often the disease reaches its head "like a tower", and grows large as long as it is seen; thus, one must first cover it at the beginning, and then bind to it with heat or fire medicine; if however you delay in covering it until it becomes large, take care if it is hard, of flaky color, poor feeling: for touching iron hardly ever happens because this is a contagious impurity that comes about whenever one covers it, but when the abscess has touched something hot, we can cover and cure the patient completely, as long as he does not have pain in his limb or feel restricted in movement.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the head is covered and swollen
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Sealed where a continuation of the treatment comes in one of these treatise chapters, and it proves to be useful because not everyone benefits; thus, you must ensure that when the wound is fresh on all its flesh; and therefore bandage both cheeks with a cloth, then heal them as long as they are healthy. And if the cheeks are sore in one part or another, you must scrape all those parts until they heal, then bind the two cheeks together with a strong twine and dust of dragon's blood over it, and incense on top; and put some hot coal underneath the powders, let it burn for as long as it continues to drip, and cure it until it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the bandage is that you assemble it using either needles or thread, as we have mentioned in the bandaging around the belly; or by using a string, as I have told you before.
des apostemes des levres	Abscesses in the cheeks
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	A mains homes that abscesses in the cheeks are found hard and grainy, becoming lesser and larger; therefore it is required to turn the cheeks, and divide them into sections on each side, and take them with pinchers, and cauterize a part of it; then apply leather after vitriol pouint; and treat the wound from drying time until they are healed.
de la char des gencives	:frise:escalier in french-2 :meanture: espose
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times it bleeds on the gums where the old term "albulus" was used; it requires that you hold it with pincers and at its root, let the hair grow long or flesh around it; then apply vitriol to the wound or other restrictive and drying powders; and if this piece returns after the incision, many times occurring, redo it: if it does not return afterwards from cauterization, these are methods of bandaging to cover.
des sordens	Sounds (noise disorders)
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are assembled at the root of the teeth between the gums, ugly and hard scabs; and never black or yellow teeth with holes in them, until the corruption reaches the gum; it requires that you sit the patient on your lap, and handle their cheeks gently so they don't resist; and remove the scales or scabs as long as nothing has been done; and make of blackness and greenery, and yellowish tints, and other discolorations, until they are gone; and if it is first reasoned that it is good, then continue for another two days and three, so you have checked everything; and know that teeth require various types of dressings to be removed, according to what the work shows, because the scaler used by those who remove scales from between the gums has other forms than those used by those who remove them in front of the teeth. And these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It requires that you delay the treatment of the tooth's pain as much as possible while doing it, because this does not have to be done at all; because it is a very high substance and therefore there should be no reason for scaling.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	When the malady is constrained to treat it, you must be certain that there's a sick tooth; many times, this pain recurs with the ill tooth and take care that it remains healthy; and proceed to scrape the good tooth accordingly; and all of these actions do not cause any further pain as long as the disease persists, because we have always done so for our saints; and if you are certain there is a sick tooth, then scraping must be done thoroughly throughout the entire area to protect the gum from all parts by using sharp pincers at first touches and touches, until they are well scraped off, and firmly hold the ill tooth in your hand, so it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After scraping the tooth thoroughly and if it does not break, then take no of these dressings and place them on each side lightly, and loosely cover the cavities; and if you use fine pincers, that it does not fracture when pressing upon the gum. And it must be dressed underneath the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And tell you well to avoid breaking it, and leave a part in place, and return the pain to the patient through the malice of the root causing greater pains than the first one. And warn you not to do so as ignorant barbers who by their haste and boldness never break a shoe once, but rather provide nothing that we have heard about; but bring in many times due to this great disease affecting the roots where they remain or for the shoe they break, as often we have seen; and when the head is removed, wash it with wine or silk and brush; and if blood comes out, frequently use vinegar on its place; and if it does not value, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the teeth, with the first one being silent and not doubled when you pull out the tooth, should be pointed at their tips and have large cheeks. These are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be strong members not to bend while pulling out, and their ironwork well made, and teeth that can hold the bit.
de la racine des dens	from the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains after pulling out, it implies that you put cotton moistened in beeswax on its place. One or two years until the tooth loosens, then you use tongs called "algefri", which makes the teeth seem like a patient'ayer; and they should also be made as smoothly as a lime, and this is their form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not emerge from these tongs, it implies that you must excavate the entire root through the root, and use an instrument called "althali", which is known as a spade. This is their form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And they should be forged and large so that they do not break, and if the root springs out from there, it's good; but if not, you can use all dental instruments to create their forms hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this instrument that has two rings, its form is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments for the teeth which are in front of them, and this instrument that looks like large tongs, whose form is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And these teeth should not be able to break, and you know that many teeth of the molars are; and other instruments that are not categorized by them; and skilled masters secretly use their own instrument according to what their works show, because they have various diseases or ancient ones did not teach an instrument for diversity in dental work; if it breaks a shoe or other bone, or causes injury, you seek the teeth that must be taken care of as I told you, and help with movements, whose form is as follows:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be large and strong enough to hold the bone without breaking it, but capable of holding and cleaning; and then restore the surface with suitable medicines for this condition in the bone if there is small porition, then use all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	quant cei laissez :lieffer apres, quant leu laisser in theespears de cest-courts :er lesche iten laisser esleuf. If.a : Thevesin : Theobsecreates ofafacour :get:ne :to beware : A15crompreis. What ail :ceux. Ala.meantre,saint French. Iesure dexicar'stars. Itin. Forthropur
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the small knife and a little pressure on the teeth for their hardness, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that he can grind them, then the grinder's shape is as follows:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also as the grinder for tooth enamel; and when they make the needles little by little on the teeth, so that it does not move while chewing, then in the end there is no razor left at all, and if the blade is too deep and cuts the tongue, then you must file the roughness until it becomes even, so that it doesn't cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth loosens
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the tooth loosens before it does so due to percussion or fracture, and the pain cannot be pressed upon it in a way that it doesn't bleed, then you treat them with restraining medicines; however, silver wire becomes greenish-brown if overused, whereas gold wire never changes. The size of the wire should vary according to the space between the teeth; and when you decide to file down the teeth, take a double thread twisted rope between each pair of healthy teeth, then insert the loose teeth in between those spaces, whether there is one or more; continue until you can make contact with the sound tooth on the opposite side. Then resume the covering procedure at that point and manipulate your hand subtly and carefully so it doesn't move; and if the thread gets stuck at the root of the tooth, tie the teeth together using some pliers, place them between the healthy tooth, and let it fit there as tightly as possible without causing bleeding or movement. Then leave it in that position until it stops moving, whether natural movement occurs or not; this is its form and appearance for both the sound pairs of teeth and those that were treated:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth hurts, if he puts it back in its place repeatedly as we have said; and does not intervene with anything that is unnecessary or painful, and never makes a bone-like form of a tooth from another mouth part, but places it on where there is an absence, and strains it like we've described before, and remains in position for the whole duration.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the tongue with silk cloth
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	ses. Apeut ilce parole cest cire. Etichore of the: Then'sicurementre andrompremere deure descalle laine. Iaccomplairecte ceintures.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it is colored with fire or black or hard, so that the maladies do not hurt, and they touch nothing, for it is a sore; and if it declines to blisters, and there is moisture in it, then let the small incision grow, and remove the fragment from one side and another; and when it does not improve with your work, place it under vitriol boiling so that it becomes annealed, then raise its head again until you treat everything thoroughly; then lift the hairs on both sides and cure them with other curing procedures until they are healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Stitches in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Never from the throat comes blood called "goth," and they directly suture their .ij. folds, and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, if it is not healed; be careful if it is small-sized and colored with fire, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and its root is large, also don't touch it with iron, but leave it until it dies, then you will have to part it, or it would break itself; and if it is of white color, and the root is subtle, prepare an instrument for covering it, but first look at whether the stitches are resting and soothing. Then let the patient sit in front of the sun, and its teeth be healthy, and with their hand hold the shield between them, press the tongue against all parts of the instrument, and make it shaped like silver or soft as some knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	You press the tongue against all parts of this instrument, and you see the stitching, if you take the nodule and pierce it in the fold, and pull it above more than you can; then draw no part with, then cover it on the instrument, for that is its form, which seems like some forces; and everything lies bent over, one against another, very sharp, and made of iron or lead:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument, if the clamp has that form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	iadresse in thees:age asaites :es::sacre desires. Injac.comme ilkne (itier.aii:these. Andaluiter :gust, lecorne pasioxentures.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman with an abscess deep in her throat, which is to say - i. a small abscess; and she had her throat well-narrowed throughout, that she could not expel air through the blocked passageway, nor eat or drink, and died if she stayed in this condition for either one year or two (iij.) And the abscess was so deep that it pierced through twelve channels. I began immediately, and took an incision on the first swelling, then injected hot medicines; afterward, I inserted another needle into the other channel of the blocked passageway, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards, I made incisions in those abscesses, and extracted a portion, and there were only small amounts of blood; and thus cleared out the passageway from her throat, and she began to drink water and then wine again, continuing for many months to treat that abscess; but it reappeared again, and filled up all the space I had previously treated, so that I reinjected cautery into her throat: thus there was no significant increase in pain afterward; and I left those areas, and only God knew what would happen next.
de l’uve	From the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the vein is disrupted from the eye, it becomes inflamed and swollen, resembling a perpendicular position; and if it is large and rounded, then it resembles an eye. If it is treated according to what we have discussed in its division, and no improvement occurs, you will see that the abscesses are calming down, and it is subtle, meaning you must carefully remove it; and when it is roundish and not long, it has blood or black coloration, indicating you should cauterize the incision of the vein. For there is great danger for the patient with this condition. Therefore, whenever you see it, according to how I have said, make it lie before the sun, press its tongue on the instrument we mentioned earlier; then pierce an abscess in the eye, and remove it from there, and cope with .ij. lymph nodes that I mentioned regarding the incision of the .ij. lymph nodes. And you must not cauterize more than necessary beyond its natural limit; for if you do, it will cause harm to their voice and speech; after the incision, use what we have said about treating the .ij. lymph nodes during the incision of those .ij. lymph nodes, and apply hot water with caustic solution, making sure that it is not too thick or too clear; and insert this instrument in its shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	sus: that itin.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is more suited to incision than cautery; if it is performed according to this method of fumigation, take camphor and oregano and rue and chamomile and avens and similar herbs, and gather them all together in one pot, or some of them; and I pour into a vessel that has an iron cover, and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and within the pot there must be a tool made like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And it can be of silver or copper, and one of the shoulders must be placed in the patient' mantle so that the vapors rise to the uvula through the throat until the uvula is parched; after this often repeating, as long as the uvula dries out, and make sure not to do it at the beginning of the healing process of an abscess rupture, because many things happen; and don't use this instrument if it's not present, then take a linen tube and insert into its tip a wooden plug, so that the patient's uvula does not have too much heat, for the wooden plug doesn't let the vapors burn the mouth, and together they make good healing.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times to the throat or spine of a fish, or nothing at all; therefore you must do what you see fit, and press the tongue against the sun within the entire instrument so that you can observe it melting; and if it does not open up anymore and is put back in the throat, then you must make the patient vomit until their meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps that's how some of them expel what they swallow through vomiting; or the sick person ingests a piece of sponge, or a navel, or lettuce root, or .i. fragment of dry bread; and to the sponge I attach .i. thread, and then transfer it; and when it comes out on its own, it will swell up again, and you must do that; and if it does not come from what we have said before, take an instrument of thickness according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And make the sponge heads light at their tip so they can more easily enter into the throat, and lift it high in the top part; and warn you not to touch the epiglote, as it will tighten up or push down on the bone inside; move so that the sick person pushes the instrument with force, because if it pushes out something, then pull it out of the entire instrument equally at all points until it is completely pushed out.
de la sansue de la gorge	Of the moisture of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Never is moisture in the throat treated if it does not respond to medicinal care as mentioned earlier; and when you see moisture, press the tongue with the instrument I have told you about. If the moisture forms a small round spot or if you have very delicate tweezers that are worth such action, then if it's of no value... (translation continues)
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	If it does not respond to our previous advice, smoke the throat with charcoal using the instrument I have described for nasal fumigation; do this many times, as she will try to target you. The way of fumigation consists of placing a pot or iron covered with linen in its center, and then inserting the instrument's teeth into that hole; then perform the smoking, and place the head of the catheter in her mouth, closing her mouth so that smoke does not escape, but moves towards the moisture; now the moisture will respond, and if it still doesn't cease, repeat the fumigation many times... (translation continues)
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument used to treat the moisture is designed in such a way that when you see it, resembles bent pincers for moving into the throat. It also has the appearance and sharpness like the tip of scissors, and its surface is smoothed with lime so that whatever she takes cannot loosen; and here is the shape: (translation continues)
li chapistres des apostemes	the treatments for abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Some similarities to treatments for abscesses are mentioned in this passage following the ones discussed previously in the book; and they differ in perforation and size. The two methods consist of one being like me (the author) and holding moisture, while the other is applied through its teeth... (translation continues)
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	later, legeuccles aicenture. Theu.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the depth of the incision according to its completion; and this is when the pain subsides, and the departure of fever, and alleviation of pain and swelling, and improvement in flexion and relief of the incision, and other signs; and it is necessary that you perform the incision depending on the extent of the incision, and where it has opened; and let the incision be deep at the long hairs, and if the incision is on hands or feet, joints, nerves, arteries, or any similar location where there is no flexion.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	If the patient has swelling, according to that limb. And when the incision is in the flesh of the calf, if it opens wide enough so you can observe digested blood flowing from it, as we have said before; for if one pierces too deep into the vein, they will find thickened blood and a lot of waste; and perhaps harden the palate and stiffen the mucus membrane. And if there are no large incisions that are made according to the size of the incision, as necessary for the limb; it is necessary to make small incisions, small cuts; and in large ones, deep incisions, and many punctures according to the degree of hardness of the incision; and if one has such incisions or it is necessary to close them, and when they are healed as we do with blisters: and if there are those that are cut into three angles, and those whose closure resembles a candle flame, just like abscesses; and if there are those that receive a rounded incision, and other shapes of incisions and closures.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those that have no chief, as shall be a superficial abscess incision, you must make shallow incisions; and when the abscess is large and has greatly swollen, you must not draw out all of the fluid at once, but rather draw out some part; then sew up the abscess again within the next day, and do no further work. Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have made your incision, check whether the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a plain incision, dress it with linen or fine cotton bandages. And if there are large incisions, and they have many punctures, you must make individual bandages so that each one overlaps the other; and if you have penetrated some flesh inside the abscess, and pulled out a piece of skin, you must fill it with plenty of cotton or rags made from linen, and bind it up for three days. Then let the physician and nurse treat as long as the wound is sane.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	ses:nosexent. If: thele aiseur, in:ice. Thearre ja.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this requires to know everywhere in the treatment of abscesses: therefore I told you how one should go before treatments for abscesses, and now the physician.
des soros	This appears to be a phrase written in Old French with no clear meaning or context provided. It may represent an error, abbreviation, or term that is not widely recognized. Without additional information, it cannot be accurately translated or explained.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	When the chief comes with small abscesses, and they are treated as in tablets, just like the butcher dressing a pig, there is much that has moisture, also those which are hard and jagged on the cutting board; for if it contains moisture, then the treatment does so excessively long. And when the moisture is drained out of the cloth that holds it, nothing remains in that cloth to come back again until you let it go; then dip cotton wool into Egyptian oil if it's still wet, and otherwise use water and bandage, leaving it for another day while healing the wound. And those who delay will suffer such a loss of time. Then renew the cotton wool, doing so again in two days and three days as before; then treat the abscess with ointment to your liking until you know it is no longer growing nights. If the abscess has any thickening, then drain it according to this method, cutting away all pieces of skin, and apply every part of treatment on the bandage under which it lies; and if the artery does not behave as I told you afterward. Also treat an abscess that is jagged with a similar procedure as I described earlier.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the treatment of a painful and moist abscess is lighter because it has less blood. If there are no such abscesses or chiefs with swelling, then these were also abscesses that I mentioned previously from an old woman's wound; and I found this abscess to be as hard, rough, and blunt as a nail, and you couldn't break it; and if there was none, they were done just like the wounds of a nail. In other cases where these abscesses come from chiefs or in children's heads (from ears), the treatment is entirely dependent on them for at least all days until hair grows out to draw blood; and you treat as it needs to be.
des scrophules	This phrase could refer to "scrophula," which is an archaic term for what we now commonly call 'scrofula'— a chronic cutaneous form of tuberculosis affecting the lymph nodes in the neck and other parts of the body. In historical medical contexts, it was often treated with prayers or "miracles" by royalty under the belief that kings had healing powers over such conditions due to a divine right (the so-called 'Royal Touch'). However, without further clarification on this text's origin and purpose, providing an accurate translation or interpretation specific to your given Old French context is not feasible.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	:esme dexcepure.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	0ersembel
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you treat the entire scrophula (a skin condition), it is necessary that you join together the two sides of the ulcer and bind them tightly; for there will be no delay in treating its great size. It is necessary that you understand how to cover the root of it, and drain fluids from it, and do so as we have said. Those scrophulas with superfluous fluid, they quickly open wide; and the opening done thus depends on the previous one mentioned, then dress them gently with oil and similar things, in order that what is delayed by decay does not corrupt; and when the wound is well healed, treat it with oiling until it becomes healthy.
de squinance	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old ones spoke and wrote about throat-dressing; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have dislocation, it is necessary that the flap of the throat called "epiglottis" be removed; and this does not help because all these veins and blood vessels are close to those with abscesses in their mouths, or in their throats, or in .ij. tonsils (tonsillar areas).
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of these veins, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the impending death that comes from strangulation (the restriction or constriction of blood flow).
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	And so it is necessary that we cut the epiglottis, cutting out of .ij. circles or three small holes through, between these circles or by the quantity of the fissure.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And there he has become caught at the section of the epiglottis, which does not have any cartilage, and his vocal cords are long without ends.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is afraid, it must extend the throat cartilage to the entire circumference, then cut the vein until it turns into a bleeding channel; and remove the blood clots, if there are no signs of anything, and then apply the poultice as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it is demonstrated by the bleeding of the throat where blood jumps through the broken lead that is there, and by the defect in voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And let the wound heal a bit.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time for touching passes and there is doubt about strangulation, gather the two sides of the vein wound, and apply pressure to move the cartilage gently; then administer medicines that cause swelling until he recovers health.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Almost as they say that it is not done until the throat is completely burnt out and the patient's voice becomes deathly weak and lifeless.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cover the epiglottis because the patient cannot breatran at all and breathes through the wound, which keeps them from dying.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	And for this reason command the healer to let the wound heal for as long as the sickness of the disease has passed, and it is done in two or three years.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And they command to close the wound and heal it until it was fully recovered.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a young woman hold a knife in her throat and tear apart the veins on her neck.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I called for him to heal, but found him already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found that blood had been drawn from it, but there was no vein to have carried it out of the throat, and thus the blood came out through the wound itself.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurriedly went in to treat the wound until it was healed.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	And there was no change in the young woman's voice, and she returned to her normal state afterwards.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	For this reason I say that there is no fear with the crafting of the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	from a large throat.
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	These cases are called "throat hernia," and they are quite significant in women with a grayish color.
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Cette phrase en français semble tirée d'une discussion sur la philosophie ou la logique. Elle pourrait être interprétée comme suit : "En effet, cela signifie que les choses doivent être gérées dans le sens des faits naturels, avec des accidents; ou bien, simplement parce qu'elles sont naturelles, il n'y a pas d'enginement implicite."
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	Cette instruction complexe phrase en français signifie dans un contexte pourrait être interprétation: Il meurt-il faut de cestre une façon la naturellement, mais l'interpreter sceur il y ait le butte. Pourfaire maniere lesme, et parler : "Theory offerreser coursive apeo. Interpretations, theoricule interpré, ici: Les. Iferre demeure.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And it has fear, and does not intend to treat small wounds except in that which is inside the intermuscular space; and he tests and searches everywhere in the surrounding area.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	and if you also tighten it like this one, without any vein being blocked, if you pull it, as we pull ourselves, and treat all its parts, where there is any sign.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and carefully examine everything, and treat it as it should be done, until he is perfectly healthy again.
des nous	as ourselves
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many methods we have, which I will describe all in detail;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is necessary for me to explain every difference between ourselves (us) and dislocation (issue).
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is characterized by heat and fever, as long as the inflammation does not subside, and it completes the felling; however, once the fever and heat are alleviated, dislocation begins to stabilize.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the joint without heat or fever or pain, and contains one of its own sacs, which is colored like a cord, and begins to resemble a swelling, and becomes as large as a sack.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and are according to similar signs, or wetness, or of such colors as I have mentioned in the dislocation;
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when you come to the treatment of the joint (nout), that you examine and search first in all instruments called "intermuscular" space, according to what form they take or whether it is after an incision made by the surgeon.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inspecting the abscess (apostemes des nouz) is that you should moisten it slightly and then tighten it up little by little so long as you know it has been penetrated, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the splinter, and take care that it sticks.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture runs out quickly, let the color have such as I have said about other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And after the splinter comes moisture, you know it is fatty, then crosswise take it with tweezers and scrape lightly from each section and wear the coat wherein you will dress it clean.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot dress it cleanly, then take it by pieces so that nothing remains undressed.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if there is anything left over, it will return to us many times.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it remains for a little while and doesn't trouble you, then fill the wound with some corrosive potions or agues, bind the wound tightly, put on soothing remedies at the incision point, and cure it with other treatments until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if the wound causes great pain to us, then count the number of times we touch the wound, and treat it with whatever soothes the aching therein.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the wound bleeds and it is contrary to your will or you hasten and employ the broth of vitriol, leave it for three days or three months as long as the wound continues to bleed, then restrain the ebbing blood flow from the sore. Then return to covering that which remains undressed.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Seigneur li mals.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and are also like the needles used to extract witches' souls, and are made of copper, or iron, or silver, and they move like those which are yellow in color, and are better suited for searching out the boils of festering sores.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	and have three kinds: large, small, and tiny, depending on the size of the abscesses.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The shapes of the abscesses are very diverse, just like you see here: large, medium-sized, and tiny; and if an abscess has two or three cavities in each of these three kinds.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and if abscesses have three cavities, and are also of these three kinds; and if abscesses have three cavities, or single cavities, and they are all necessary for their treatment.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The main treatment for these involves deep cutting, and such that in some cases they only cut one side, from which they scrape us away because they cannot reach the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And these interdental instruments are made of metal and inserted into the mouth, so that the malady does not become apparent at the beginning of an incision.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and they have three sizes: large, small, and medium, just like you see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and they are not used for any other purpose than the skin, just like legs, arms, breasts, and bellies, and similar things.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and there is no other instrument of this size, looking like the scrapers used for abscesses, in order to scrape off the sanguineous fluid.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it has never been placed on healthy veins for blood flow, or arteries, in accordance with this great shape.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	There have been cases where people's breasts swell up when they begin to become permeable, so that they seem like women's breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and remain swollen and misshapen, and which can be cured according to this shape along line B until point G:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrapes off the fat, and fills the wound with healing oil, then joins together the two sides of the wound by sewing it, and treats it until it is healthy.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and when the malady spreads downward, it is softened due to its size just like women do, making two or three small slits above it.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	from which one holds the other at the end of each and both together so that the longer line contains the shorter according to this shape starting from line B until point G:
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrapes off the skin between the two sides of the wound and removes the fat, and I accommodate what we have said about sewing and powders, and all that is necessary for treatment until it is healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healed or the incision is not complete because of the malady, so you must fill the wound with a moistened linen impregnated with caustic vinegar.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it move its fat so long as it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscess cuts that come above the shoulders are hardened lumps or have ulcers, and they contain moisture within them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those which contain moisture must be cut according to this form: from line B up to line G. (Here, it's assumed that the original text refers to specific instructions on how abscesses containing moisture should be treated or incised.)
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And as for all the fluid that is in the abscess cavity, if it is drained from the wound, let it be left until the next day; and then remove all the cotton, and cauterize accordingly so long as it remains clean. (This instruction implies a step-by-step medical procedure for treating an abscess with fluid that has been previously drained, involving time management of leaving the wound open to air, removal of dressing materials such as cotton, and subsequent treatment.)
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to lumps of scrofula, treat them as we have said in cutting into lumps of tubercles; and when the wound is healed, apply cautery accordingly as we have previously instructed. (This part suggests a parallel approach for treating abscesses that resemble lumps or tumors associated with scrofula by using similar methods to those used in traditional treatments, followed by appropriate post-healing interventions.)
de la routure de l’artere	of the arterial route
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the arteries are involved and their protective sheath is attached to them as well, many times this leads to abscesses occurreaning along both its course and at its junctions; (This line describes a scenario where damage or intervention involving arterial structures might lead to complications such as the formation of abscesses due to bleeding or inflammation at critical points where the artery meets with other anatomical structures.)
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if it is there for a while concerning the arterial path, then these abscesses are formed along its length. (This statement links the presence of an issue or procedure related to the arteries with the formation of abscesses that develop longitudinally within them.)
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it is necessary, if you sense the first removal; and when it's related to veins, then return for further assessment. (This final statement suggests a general guideline for medical decision-making based on symptoms or clinical findings, advocating for initial intervention followed by subsequent evaluations especially in relation to vascular issues.)
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it is foolish to treat this abscess, and immediately when it's above the shoulders and in the arms and neck and elsewhere, and it is very large. (This concluding remark seems to advise against a certain approach or intervention for an extensive abscess located in strategic body areas such as over the shoulder joints.)
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore the treatment with fire must be avoided, and those who are at the head of the abscess must also avoid it, and in the one that is swollen from an artery, cut long enough to reach the underlying cartilage. (This advice appears to offer a cautious approach to treating large or potentially dangerous abscesses related to vascular inflammation, advising against using heat-based treatments such as cautery and recommending careful dissection to avoid further complications.)
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then work the edges as needed, and gradually remove the arterial sheath so long as it is exposed. (This instruction seems to suggest a step in managing an abscess where careful attention must be given while working around the vascular structures, ensuring that the blood vessel's protective covering is removed progressively and cautiously.)
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	then place a needle there, and draw it across the other side, and stretch the artery with two strands of linen according to what I have instructed in the extraction of those arteries which are within the temple. (Here, the text appears to be detailing a technique for using a suture following an abscess procedure wherein a thin needle is inserted on one side of the abscess and two strands of linen fabricate:
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	:esme deu li, in the French medieval :ist iten tounsesme:eveside of ailé leu esleu :esode.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then instruct the treatment that causes bowing, until his ligaments ache.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat this aversion accompanying it, as long as he is healthy.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	And if the incision at the vein's size occurs, it requires that you clean with your hand whatever of the incision penetrates through the skin.
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	Then throw the arrow on the point that you hold in your hand, and let it pierce, with an intertwined thread so that you can draw it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	Then bind the incision, as I have told you, or the ligaments of one part with two threads;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	And if you doubt that the thread is not enough, then replace another arrow at every one of these threads in the incision made by the first arrow, and hold the threads together with four fingers.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then repair the incision until there are no excess materials left, then mend the excess and leave what has been bound.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cover it with a linen cloth and oil, then instruct the treatments of bandages and ointments as long as he is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	From arteries' incision
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also when arteries' and veins' incision occur, so do incidents in the nerves when they are formed or due to too much labor, and similar things happen.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And such things often occur with auxiliaries and drugs in all their connections, and it is one of these painful incision sites where the nerve's color resembles that of a bruise, and they are subject to various conditions causing pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when they are stretched out, if he feels the severe pain, and it is not due to a bruise but rather in its course;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and let all parts remain still, and not move forward or backward, nor above or below the connections, and those in connection do not need to be covered with iron: sometimes there may occur a contraction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and those who are at the top or on the forehead make a slit with an incision.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the incision is small and you have some pincers, then use them on his root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"a laissainsiemale.  ions ence il devisinage desmoi thean:revelat :  it'sellas-"
des grosses boces pendans	deuelt point.nkallewarkles.nguilxin
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Never happens in the belly and nowhere else the like, and it is a disease called "fungus" by its appearance, and its root is subtle, and its joints are large; and there are some small and many great ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I see. i.e., there is a man who had .ij. bellies that were more like fungus than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had delicate roots, and were split, and thus began the moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I collected them and found in one .xviij. (16) ounces, and in the other .vj. (5), and the procedures for incision show that if you look at the patient's pains, they are moist, and the color of their articulation is pale and moist with a delicate root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If the caustic penetrates deeply into the joint, and are present in your presence. Because at the surgery there come many times too large wounds of blood, and if it does not stop with you, then I hasten to bring you the cauterizing instrument.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	And if you see the patient's pain and fear about the iron incision, then take a thick piece of linen, and wrap it around the joint as we have said, and let him rest for .ij. (20) days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	And then the restraint, and do not stop tightening the linen band around the joint until it touches the articulation, and he feels through his sensations; and if the roots are large, there is no need to fear piercing too much for the belly itself, but you can certainly puncture most of it.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then cauterize so that it does not retract; then treat the wound, and ensure you do not puncture the belly which is of fox-colored skin, poor feeling, and thin and pale appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an infected abscess, and I will come back to the treatment of this ulcer afterward.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the blood boils for it.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the boil comes from a puncture wound or a fissure in the intestine, and it is on the belly and also in other places where bruises or bleeding occur due to blood vessels being cut by these procedures, or bleeding from veins or arteries according to what is presented.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is due to the perforation of the intestine and by the bleeding from the abscess, then its appearance is like that of the wound on the abdomen, and it is light in feeling, and comes through different issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the intestinal issue, then it is more diverse, and when pressed on its sides it recoils, and returns again, and perhaps it becomes swollen at the entrance of the bath and requires a lot of work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is moisture, it's a light matter, and opens well when pressed with your hand, and does not constrain at all; and if it is blood, then the abscesses are large and hard, and they appear according to a certain quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	Lle neufsantil thelun : "Cette antique ions iure d'ainthans ince.comme a peuinsulte of:ngein :rime antire :itsecre from thees and : Iere :an, it:
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	sangle leger: ceintiage :cramble;lume.<bransche,re.se peuceille, heurtifere, cuitheuse.<1esseurs angastrape demejorie cesuant seurange conionseutexime:gere ſe
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if his appearance is due to the intestines or his bowels, then it commands that you instruct the patient to bleach their belly, and stretch them out straight, then squeeze in all of his bowels.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	Then he commands you to lie down between your hands.
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	Then go along the line that you have marked throughout the entire area.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then it is in the upper part above all other wounds.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then bind him along a strong thread or tightly tied silk cord firmly and hold it down there.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then work on the upper part extended along the bandage, and give your necessary indications, and address the intestines.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you tighten the bandage and it releases, then push the intestine back to the front of the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you tighten the bowel, it takes on inflammation, and deal with excess fluid.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery is opposed to it or the vein, walk briskly around, then return to your work and take needles (and) threads, and push out those needles into that place where you have done piercing, thinking that this will repair.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then draw the bandage around three fingers using needles, and if you see it moving, remove the needles, and let the place where they were inserted rest until it is possible to suture (stitch) it yourself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Or when it is subtle and perceivable, then you treat that which it requires, and if necessary, apply the bandage as we have described.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And extract the blood or moisture that you tighten, then treat the wound according to what it requires, and sew up the wound.
dou chancre	And two ulcers
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	n:
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when it is in position or can be removed as we have said, is that you must never purging black sickness from its gall; then make it stronger if there is manifest fullness, and cleanse the sickness. B[e] heal your ulcer firstly by making a good [cut], and treat all one-time ulcers or sores, and remove the hair from all parts, and leave nothing to the bone of any part that feels anything; and let the blood flow completely, and press well with your hand or something else, and if it contracts due to blood drawing from an artery or vein, cauterize until the sickness is not present anymore; then treat other treatments until he is healthy.
de ydropisie	It seems like you've provided a line in Old French that doesn't appear complete. The text "de ydropisie" does not form a coherent phrase or sentence and could be an error or fragment of the original text. Without additional context, it is challenging to provide a meaningful translation or interpretation. If there are more lines from the treatise you would like translated, please share them for further assistance.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have said in the division of hydrops, and how the water is made up in each case, and the signs of every such semblance, and the treatment by medicine, and that which heals with iron: it is only lightly; and one should not touch iron in these two cases: namely tympanites and iposarcha, for it is a deadly thing; therefore when you treat this semblance of hydrops marked "lightning" by medicines, and the cure does not benefit if the patient has weaknesses or other diseases besides hydrops, as in solutions of the stomach and similar signs: then one should not touch iron, for there is doubt; and when you see the patient with great strength, and no other disease but hydrops only, and he is not too languid nor overly tall, you must therefore do so:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Treat the patient right under your hands, and let the minister press down on his abdomen at its lowest part, then take up the spatula in this manner: And be careful of two parts from point to end, so that nothing can penetrate into the intestine when he is pressed there.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then look to see if the hydrops is towards the intestines: it must be that you pierce them from right underne mantle of the spit three fingers down, and if the hydrops is due to liver disease, then your piercing should be on the left side of the abdomen at this distance; and if it's for an ulcer, then make your piercing on the right side, and it must not happen that superfluous fluids flow through the hole into the weaker part.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	il'saint leu theor seigneurs in ancient theorrection:esubstant.iij.i:interprepretation desper:entire.iall, andaurementrains deinexclusive ache int'sante.illeage. Thee tolwinter. Interpre (fromage.i: It:comme it isode:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	To the head above it is the small joint, so that when the hand moves to cold, immediately rises with the instrument; remove then most of or third part, for if you remove more than necessary in this hour, perhaps he will die from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he suffers pains in the palms, or approaches death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	But according to the quantity of its strength, and considering what the dispositions of the strength of the patient mean, and his teeth; then take up the instrument and hold the blood, for it is now held by the knight who pierces the hole above the suture that is on top of the seam, as I have said, that you pierce in this manner; then restart the instrument another day, if the patient suffers such pain, and remove a small amount of blood.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Do not do it for one year, and keep from folding as much blood until he stays still but a little bit of blood; if you doubt about the patient's condition, and you remove too much blood, then care for his burial or sand will burn, and through many sweats and bathing in sunlight, and by drinking water, and treating with dry medicines while he is healthy, and cauterizing the stomach, liver, and spleen after removing the blood.
de l’estopement de la verge	The cauterization of the vein
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	There has never been a child born without a vein in the arm, or whose vein is small, or not located at its base. If it must be pierced immediately to address all these matters: then place underneocloverly thin thread in such form: and bind the closed vein for three years or four years as long as he urinates; and when he feels like urinating again, cut open the vein, let him urinate, and then put it back. And perhaps there is no need to do so because the urine that comes out does not leave the vein closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	These cases involve small veins that are bound with thin thread or cloth, as previously discussed, and they will eventually grow larger. Those who do not have their vein located at the base of their arm cannot urinate properly before tying up their arm; therefore, it does not allow fluid to come out from the blood vessels there, which results in a painful condition called "bleeding" (bleciet) due to lack of proper blood circulation. Patients with this issue are said to suffer from an unpleasant and dangerous illness because they cannot drain fluids naturally through their veins located at the top of the arm.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	: lexpresents ainsgustemaisse le malice: parleprebreve the preitrepresentations. Whatissance ofsaint theor, ilte. Amende. Issofrespectaement. Thises andire. Presenting offeral. Whatisoldumbrecture.
des pustules de la verge	Of the pustules of the thorn
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these thorns appear in the vein, and it looks like a wart; and there are both malignant and benign ones; it must be treated with an ointment of one part; then cover them with moistened cotton soaked in Egyptian oil, and cure the healing until they are well.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the thorn is malignant, reddish and loose in color, it must be treated with a heated iron instrument; when you have coagulated it, and if the thorn lies within the vein, part of it inside the skin and part underneath, then remove the thorn that is beneath first; and when it has set, continue to cure it. For as one treats it all together, there is no assurance that the wart on the vein will not be noticed, nor become darkened and corrupted in its place; thus everything black and corrupted must be burned off, then apply an amulet made of honey and flour mixed with several times ground pomegranate bark, and cure it further until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if the discharge of blood comes, treat with the lunar cautery in this manner: The cauteries help by providing a combination of actions: during bleeding, and corruption; and when the thorn on the vein is decayed and retracting, it must be removed or drawn from the vein, pouring the patient's urine around the area where there are no circumcised men who have had an injury or abscess in that region. In such cases, you must scrape off with a scraping tool held by hand, until all connections of the wart on the vein are dislodged and liberated from every part.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is something that requires designing in this case, you must scrape it with any smooth tool without touching the chief of the vein and part of the skin; then cleanly draw between these two points, and place a moistened linen cloth soaked in cold water on it, such that it does not stick back to the vein.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not displeasing for continuation like other wounds; however, all the work we perform of our own volition, and particularly concerning children, it is the best deed done by us, and brings salvation most easily.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children, for they do not practice it in their law, and we have nothing but what we have gained by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I wanted the greatest part of masters and saints who practiced circumcision in their time, and used force, and applied it everywhere; if they were careful about this issue because there are two sheets involved, and sometimes a third one is added above and prolonged.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or recovers circumcision and it is twice as painful; the healing of this wound, which affects two points in its place, is not securely fixed for the pointed limb member; and the healing of a finger through such a process may break the nail, and damage work, and many times are born without the need for further circumcision.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Regarding the healing done by force along the entire length of the thread, I found the benefit in experimentation, as these techniques also cut well both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	Because when you press your hand, if you cut it evenly in one-third of the length; but that the thread is properly inserted into the skin; and if the method is similar to the first work done, then it makes the child think whether you are merely tying the thread around the vein or forcing them to try every possible way.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	then you do it firmly in your hands and pull the forces between your hands or on your fingers that the child does not see them nor any animals; then place your hand on the vein and blow air, and move up to the point where the thread is inserted into the vein as much as necessary; then clean well of the dirt assembled there, tie one loop with a double string, and tie it in two places along .i. part .i. other tie; and you have .ij. does for the second tying at the bulb and the index finger, and place between the two ties, then lift the arrowhead quickly above hand and remove the head of the vein;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then let the blood flow a little and a little, because it is necessary; and sprinkle on top of the powder about one hour of moist bread baked without water, glazed with roasted red honey mixed with olive oil and rose water, and leave it for another day, and cure him with other care until he is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The force applied in the circumcision process is such that both halves of the wound are held and stretched, and are as large as the child's finger.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	the error of healing if it is in the incision area, therefore you must extend your single finger so that it makes an incision; and cut it evenly, and if you hold on to your hooks, and then pull.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	aspiez.iij. A: " :mein, et :"sainct "e theu.jacres of "it.il.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure now the wound of recently occurred pains treated with powder, which we have said or dealt with powders, and if it is overdone, and it goes above, without causing harm; cure then as we have said, until he is sound.
dou retenement de l’urine	Holding back urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The holding back of urine is an operation involving a hole in the body, or frozen blood, or bowel obstruction, or similar things which we have mentioned in the section.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that the retention is due to an opening in the area of the bladder neck or urethral collar, then it must be crushed under his knees; place the foot on his back, extend his abdomen from above the lumbar region, restrain him so much as he can, and constrain the neck of the bladder to the opening of the hole upwards, for this way the urine is discharged.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary to alleviate the extraction with all the instruments called "syringe," for thus is its form: let it be of thin silver lightly coated like a bird's quill, or made with a handle one and a half palms long, or subtle at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the way of urine discharge is that you take a double thread, tie it at the top with a little wool or cotton, and insert the end into the syringe; then remove any surplus wool and push down to the tip of the syringe, oil the syringe with olive oil or beeswax, and have the patient sit on a chair, raise the bladder and penis moist with water mixed with olive oil and honey.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then insert the syringe into the penis as far as the root of the penis, then double it above towards the bulb; push the syringe downwards to the bladder before it, and let the patient feel the urine coming out of the empty thing right away, which is not done according to this order because when they insert it for it to go straight. Then remove a little bit of thread from the wool all around and around, and then the urine follows the wool, and draw the urine out, and correct the urine;
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And repeat the use of the syringe until the bladder is empty, and hold down the patient's hands.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	(old ince :rerect. I'sesance of theur sourne in English :meantainstircles de laissaint.dement,screw :lesemeanentures fromage ;faituregive:causele. In-victiener 138nose itentire. What'ce, lexpressive.
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and it has .ij. holes: .ij. on one side, and .i. on the other, as you can see; and the shoulder joints are cut so that they easily pierce through the vein without additional damage, provided that we can remove the moisture, and push out as much as necessary when it is appropriate.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	And when you see the medicines moving in the bladder, put the catheter into the moisture, and insert it where it is necessary; if you remove the moisture by catheterizing, then firmly push back the tube, and if the moisture enters now, so that the patient feels relief from pain.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	And this is the subtle form of catheterization used to irrigate the bladder: it looks like this:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is either silver or of gold, and the catheter has its tip above; and placed between one half-heart or along the line where you have seen irrigate the bladder with a sheep's bladder, then take a double thickness cotton wool, warm it on the fire, and insert .ij. parts of it into the catheter; then push the catheter into the penis, stretching your hand over the bladder until the patient feels that the moisture has arrived in the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make .i. circles on it; pierce these circles roundly into the holes; then push firmly through those holes with a wire, assemble the circle as you would assemble a dial, and place within this assembly what you have seen for oil and moisture and water in the instrument; and do it so that if you have done with the bladder, press down on your hand to the point where the moisture begins to flow into the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	In the division of surgical methods, and the extraction of medicines in general; and I have said the difference between jointed stitches made with rains, and all signs, and about the size to work on the bladder, and the vein, which I will explain clearly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the wound in the bladder occurs frequently in children, and it resembles an acute pain of the bladder with its subtlety; and this is harshly felt on their legs, and very severe their abdominal pain, and they suffer many times, and then inflammation forms; and for these types of injuries, recovery can be swift, especially up to three years old. It is much more difficult in the elderly, and it's related to osteoporosis among those who are between bone weakness and old age; and cure is lighter for those with a larger wound compared to those with a smaller one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And regarding the treatment, it is firstly recommended to clear up the malady with enemas, for administering all that remains in the intestines. For at times this blocks the wound.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the legs, and lift them up and move to their sides, so that the wound descends below the opening of the bladder, and never let any part be lifted high; then make him sit between your hands, with his hands outside his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downwards; then examine it and touch all parts.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the wound in the distance, then rush from your post near the wound. And if it does not tighten at all when touched with the instrument, give your left hand index finger as an indicator of how long the pain lasts, or if the pain subsides, or if the pain is still present; and let it be in its foundation, and see where you feel the wound on your fingers, and when you feel it at your post, press down to check whether the bladder has dropped.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend both hands above, and hold his right arm's skin over the knots in the upper part where he cuts; then release the bandage covering it, as this is its shape.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make between what is between the knots and the foundation, not in the middle but on the left side of the nape; and position it over the wound, and your hand should either rest on the foundation or stay at the base, according to how wide the incision will be, avoiding making it too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Perhaps the pressure should be enough for you to feel work at the foundation or base, knowing whether it has edges and margins: if it is gripped tightly; and when there is part that is swollen, with a slant and roundness, whose opening is light, as described.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	Since it has angles and margins, make the incision larger; if it does not yield, then you must use pliers that are as thin as a chisel at the head, to stretch the wound so that it doesn't recede; or you place underneath such a delicate instrument with a pointed end. And if you cannot reach in there, expand the puncture slightly, and since it is without cortex, then draw out the spinal cord; or extract it with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	. Comme sié enmettre lice aultes, et sié : ce quoi comest en mauvaise veystiés. Andresemende estiraitinens, ouest lai: Ieccles.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And when you have completed your work, if the wound receives incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and it is bound tightly, and placed under a strip moistened with oil and wine, or oil and rose water warm and cold to soothe the burn; then re-warm the patient on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until tomorrow.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, if the wound has healed well with oil and water, then treat it with daubing and rubbing (daubing) until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if a burn appears in the wound and scorings occur, and clots of blood form in the bladder, and it is retained with urine, which resembles standing water somewhat mixed with urine: then apply your treatment to that spot within the wound, and remove that piece of blood clot, for if it remains, the bladder will be torn;
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then raise the wound with water and salt and bandages in all ways you know until it is healthy; and it must be ensured that all urinations you treat by binding the patient's legs together and assembling the medicines on his abdomen.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the wound is small and it comes from a vein, and you prick it with a pointy instrument, and it prevents urine from issuing; then treat this in such a way that I have shown you before, but since it involves many tissue cuts, excuse me for describing this procedure now. I have already experienced this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take of iron according to this form and make it at three angles pinned in one stick:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take a thread and tie it around the vein under the wound, so that it does not enter into the bladder; then insert the iron rod loosely along the vein until it reaches the wound; turn the iron rod in your hand within the wound repeatedly, enough to probe other parts of the wound; if at once there is urine, press against the part that remains in contact with the wound under the vein. If immediately broken and flies with urine, then protect the painful area.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	:
de la piere des femmes	of women's wounds
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Often it happens that the womb is conceived in women, and if not at all, then it's considered a grave matter; and for this reason, there are three things to defend: one is that by chance the woman becomes a virgin; and the second is that no one can find a woman who knows how to cover her shame, especially when she is of high status.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that a woman's womb differs from a man's because it requires deeper penetration, which causes great fear for her.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if necessary, it is essential to have a woman well-versed in this matter and the vaginal entrance, and if you do not find such skill, there's no need for a subtle highborn maiden; and present a well-beformed lady with knowledge of women's lives, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you instructed in regard to examining the womb.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And watch carefully if the woman is virgin: however, it requires her to push down or foundations and inquire about the womb; and if she penetrates, she must constrain herself from doing so on her foundation, and recommend that she pushes down or with the malady, and seeks and pressures her left hand upon the formed bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she penetrates, it requires her to move the womb from great to great within the entrance of the bladder until reaching the root of the thigh; then push down on the womb's root in the thigh against the muscle where it lies, and feel the womb at that part; and do not move her womb above or below the entry or around it, but cut into it with a small blade for better examination.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then push the womb into the cut, if you feel the womb there so that the puncture can be drawn out, and know many types of pins: this means small and large, sharp and soft, long and round, and which have rings. If you see their appearances to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the puncture does not heal on its own, put borax powder and cover it with your pin for an hour until the puncture is sealed. Then return to your work, so that the wound remains open and use the animals I mentioned earlier in order to assist you in this task performed by men at your service.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the puncture does not heal on its own and it's an artery that is cut, put powder under her wound and straps and bandages, do not try again; leave the wound open and perhaps the maladies may pass away from her; then tend to the injury.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the blood is calmed down, and let loose in it, so return to your work.
de hernie carnouse	of hail, et desce elle n'au premier petit, siens de tout en chascun leu parlez; ceincomme por leu que les plait qu’il yi aulx coment d'abord ou.sesmesure seigneur l’ancorne ire quitter et siensesprey senglish.
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	iere:sseccresse
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this reed is weakness, which causes bleeding, and that material spreads.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And there is never if it comes from percussion on the blood vessels, and this moisture takes many colors: whether it turns to yellowish, or without redness, or black, or water white, and that happens more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are signs of knowing this assembly, for if it is white and fluffy as we have said, then the abscesses open long like an oofie, and they do not open the blood vessels because it has full moisture inside.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the actual tissue, then the abscesses open with a part of the epidermis (uef), and therefore we think it's another type of swelling.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if the moisture is between the skin of the blood vessels and the fluffy white, then it feels well; therefore, as you know the color of the moisture throughout the internal passageway, from there the formation appears here.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Since that's after the internal passageway, judge what is therein.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we treat it with iron, it must be determined that the maladies are restored as well as possible and the replenishment of its heart; then they place him on his back a little high, and put over him many pieces of cloth.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	Then they place him on his left side, and command the minister to place him on the right hand, and extend the rod at one of the two corners where the blood vessels are located;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula and pierce the skin of the blood vessels long until it approaches the thigh, and make a straight incision in the vein's sheath as white as snow, and extract gently according to purpose.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the surface of water in one large hole, and draw out all the water, and then insert the stakes, and let them rise in the water face; and do not touch the edge of the roots, but only pierce the root itself; scrape it gently along its side, so that if you don't do this carefully, the water will return to him.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the water sprouts from your work, you must reset it in its place after completing the water channeling; then join together the two stakes holding the roots at a joint, and treat it as for other wounds, until he is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you correct the corrupted water due to another disease, it is required that you tie up the limbs hanging downward (suspensories), doubting whether there will be a flow of blood; then pierce the root throughout the suspensory, and draw out the water, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the water is assembled into two parts joined together (ensambled), it appears to be twigs (rames); when you pierce the other part as you have done for the first one, then draw out the blood from that wound, and place linen soaked in rose oil on the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And set another soaked linen on it in wine and oil, place the two stakes holding the roots underneath this linen, and cover everything with doubled cloths (drapelets), and bind them all together along this entire structure according to this form.
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take the cloths (drapelets), and cut the linen scraps according to this form, and assemble them with cordage in a bundle at the back of breeches, so that one stake protrudes from the foundation up to the back, and the other extends down to the belly part; and take two chiefs under the roots (two more pieces), and bind all together tightly in the loop on the barrier.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And never is this rod of cautery made in the size of iron at once, and it is that you must make a subtle metal cautery (cauteret cultellaire), pierce the skin of the roots, and treat them as we have said before. So that when the white wound containing water is uncovered;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Andy salle (hors dous ceaiges duce desormainz envenables laisse li. Paste. Sgustres chastre deus entendit:enture, les paine epearme of thecaesure ainsalere.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And the wound in all ways that you can, so long as it remains open; and make sure fire does not touch the unhealed area; and know this work is safer; and keep from running of blood, and movements that result from cutting.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if anything contradicts you, or incision or bleeding resulting from an operation, then treat what is contrary to it, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the great pain causes fear and it does not want to wait for this work due to its horror, prepare a puncture as I have told you, and when you are sure of the meanings we have mentioned that resetting is necessary there.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	If it suits the patient to lie on a raised surface; then make the incision in the part above where there is space throughout the entire muscle area, and insert the puncture long and straight; and make wide holes so that all the blood flows.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on top of the wound, and cover it, and let the remaining blood flow through it, then treat until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the blood does not come out of the wound'ran opening, it is necessary to insert a needle or the instrument with which we extract the blood from such injuries, as indicated here; and slightly expand the wound, and know that the blood will return, and after about two months or sooner, when it has assembled again in this way, then the painful joints will pass its days.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the incision of arrows
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in this section of this procedure there are various fearful conditions, which makes it seem to me that leaving it as is is better.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you the work and the appearances of the incision.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Nowadays, most incisions come from cuts or arrows; and this happens quite often.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is known by excessive bitterness and swelling which spreads into the cuts or arrows; or from percussion.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	And the color of the incision depends on the color of the arrow; and it does not cause pain, but rather a grievous incision.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And perhaps there are also painful and sharp incisions, and sometimes the color is of fat; but it rarely comes from our arteries or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from our arteries, it curves according to the shape of the incision when you apply pressure.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and does not require you to touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	This made of vein swelling is curved by its shape resembling the gentle touching of joints.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and can easily make a cut in this likeness, and on the others too.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And it is that you grasp the tightness of the joints, then it lifts upwards, and spreads out with white flow, releasing the suspensory from all parts of the vein.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the vein is already so entwined with these needs, then it requires you to cut the vein and grasp.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is attached to the flow, or in these spaces among the vessels, then it requires that you release all of that tenacious hold and grasp it gently.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the origin of the joint is behind, then it requires you to grasp it completely and extract the vein, as we have said before.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your tasks are completed, cover the wound with dirty linen in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the joints' abscesses
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling one joint, with the softening of the joints.
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and if it cries out loud when it moves;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment of this disease is also very concerning as this one before it,
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and therefore we will tell you the work of it, according to what they did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It requires that you set the painful joint in an elevated position, then release the suspensory from its places among your joints.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	around all the vessels that are near the neck, and the masters of them, and extend into form;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then you cut through a thick vein at that point among the vessels, until they are exposed.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scrape at some parts as we have said in the removal of those arteries that are in temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	:en français en france. En: the second :o tokës. Thisg andrèl'srepremantheir de laire ǒn. Whattic. Ientence of the samecate cestures,
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then bind it firmly, according to its length, and remove the decayed humours.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then heal the wound as we do with others, so that no vein is squeezed by any of its neighbors.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for there is no harm from this, and if all the veins come together, it must be drained from each of them.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that it does not lose any suction due to the incisions of the veins, and they are dried up and cannot be aided.
de la routure dou syfac	from the course of its surgery
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The relief from this operation is by the cut that brings it forth or extends to the abdomen in the part of the angels, for so the intestines descend from that course to one of the veins.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	And this operation is by the cut or its extension, and these .ij. (two) manners of much from various causes come: either by percussion, or jumping, or blowing, or lifting a burden, and in similar ways;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is of the cut's extension are that they occur rarely and slowly, over a long time, and do not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and are the abscesses equal up to the opening of the wound, because the cut presses upon the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs when it is of the cut's section are that they bring sudden commencement of pain, and various appearing abscesses therein near the skin, for by the exit of the intestines and the course away from the cut.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never are the blood vessels conjoined with the intestines, and they are retained within, and it brings great suffering to the patient mainly when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron cures for pain, because it must be refrained from.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of this work is that you command your patient that he may withdraw his intestines from within the wound if it can be drawn.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	lifiecurexileux :1entailleuledecleurrevesche.ne:nicharcheungeurange theissose mes–aucellecius iflet outerrener �angantanimeigne :ures,uel vevelle ifsainnel colore to canglewaxanjure
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then become the key above, and cover all of the skin around long nerves.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then place linen folds on the abdomen according to what you know how to do to open the wound, and such that they can allow it.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape off the scab from the skin around the nerves, so that the white scabs are completely removed.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	Then put your indicator in such a way that teaches the nerve, which is between the white scabs on the abdomen skin and between the second scab.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And go behind the abdomen, and between the second scab; and move your right hand towards the nerves on the skin of the shoulder, and place the white scabs high in your left hand, and lift the abdomen towards all parts toward the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And command the minister to extend the abdomen upwards, and move what is behind the ligament.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And you must see if there is any intestine wrapped up or white scabs that are hardened, and if not, put it in the abdomen.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Then take an awl or a piece of thick thread made from x strands of y threads, and place it in the back part behind the scab that is after the skin around the nerves; below the waist, then cover the ends where the threads appear, as long as there are 3 strands.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	Then join them together in a way like a cross, and bind the scab that is around the nerves with a strong ligature of 2 parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the threads and tie them with 2 parts, so that no one can push their fingers into it, even when pressing hard.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And place the ligature in line with one that is long by 2 parts of the previous one, and after these 2 part ligatures leave a scab that is around the shoulder's nerve wide.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	And after all the rest of the movement that he used, cover in the part that is under the skin around the nerves as long and without correction or bowing, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then make a clean lint of oil, and put it in the wounds, and treat with the ligature that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize the white scabs that we mentioned after the incision due to doubt or fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	Because this happens many times and leave the ligature as long as it hurts him; if it does not come out on its own, then heat up with warm water as we have said, until it comes.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then cure the wound with other treatments, until it heals perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	of carcinosis
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this section, I have never seen anyone attempt to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old one said it is made like this joint that is assembled with pieces in such a way that you tie the veins after cutting them lightly.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let me take part in it, and treat the abscess that performs, until the veins ache; and treat them as we have said, until they are healthy again.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	There is no occasion for an operation on the arrows, as we have said, and open them; and if there are any entrails that have been cut, it's little, and return all times.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And in any case if he lingers too much on this point, whether it's a wound or syphilis, as long as the entrails continue to bleed.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens by the extension of the sore that is in the entrails, as we have said, because it extends, then becomes soft and swollen, and opens up.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And it is treated by cauterization, as we have said before; and never has been cured by iron in this manner.
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	And that the great pain is sitting on his shoulders between your hands, then take out the piece of the enlarged abscess according to the size indicated by III spindles (an old measure).
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	And then extract the sore that is inside the skin where it's situated, then take up its rind and apply it to the apparent sore.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And press the piece into the belly of the patient where the larger abscess is located, then count the II pieces appearing on top of its rind, and apply both.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then extract the rind of the sore and do not cover up the abscess nor extend its size or any other condition, as I have told you in the treatment of the intestinal dislocations.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then treat the wounds. And if it heals by itself and treat the wound as long as it is healthy again.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The shoulder is bound, and has no outward appearance in the journey, and the fire cautery is burnt into this place, and soon after it leads to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	The softening of the cartilage joints.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the cartilage joints in some people are softened, because the shoes worn within them become mushy, and it is easy to see; and there is a method when you want to cure him, placing the patient on their back, and tearing the softened skin where it lies over the natural skin; then take two or three fingers under one cover and if you feel any superfluous softened skin in those covers or firmly attached, then separate them, and treat the wound as for other injuries, until he is cured, and bind his filament.
dou chastrement	The muzzling.
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	It is forbidden to write about muzzling in our law, and for that reason I would prefer not to mention it here; yet there are two ways of muzzling: one by attraction, or the other by a cut. For the attraction method we let the beast sit in hot water until its cartilage joints become softened and remain so; then pull the ears with your hand until they return to normal feeling. In the trimming process, you must shave the beast's coat, press the softened skin on the neck with your left hand, tie up the suspension, and place a strap over each joint as you have shaved them; and this method of muzzling is more extensive than that by attraction because by attrition there may sometimes occur an accidental separation in the cartilage joints among the tendons. This way of trimming is much like the one by attraction, since due to attrition the beast desires excessive thirst; and this method of muzzling is more extensive than that done by attrition because the attrition may sometimes accidentally separate some cartilage joints among the tendons.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphroditic (hermaphrodite).
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphroditic (hermaphrodite) is according to two ways: one where there are two cartilage joints as open and arranged like the figure of nature a woman has hair, or even urination; and the other way in women, with sticks placed on their penis just like a rod and two cartilage joints. And the treatment for the body and face is that you coat all these areas together, and treat them as for other wounds; in the second case, where there is no cure because the urine leaks through the cartilage joints of men.
de la tentigene	Tenting (tenting).
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tenting is a modification of the natural part, which is too ugly to see; and some women also great as a finger, and the curer: It covient that tu teignees, and li superflore : les maundes laisse. 10sangledit leu n’sainte le cunj:mesure desir.
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Erratic dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, preventing it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the woman; whether this condition is due to natural reasons or accidental causes, such as slight tremors or delicate illnesses occurring within her body's cavities - whether internal or external; which affect conception, childbirth, and unexpected flower production. If these subtle tremors are apparent near birth, it becomes evident that intervention is necessary. Should the condition involve a congenital issue causing dislocation, then the woman should be supported by two hands on her back with legs spread out as much as possible until the soft dislocation subsides; afterwards, apply linen bandage soaked in oil and place it over the wound, ensuring she receives care at home every day to facilitate healing. If the dislocation is caused by a birth injury, first cover her wounds with a wide, large cloth that won't allow them to re-adhere; then treat her for an extended period of time and apply a linen tent as dry treatment while she recovers from other injuries. When such conditions arise in the marrow, it should be covered according to this manner unless there are enlarged sinuses present, because touching them during an abscess formation is not advisable. For when touched in the cavity, any inflammation must not be disturbed.
des emorroides	Hemorrhoids occur when swollen veins appear in the lower rectum and anus; they can cause discomfort, bleeding during bowel movements, and irritation of the skin surrounding them. Treatment often includes dietary changes, medications, or procedures to alleviate symptoms and reduce size.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hemorrhoids are swollen veins in the lower rectum and anus that can cause pain, bleeding during bowel movements, and irritation of the surrounding skin; treatment may involve dietary changes, medications, or procedures to relieve symptoms and reduce size. Hemorrhoids become thicker over time if they are left untreated; we have said in previous sections about their signs and symptoms, and now I'll mention those that can be cured. Those found on the surface of the marrow can be felt and therefore treated by iron. It is necessary to place the woman in a cold room then apply hemorrhoids as pincers; and pour medicines restricting sanguineous blood, si comacavele de lacte. Then warm water; and it becomes leu, et il estant les emoryes:et enceinte l’enfants de ceste maladies, et secoire de la maris. Etre chastel :etemple de la femme infection. Si li vein. Severe theil juge :e du leu ci au fer, et les parties of themaintenant dele sachaile lou aoutrovenement caustice itinon meveint heure :redeletic :eru out :en: "dise :all. Here's : The :ce and :meetil (https, ce,cause : In it :itgive alesume; Iberes.
des apostemes de la marris	Of fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Many methods of treating abscesses come in dealing with the cavity; and when it comes to boils, herpes, furuncles, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and burns, as well as forcible cauterization, which is not limited to cutting with a hot iron. Nevertheless, do not rush to determine it, but let the patient endure until his pain subsides; then have him sit on an elevated surface, using two small supports or benches so that he can lean back and spread his legs, extend his feet outward, place his hands under his thighs, and tie them tightly together. Then observe the depth of the cavity first to ensure it is deep enough, but not too much; if there are larger stones inside, cover it with linen cloth, so that it does not cause pain. Place the instrument above the opening at the top, around the head of the stone at the base; and when the stone is empty, cover the wound with moistened bandages in oil or dried mustard; place them over the cavity of the abscess and on the back part of the buttock. After this treatment lasting for two years with oiling and massage along its length, if it heals well; do not apply a hot iron to the wound, as previously stated in the division. If the stone is pushed into the cavity, be careful not to burn with fire, but treat it as we have said in this section.
de l’enfantement	This phrase refers to childbirth and would likely appear in a medical text discussing obstetrics or gynecology during medieval times. The translated line might read: "Regarding the process of childbirth."
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	ilk parle riche pas le butterail (sisles aoutil: Injur ander lice in thees arme purely pureaide juratnayes pastry devoxidure oftear lai cesare.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes to his head naturally, and the woman gives birth with crying, and the strength of a man is weak, so it sits on a seat or women hold it; and let its nature be made from oil or fenugreek, and then pour the bath between its legs where this small sac is formed:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And cut the umbilical cord, and hold the man's belly so that the moisture which is in it makes small wounds; and press the woman's abdomen until the child comes down, and if it doesn't come out naturally, then you must use musk with fenugreek oil for washing the woman; then raise her head and cough deeply. Now, if two hands emerge strongly, you must rub them lightly a few times and a few times; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on one chair, and lift her feet up; then remove the chair from the ground, and wash the woman so she does not defecate when standing. And if the hands do not go in, and the child dies, you must take the hands to the instrument that is shown here before me, and extract the child, and dislocate it gently.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	From the exit of the child from its legs
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes from his legs, then its strength requires that it be pushed upwards.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	And then twist it lightly and lightly, until it is straight.
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then raise his feet and extend them lightly, slowly.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can it just jump from one foot, if commanded to raise, and make it cough deeply?
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If he jumps, God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not so as we have said, then turn it lightly and lightly until it is in the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For this is done lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come out as we have said, then use honey of almonds, oil of cinnamnium, and molten wax, and grind everything in a mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and pour the woman inside for it is burning;
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	thecauses. The Old English:mein in itake aprezent. I'sain. Ai source. Andresort, etat "Theesurge. Iber. Hereise laissera lesuccles 3. Ages andre. It'intermiser. What'elacute (it'sle deca veintres apreyens.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	And when it is wet inside, he makes a small bowl of myrrh, and puts it in there, and leaves for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then it sits on a stool, then he forces and tightens the mouth and nostrils, and presses gently on the belly, because now the child is jumping.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the child on his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, he puts his hands slightly and slightly;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then is placed on his neck, and he hangs the legs downwards, and lies down on a bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and he bends his hands slightly, then he presses the hands on her belly, and he pulls out the umbilical cord until it is cut away;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not jump, then he raises his legs and they form a shape, then he makes the belly's upper part rise, and he pushes with his hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and the child only for a little while; and commands to the woman that she pinch him until he expels.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the child who comes out with a hand wide open
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I command to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be brought back, then makes the woman stand up and go;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot go, then makes her sit on a bed, and he stretches out the legs;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then I instruct the muscle that I have told about;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, then makes her sit on a chair, and studies to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and the child according to his natural shape, and makes her pinch him until he expels;
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the child on his neck, and spreading her hands, and turn it to the mother's back;
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I urge you to turn your hand back and forth slightly.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is swollen, if you place a mixture of musk and oil on it, as we have said before, then he commands it to move slightly.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	And when you have done this, if the swelling settles on one point, he commands it to pop; and the swelling will burst open.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this way for all the second time
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When he comes into this manner for the second time, let you dip your finger in oil until all the moisture is gone.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if the wound appears on his face and neck, if he covers it with tears so that it is not retained, then the child dies. (Note: The phrase "si la cope des la boude" seems to be a misinterpretation or error in transcription as it does not make sense in English. It might have been intended to say something like "if he covers it with tears," which I've included above.)
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then throw the child into, as he must command it to be done; and orders the woman that she shall not pop it again. (Note: The phrase "aucune fois" is French for "never," which makes sense in context but might have been incorrectly included from the original text.)
adonques si istra legierement.	But if you move it lightly. (The word "adonques" seems to be a misinterpretation or error, and has likely not affected the meaning of this instruction line in translation.)
de l’issue des gemelz	From the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Save that twins are born many times and never two or three; this is not strange, and little happens. (Note: The phrase "et aucune fois en naissent" seems out of context in this translation as it refers to the frequency at which twins might be born, but without further text, it's difficult to confirm its exact meaning.)
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Both are strange and do not live much longer than a few days. (Note: The phrase "se poc nom" is unclear in this context but might have been intended to mean "little life," suggesting the short lifespan of these newborns.)
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they multiply and are depleted by the same reason which causes them to weep, which is tied with tears. (Note: The phrase "qui les devise" may have been misinterpreted in this context. It could be referring to some kind of cause or condition leading to their plight; however, it's challenging without additional text for clarity.)
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And never naturally come out like all others we have said before. (Note: This sentence seems to refer back to the context of twins and their natural occurrence or lack thereof as described in previous lines.)
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come out grievously, then the treatment as we have said before, and let it be done subtly to that child, letting its limb move quickly in whatever manner it is inclined. (Note: This line appears to refer to a specific condition or occurrence of twins coming out with complications, requiring a particular medical intervention.)
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And let its limb move in this way as it is meant for salvation. (Note: The phrase "il vaut mues" seems to be an error or misinterpretation, and might have been intended to describe the desired movement of the limb after treatment.)
de plusors enfans	Of several children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	Never are they formed in the marrow of such numbers as one or two or three or four or five or six or seven or eight or ten; and they all take shape like a child by measure with great joy. (Note: This line discusses various potential quantities that are not observed to form, likely referring back to twins' developmental pattern, mentioning the formation process as 'great joy.' However, it is hard to place without additional context from surrounding text.)
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	And let his limb remain whole so that something similar may not happen again. (Note: The phrase "car" seems to be an incorrect segmentation of text, and might refer to the prevention of a recurrence.)
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	If he suffers according to what it requires.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman with a dead child or womb as I have explained in the division, and there are no fruits, and you are compelled to manual labor.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	It requires that you know if the woman is in good health and does not have any accidents or fear of death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	It requires that the woman be laid over her back, with her legs raised, and her feet together.
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And the minister instructs her with a part of .ii., or she lies in bed if it is not treated through the extraction of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then you rub the patient's mouth with moistened bread and honey mixed with aromatic oil and flaxseed seed, then anoint her hands with these oils and aromatics.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then you knead the poultice into her womb lightly, and look for one or two spots that are evident;
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	And take warning if the baby appears to descend upon its head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	If you press the points in her ears, neck, mouth, or throat, or under the chin or on the beard or near the shoulder joints;
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	And if the patient is in pain under her feet, then pressure is applied to the heel and near the joints of the shoulders;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is required that you draw the child into her right hand, place the finger in the left hand's palm, and stroke his hand lightly, and apply pressure to any of these places we have mentioned, so long as he remains empty;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the shape of the swelling:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then find another type of swelling, or in which you have experience, if it is to be extracted unchanged;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then it is moved from one side and the other, to allow movement, and its swelling teeth are moved accordingly as in this case:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if a part delays, if you burn the body without touching its limbs, and cast it into that section, and draw out the other section:
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if it remains unchanged, place this swelling higher up and do so until it flattens out completely:
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes between the other, and it cannot be pulled back due to contraction:
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	Since it indicates that you must wrap around it with a cloth until it flattens out completely:
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	Then wrap it around the heel of the foot or near the wound, and this indicates that you should perform the same action with your other hand on both feet:
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child's shoulder joint is large and it has been injured or dislocated:
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	Since it indicates that you should push the spinous process between your two hands and perform the same action on both sides:
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	Or you use the instrument called "almideyne," which comes from the shape of this surgeon, who is after that one:
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And then immediately make him cut deep naturally;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then pull out the bones with tongs;
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the joint is dislocated and he resists being pulled, he must be restrained with force until they are either separated or no longer displaced by fluid accumulation;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot be extracted, divide it into pieces as you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the abdomen or on the sides of the ribs, it must be pierced as long as the fluid persists;
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the joint is on its legs, it has light contraction and the application of warmth to the mouth of the marsh (warm compress) should be quick;
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is stuck in the abdomen or the vagina, it must be extracted with one sheet wrapped around the hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and make the abdomen or the vagina, as long as the fluid is present therein;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if other limbs are fractured, and they relapse again;
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	but he pulls out the hand from the marsh, and draw it out of his mouth.
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	And then I put one ounce or two, and it became hot.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	And if the mouth of the mortar is reset by piercing which was drawn into it, there is no need to work on it further.
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	Moreover, it must provide wet and greasy substances;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And the substance must be moist and soft, as well as liquid and smooth.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if it is on its side, and you may put it back to normal position, using the substances we have mentioned for a live child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if there was no possibility, then let it be torn into pieces, and not leave anything of the second one.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this thing, then provide those substances we have discussed for pebbles that come into the mortar.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if the blood comes out, then it is put under strong restriction, and other treatments are given.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in which there was an infant that had been bitten, then consulted another one above it, and removed the second bite from her.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After longing, an abscess appeared on the wound, which swelled until it broke open, and began to form a large cavity.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went to call for treatment, and after longing, I thought of it, but could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed above an iron block with great magnetism, and from it came some bone, and after several days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly worried because there is no bone in her abdomen.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it might be the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I wanted to examine the wound and with my hands took out some bone, until the woman reached her best possible condition.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And for a long time after that, there were still two large wounds on her body.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I have no record of this chapter because whenever the master performs an extraordinary operation, he knows how to assist.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring back the moisture to her body.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	And after this comes the shape of the pressure, which makes us take out books; and at that time they turn to their patients' faces.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	In general, the crown is more subtle than other restrictions, and it can be made of wood or bronze.
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	And it was made of wood with a wide mouth and the margin around the trees is about one and a half palms.
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And in the middle of these movements, this one was firmly fixed on both sides, which were half a palm long from each side.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	:toise, theilsincontracture. A:cesaigne: (faitre le plusa. Contracte aspearre.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, resembling more subtly and lighter, is made of iron or boxwood according to the appearance of tongs.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	And they have interlocking joints, like you see, half a hand's length long and wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	And when you have opened the marrow to all parts of the instrument, let it rest on one leg as if supported by a woman sitting on an iron stool.
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	Then fit the interlocking joints together into the marrow and hold the head of the instrument between your fingers.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hand on the instrument in the same manner as you have made the tongs evenly, according to the amount that you saw open the marrow's cavity until it makes it move as it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all submerged, and they have various shapes; and the more you open their marrow cavities, the more difficult the work becomes, and higher the rank of those who perform it based on its quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you don't adorn the instrument with which you have equipped it, for their needs are not dispensable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second stage of childbirth is reached, it requires you to command the midwife that she retain her patient's airway, and then make him exhale deeply, and restrain your hands at his mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she jumps through it, well then.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, then take a pot and make a puncture or cup-like formation, and place therein herbs that may open the marrow's cavity as in concoction, like chamomile, rue, anise, camphire (camomile), cassia, centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	Put some fire in the mouths of marris.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	sage, ail, ala 100:15. Andre. Aid it:laterles asu: httpsjacmeant.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second dislocation occurs suddenly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if after this treatment she remains, and is not cured as commanded, then the ball orders her to rub her left hand with linen or oil, and then put it back in its place.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And if she finds the second dislocation; and when she has found it, let her gently pull and extend it little by little, so that the pain does not lead to extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	But it must move more lightly to the right and left, and then pull away; if it comes and separates.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the wound of the joint is sore and inflamed, we have said that the treatment involves stretching out and smoke baths with herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	And if it's not all of what we have said, then let you be careful in the treatment;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	But it contains what is in the joint wound, let you place it on the knees of the woman, then perform an enema with four-part medicinal oil.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If she puts it in and repositions it, but if it becomes worse again; however, everything else, when the pain of a bad smell reaches the stomach and head, then bind the malady.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	And now it is said that there are fumigations available to this effect: none of the old have tried smoking dandelion and dry figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument used in this smoke bath with the woman to retain flowers and the dislocation is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is said to resemble a wound, and put in the head subtly in its place, and large joints near fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	Et de ces paroles desarmes pour le pene d'apostrophe aye. Andres verses cease tautil parlè. ille anonymously in the middle ounce andare. Answer: The Middle French verse fromage,eaux. Whatsofaire nounsse: les cetera desu, Answer Airage.
de percier lou fondement	Of piercing its foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Children born without piercing their foundational base, yet they have subtly suppressed something within them:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Since it must pierce that subtlety within its due time, and not merely with sharpness but rather by gentle handling, so that it does not touch the dislocation:
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place a thin layer over the wound in wine and oil, then treat it with ointment as long as it remains healthy:
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not reform, then place a puncture of depth in the wound and leave it to heal for several days, and only remove the stitches when the child has been allowed into bedrooms:
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And never comes this type of healing for wounds or abscesses without a covering; it must cover that setting well: if you take care of it as we have said regarding the deep puncture in the wound...
de la fistule dou fondement	from the foundation of the fistula:
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that arise from the foundation are inflammations and more severe than those originating nearby or within a distance of about two fingers:
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If there is one or more; and when the inflammation (nodation) of that fistula is old, then it must be examined carefully because there may be a hidden injury or weakness:
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And there are no such persistent fistulas; and they are known by the fact that it does not produce or expel any material when the patient vomits or experiences windiness:
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate the bladder and a part of the thigh; and they reach the joints of the knee or other parts:
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And then it is known at the base; and not from time to time continues:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And it is that you pierce your index finger or foundation, and insert a thin needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has twisting, when he inserts a thin piece of cloth or horsehair so long and slender that you feel the cloth or hair on your joint.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	And if you do not feel it, and it does not produce apertures of excretion or windiness or pain as we have said before.
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	You know that it does not pierce; but rather hurries the cautery.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is just above the bladder or near the urethra, if it causes the patient to urinate involuntarily and cannot be relieved by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is perceived just at the kneecap joint, then the cloth or hair will come back to its original position.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no twisting and the creation of pain by it, then it becomes merely a cautery and does not require medicine or heat treatment.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in these persistent fistulas there is no cure because of the effort involved and it causes great concern among those who intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In that which is not persistent and ancient, there is hope for healing with iron as I have seen before.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And the patient feels pain between your hands on his back; and he bends his legs up to his kneecaps, and leans his kneecaps towards his abdomen.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then you insert a thin piece of iron or cloth if there is twisting, so that you can feel whether the inserted piece comes back to its original position.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels pain on his foundation, it means that you must pierce your index finger.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	If it is perceived that the inserted piece has penetrated either under your joint or between muscles and tendons, you know that it is persistent.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if there is no work on it which can make it heal.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	As we know, some of them can be well treated, but these are few in number.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And the help that is done to him involves using a thin cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it has been described before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and he puts all the heat into the fistula, until it moves away from the foundation; doing this 1 or 2 times as long as you can feel that these useless parts are like a feather's quill.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the treatment of smoldering cloth in wax so long as it has been burning; then the oil massage and healing by compresses which unite and seal.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If he is so well treated in this way, it's good enough. Otherwise, there may be no other treatment that can make him well.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the piece is between him who is at the foundation of his body, or on your finger where there is a thick layer of cloth or tendon, so that you can see through it.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if it is the beginning of the fistula and its wall;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	n:100me:represents:rre,sentiment:ne:sautreignest (faissime:3lumente.c’sse,archelegefe forfaire.ce cupe tandex laithevesgarisme.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if it does not succeed, and cut between you and the right side, then burn with fire or a medicinal liquid on it.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	And when it comes to fire cautery, there are certain joints involved: namely, the dislocation of these joined bones, and the drainage of blood and removal of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then he treats swollen ears in bear's fat or by burning them down, until the hair falls off and his joints are weakened.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then he treats burn wounds hardened by fire, and dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	And if it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula arises from its base, and is separated from the joints, then you throw your stick or foundations out, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tent, and there is either the towel or the sinew or joints in question, it should be pierced through; if not, there are no wounds but merely a trace of fear and hope, managed by one of the three methods mentioned:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	You either cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it immediately if the joints are involved, or if there are tentacles and you treat them in the same way as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	And do not pierce too deeply into the joints, lest you cut through the foundation that holds them together and move their movements by will.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it as we have said.
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	possibly it will become healthy again if you move that covering and the wound, either by piercing near its foundation or through tentacles, or with another pointed instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then make known to me this joint which is in the wound, as you can do.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then study how to restore the wound and keep the fistula in the part further from the foundation; if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And there is never a fistula of this kind; and when you pierce the tent in the fistula, it touches the foundation beneath the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if you take a tent pierced at its base in this manner:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	and throw one twisted stick into it, and thrust the tent through the whole length of the fistula as long as it remains at its base.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	seur devis duy charles:
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	And tie the head of the thread, and gather the two ends together, and bind them to each other, and let it remain for one or two years.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And make no restraint on the thread at all while it copes these two characters that are between them and cross.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then heal the wound as long as it is sewn and sound.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, if it is to be opened in all ways that you can, but if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For he does not need to cover up the dislocation if it is opened and then heals, as we have said, until it becomes sound again.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spinous processes which are used for creating a fistula if it is very large and involves one or two vertebrae.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other hand, for such cases because it does not cover what should be covered, as you can see in this case:
des emorroydes	of evacuations (of blood)
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Blood evacuations occur through various methods: within the foundation (e.g., veins), like grains of resin, for both small and large amounts of blood, and subsequently from the body's tissues ('cort'). This passage details different approaches to manage excessive bleeding during medical procedures, including direct extraction via the vascular system, through abscess cavities (comparing it metaphorically to grains), as well as removing fluid-like blood clots and directly from bodily tissues.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	And if there is one or more such cases, and they are to be removed from the foundation (e.g., veins) and the main foundations of the body ('chief'), but those that are removed due to minimal fluidity generally have little impact;
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	And subsequently they may be left with a small amount of yellowish or clear fluid ('citrine' and 'sanc'), which has the same color as the surrounding tissues.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment for those within the foundations (e.g., veins), if you command the patient to remain in rooms with air ('en chambres'), so long as the foundations are full of blood, and it becomes evident on the skin surface ('filz');
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hasten it up, and then binds in one's roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	:means andaila century oun. Itas the.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And remove the arrows from your body, then burn them out of their place, and powder above any warm salves used in cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if as it is said or the author of cautery says, they are cautioned and then healed with other treatments until he is well.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the lodged parts cannot come out, then he cleanses the patient with a non-biting and gentle enema to wash away what is in the foundation so that it can come out openly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	And if the maladies are severe, and the wounds are deep in their foundation, then it is a light treatment.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And whether you treat it with your finger or tongs, and then you heal them as we have said, until they are well, and that the incisions made by iron should not be feared.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	It is intended that you perform the suturing as follows: take a twisted thread and put it on an awl, then stretch the thread over the awl and pierce it from another side, and turn the two stitches around inside the needle, so they lie directly opposite each other.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And if it is wide; and hold the threads together, then stretch the thread over again, remove the awl, and do so for all others, and leave a little excess blood in each puncture to correct any suction deficit.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place a damp cloth or oil-soaked cloth on the foundation, and put it there again, and command the patient to lie down.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let them heal until they begin to itch, and when they do start, continue with the ointment treatment and other treatments as long as he is well.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	two days or foundation, depending on the severity of the wound and its depth in the body's structure (foundation).
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often times it occurs in the intestine due to a natural constriction and when the illness is old and medicine cannot help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	And iten demeingles ceste cièdans ieu et siens en touplainces en laisse.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	sis, apeurgueble (12esday. Allusive.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if it cannot be sewn together, then resection is repeated more forcefully than before until he recovers well, and it must be scraped;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment continues as long as he remains healthy.
dou fremit	then a tremor
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Formication is a misleading appearance before the wound, and it heals quickly.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and never has the cold of frostbite, and he feels almost dead from tremor, and it affects all parts, especially the hands more than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a cane of about an ostrich feather's length, or a strong turkey feather, and place it on the tremor, so long as the purple circle around the tremor disappears completely.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand over the entire cane as long as you manage to cope completely with the tremor, and place it on the wound, and loosen the tremor at its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it as a cane of rain or iron shaped in this manner, and be subtle and quick beneath:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not hesitate to continue holding it for two days and press firmly And if you see the tremor, cauterize it as it is before or by fire of caustic treatment.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form like a poultice.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No one has made an enema with silver or arsenic, or molten rainwater or oil; and no small or large animal sucklings have been used as they are recommended for it.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These are small ones used in the treatment of children who are frail and suffering; they are little.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the poultice small and large if it is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner.
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	And there is an obstruction or the belly is tied as you see it, and the fistulas are located within them, and in one of the sides, dothe first fistula, and in the other side;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	And it may be the belly where you put the best medicine of a bladder or linen, and see all small fistulas.
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	souvent inquiete desu it'sau 1306:1000'sautes'soulle. If yout:ixtentire. I: ACTsisme :1stant, anderic, theire 1500'saintique.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And when the medicine is dense, if there is blood on the instrument in front of it with a strong thread, then we will wash; and this takes the form of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And the medicine should not be too hot or too cold, and we apply oil or almond oil on top of the wash, or something similar, then let it flow gently.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	Then the physician squeezes his two hands together, holding them tightly until they are all visible, then removes the enema and lifts the patient's legs at the hips.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if the medicine comes out as much as it can; and if it stays in all night, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you perform an enema during a disorder of intestinal peristalsis, and the medicine accelerates its release, then it restarts as long as he is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if there are hemorrhoids or an abscess, then the enema can also be applied gently as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and it is the gentle form of the enema on which the skin is restrained:
des plaies	in wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said about the treatment of wounds; and we will say about the treatments for hands and medicines according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on what they are made of and the kind or type of wounds they are made from.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things that wounds are made of due to movement of the body, cutting with a sword or cutter, and other similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or according to the location of injuries on the body, such as those that cut under the collarbone, or on the head, or the thighs, the abdomen, and other limbs.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head injuries, because their repair is included in this chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and the bone is not broken, if it's due to movement of the body or similar things, then the skin is completely torn and the wound is large.
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you doubt little of the incision: if it heals quickly from its headmost first, especially if there is only a small amount of blood coming from the wound, then we will consider its recovery contrary to the lower part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and avoid heavy consumption of wine and large meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if it does not heal, then reduce its meat intake and abstain from drinking wine and consuming fat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	:metal thisfeet iles leather ate the toi des'sons dexterior. In ittey elixentil. Thexer. Whatisles: metsure. 12: frommeattres : 230. Andre, and trellommenture: Get hereto incisaures 3 :
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if it does not have an incision, then put above the wound, if the wound is still fresh throughout its entire flesh, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I will say only a little bit later:
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the arrow has been moved, then put on any dressings until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of sword-cutting and similar injuries, and the lips cannot be closed together without force, then they are closed by covering it, which I will say later regarding abdominal wounds from stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is exposed to the bone and bleeds heavily but lasts only for a short while if it is touched, then treat the wound with medicine, and restore toughness to its surface in leather.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And instruct the patient to eat hearty meats as we have tested and cooked wheat, also like turkey, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you treat or suture perforation, and it is to the bone, touch the perforation completely, and apply treatment;
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if an arrow is in the wound or vein without surgery, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then whether you remove the arrow, and loosen the clot with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if that does not help at all, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these small and simple wounds are treated lightly; and you put this powder on the arrow so that it moves again.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the way of the powder is as follows: take an incense piece; blood from a dragon for two parts; live copper for three parts, and mix it subtly.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	And apply the wound, and form a fist, so that it heals well and joins all its flesh.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And then remove the clot well, and leave it untied if it does not swell; because one should not use medicines until she is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And no one has ever done this with only live copper alone, as long as there is neither incense nor blood from a dragon, but the arrow has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arrow has moved the wound, this is also how it was, without anyone using this powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put any digestible dressings on it or grain of barley made from water and honey, until the wound shrinks.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with other treatments until healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the bone fracture accompanies the wound and it is small, then you should make subtle pinches.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And I will say this about fractures of the head later on.
de la plaie dou col	sesoon.comenture duel.cumbersentire,re. 4ccue, andrompourfeeludexceli cest.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If pleasure comes from the head and neck being simple, for it has no difference between its chief or that which is attached to it; but if there are problems with the head or where the blood vessel is compressed.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it's the case that there is no other remedy but to leave the treatment and not apply anything restrictive, for it harms the nerves and forces them to withdraw.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and not to place anything on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their connection with the brain, which are its most important members.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but if there is medicine that washes with soft water and mixes it with rose oil, and also washes with soft water,
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other stones of this kind according to this method, and damp treatments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind it tightly with bandages, and continue treatment until healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and filled with blood, pierce them further or at a lower point;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the blood vessel is compressed, and the blood accumulates ('comes'), then he will observe, and let it lie (or rest), and if there is a necessity to cauterize, that is their profession.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the spine of the throat is compressed, or it hurts, then they should be guided; for by that reason the flesh will go away.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	but do not cause further pain in the throat's lining, and do not touch the throat itself but set it according to its natural form.
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then leave the stitching for some time, let him make no further interventions, and continue dressings with ointments until healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the injury has pressed upon the bone, then let him use it.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	And if he has bone fragments, if you drive all of them into his wound completely, and those that you cannot have, let the wound close as much as possible.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and be dislocated or misaligned.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder that I mentioned before.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and he has an abscess, treat it as I have said in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from the arrow or knife wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is an arrow or knife wound, and the wound is deep, then look at the wound for venous valve collapse, which indicates that the wound is deadly; understand that clearly the wound is fatal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	And if it is not deep and fresh all the way through, then do not put on the powder at first nor bind it to the skin that does not heal immediately.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And plunge the patient's body into cold water, and douse the affected area with coldness;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	But also an attractive heat application, and bind it daily for a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	And if you do not have a heating application, then place plenty of cotton to suction the fluid from the moisture.
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	And make the patient lie on the wound for either three or four days, or more if necessary.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	And if no spasms occur and there are no significant involuntary movements of the body throughout this process;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see the bone positioning, understand that the wound is salvageable.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then continue with other treatments and remedies as long as he remains in good health.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	And if it cannot be healed, and then do as is necessary; you will understand that there is an abscess.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut and it's straightforward, or on the backside, do that which I have mentioned before.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	If the wound is large;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	Ander: a l'alicomposition of itèlater ás devises.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	:naturexile alement:
dou derrompement dou ventre	A sudden collapse of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The abdominal collapses are great and frequent, as well as small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	Of great wounds there is never an instance where the intestines are pierced or torn, because due to the insertion of instruments.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	And the dressing is more troublesome, and there has never been a case where the small wound was worse than the large one.
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	For this reason they reinsert the intestines at intervals, because if they are not inserted gradually.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	For this reason the intestine inflames immediately when it feels pain, so they reinsert more gradually.
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	And because it is equal in severity to that wound, for this reason they reinsert the intestines into their natural position instead of other methods.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And you know that the treatment of the abdomen is based on four methods:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	The common dressings involve in the treatment of the abdomen,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	And the dressing of other wounds on the body and those other dressings are common like other injuries;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And all of them are more effective with the dressing of the abdomen, and I will say one and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I will say that when the wound is small, nothing from the intestines occurs;
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	And grafting is one way of reintroducing it, that is through one of the four methods;
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	Or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said;
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	Or because the intestine is inflamed by heat.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, treat the affected area as follows:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	Moisten a sponge or something similar with water only briefly,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	Or you heat by quenching and dipping and drying,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And raise the intestine until it has cooled down completely;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And never make restrictive movements, and it must be slow to relax;
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the inflammation subsiding, make sure to cool down or heat up and handle them gently;
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	Because through this process becomes lightened with few things.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if it cannot be entered, do a little with the wound using the tool for removal of abscesses to drain the pus.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	And the first treatment must be done slowly;
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	so we do not need to cut it forcefully without great necessity;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this refers to the effort of breaking it apart:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if it breaks down within the core and does not solidify again, then it takes on this shape;
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound has increased and the intestine moves abruptly:
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if it returns to its natural shape as per its proper place;
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	if it's possible for you, because this matters;
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is wide, and it's located on the part of the stomach;
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	which indicates that you should have the patient lie on their back;
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and raise his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is on the part of the stomach;
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	if raise his head and feet above the parts of the body;
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and also in one of these two parts;
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is kept high part of the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	Andromaintenant le feu eschief enlenginfeu en France inmainestatifs deves laconte meve in English translation en français:
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	Let the small wounds appear as they are,
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	Then hold it between your hands, for this minister who carries his entire route in his hand.
et assemble les levres;	And bring together the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	And that is the common way of dressings;
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	And that you prepare a needle or several, depending on the size of the wound's extent;
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	Then let the head of the wound receive space and insert an awl or whatever has strong thread in it;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	And pierce the two channels with the two sharp scissors;
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	Which are under the skin so that you cut through that part;
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	And join the two channels where you have made those four incisions;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	Then take a strong thread and run it through one of those parts;
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	Then join the two scissors at the wound to come together;
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	And then let some space and insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	Then join the two threads together if you have made the first needle;
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	And do not cease from making those needles;
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	as long as every wound is contained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and be the needles fine or thick, subtle and large.
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	for the fine needles penetrate all the way through, but the large ones cannot easily enter.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	because it is necessary that they be sharp;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it is not advisable to force the needles too deeply into flesh or leather;
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and they should not penetrate or open the wound before setting it with a soldering iron;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then they must handle the needles' points, so that they do not cause pain to the maladies at rest;
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and they place towels or cloth around the needles' points in order to hold them steadily;
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and let them remain so long as the wound is set;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and in such a way with needles it is more commendable for small wounds;
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because it is better with a needle or in its absence;
Li seconde costure si est commune,	⁠20thé andreinfeet the wounds:rime asseigne ite.
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	n: toiensingles la.iellas prezent.i :ite andre ientire, theires fromsage. ici. Whatsoaright. Iteraise. Ipouge-dayes:cumbreitures tis aprementalice lexe frommalyssuccresse.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	And when you have perceived these four signs together.
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	When you reset the arrowhead at the part where it has been started, in the manner that cost arrows.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and leave space between each suture the size of a minor stitch.
ceste costure sevent li home,	this cutting is done by hand.
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sutured a wound that one had in his abdomen.
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was armed with a knife.
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and it was more than one handbreadth in size.
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and it was indeed over two palms long in the intestine.
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and it was inside his abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I returned the intestine then it had been there for about twenty-two hours.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was sewn up just a little over fifteen years ago, and he recovered fully.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the physician had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not cure him with ointment because there was in it one little line where no medicine could be found, nor any remedy at all.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and left the wound soaked with water several times a day, and he washed it with honey as long as it healed.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	I will now translate the provided Old French medical treatise line by line into modern English:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and the thread on its back part so as to come close inside.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when she has perceived the right of power in power, if she holds the Chief' Writ or charged it with thread,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and make a cut on the other back part so as to come away from inside;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and their understanding of this stitching is that you do it just like the tailors make the leather;
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and leave the suturing of one side afterward, and continue on the other until the stitching is fully complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second manner of stitching that Galen described properly,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	as long as no one does it in this way, which assembles the two parts naturally;
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one of the sutures to the other, halfway:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	and make an awl or Chief Writ in frontal order, and pierce that part only,
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and let the two fingers become softly shaped;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	Then turn the needle, and cut it through the back part close to therein.
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and let the two fingers become softly shaped;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then cut through both of their rear sections closely adjacent to therein, in the same two fingers that are opposite it;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the more common way to suture and stitch;
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galien would say this proclamation, and no one can testify to it;
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	it must be sewn together with two needles or thread for each;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must insert an arrowhead into one side, and the other into another, in the manner of those who solder metals;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and it is known that when the stitching lies within the abdomen;
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	if this closure becomes more painful than other similar abdominal closures;
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment about the wound is such as the judgments made regarding other wounds;
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and is that when you tighten the fresh wound completely through all its tissues, causing the arrow to move;
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	if you restore intestines back into place and the associated costume, then apply powder tightly packed in a bandage;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if the arrow has been displaced, then apply any dressing that is available as long as it covers the wound;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and make sure the thread is tightly sewn along with the suture and stitches;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as you would any similar injury until it heals completely;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you have no medicine, then apply it as soon as possible to begin covering the wound with any available materials like clean cotton;
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and turn it every day until he is fully recovered;
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	Because you don't know of any other medicine beyond these that is suitable for simple injuries;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt whether the community of members can move.
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	If it is required that you massage the area lightly with oil of temperance heat or rose oil.
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and places them on the wounds, and between the scars;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	And if it smells pain or pus in the blisters, and often occurs;
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	If enemas are made with black wine and immediately afterwards the pus comes out to the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierce deeply, and you know that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the small;
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The "young" intestine cannot recover if it is congested;
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	And it is because of the positioning of the veins that they are, and for the subtlety of all the tissues, and the approach to their nature in the nerves;
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the abscess bursts from the wound, it should be treated as though it were in the intestine, while still fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	And if it is large and turned yellow or black, it indicates that you must tie the vein which contains blood;
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	for it has veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	and then deal with what's between the lines;
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and place the cautery in those parts around the wound until it has become compressed by the abscesses;
de la routure dou boueil	Of the treatment of the joint
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestine is twisted, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	If it can be restored by any means,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	For because I see some men wounded or with their abdomen pierced by a spear.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and it was the wound on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and thus affected defecation and wind.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I prescribed treatment according to what I knew, and I continued to carefully monitor it until healed, and the limbs were bound together.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him sewn up, I doubted that his illness was not in his abdomen.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he had no further ailment but improved significantly with rest, eating, and drinking.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And they told that any experimenter who has a small wound in the intestine must be bound together part by part.
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	then perform large experiments on it and assemble the edges of the wound.
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the experiments have passed through its mouth, if he puts them under the two lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if she pulls her mouth up.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then he lifts the head, so that it does not move at all.
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then apply another tremor afterward to it, as before, until the wound is completely healed.
et cout la plaie.	and cost the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	This chief is absorbed into the intestine, and brings no harm to the patient.
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and it can be tied up with a very fine thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal.
en teil maniere:	in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take this thread of intestine that is very thick.
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then tie it with this very fine linen thread.
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then push the thread through a needle, and cost the intestine, and rejoin it in place;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of mending is not harmful according to the path of faith and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is large and deep, especially when it's in one of the inner intestinal loops, there's no better remedy or healing, due to its subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	even if it is an abscess or a fistula.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Seals that any wound or abscess, when it heals ("Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme"), as if it were a fistula, is everywhere stopped.
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	And ons d'une fremit a l'anatomie des iacture de la mortel, parler in the beginning of the vavare.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	:esuccentilogy and fromage, aundec:ice, thenave. ous(sawisoldreversalice.
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it is also like the feathers of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and neither leaps clear nor heavy in its movement;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	never at all, and sometimes enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have mentioned in the division of wounds that all unsanctified wounds cannot be cured;
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	it is only by one of seven causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	and that is called the small amount of blood or clots;
ou por sa malice;	or by its own malice (referring to the disease/condition causing bleeding);
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hardness within it and under the tongue, wherein nothing can grow healthily;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or it has too many feathers (referring metaphorically to an overabundance of something);
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the stone has a pit (referring metaphorically to an imperfection), and its material quality is evil;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good for the treatment (indicating that traditional methods are insufficient);
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because its decay is akin to plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or due to the late property in that region (indicating delayed processes), and slow healing, and it naturally escapes/flits away;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or there are bones or vessels within (referring metaprompturally to anatomical structures affected);
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, signs, and medical treatments in the division;
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	or it implies that you need to understand the manual procedure for treating an abscess;
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	and it affects a fistula in all four limbs of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	because it has fistulas that originate from great veins, and arteries, and nerves;
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	either at the stomach, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or any of these abdominal areas;
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	either in the spine of the back, or in no joint of hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if to that particular property (property) of principal limbs, and their signs;
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all such fistulas of this kind are difficult to treat, requiring only laborious methods and lacking understanding;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	but if there is no such fistula that can be healed only with what I have said earlier, and you are confident of the cure;
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you have seen if the patient takes a draught of iron or wine, if the fistula is straight, and it pains him.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	iuntiferrangherifferde enclosure 1entioxange (theacher'resse. greinfalleuokheicherus
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	For the limbs bend over due to twistedness;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if he forms an abscess in his hand which you cannot properly drain by means of small punctures.
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if the enema is administered through one of the punctures;
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for the moisture in one puncture is drawn out from another, and it is masked;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then the decrease in pressure that you hope to know if it has bone or nerve inside, and it is filled with pus;
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask well of the patient about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and where it hurts;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you truly know the location where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein;
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in none of the locations I have mentioned if it copes according to what I have told you;
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and bone for the other one and those corrupt bodies that are within them;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then continue the treatment until it becomes sound;
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and whereof de coure l’ape laisser leu enlal ce quie itens aye defface tostern lignes au roe un coup. The l'in thexume in chief desmechant enceint:rre de: (13thaire nen: ices dechief cite
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	Then he places wet cloths in medical practice for a head wound, and applies them to the head of the abscess.
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	As long as medicine removes excess that lingered at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then I apply hot unguents medicinal to the cleaned and healthy skin;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	But if it is not cleaned by that, if the cauterize as we have said,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if his bone is rotted from the abscess, he cauters it too.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If veins or arteries are not constricted or the main limbs, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	And if his bone is exposed, and it has decayed or turned black, so long as the decay affects the entire bone,
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	And treats other untainted things on clean skin until it is healthy again;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	But if it is not cleaned, and grows black as before;
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	We understand that you do not remain just at all;
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	If discovered and you wish to be at the bottom;
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	And cleans all the decay, then restore the vein;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is so healthy then that's good;
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	But if it is not so, you know that decay has spread too far, and there will be no more time for it.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	But if a malgrevein, sois leu la sante.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	And if it has a small decayed bone, and you must extract it with pincers.
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	If the arrow is reachable by such an instrument.
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if it has a remaining bone, and you must extract all of them without leaving any behind.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	And if the moisture causes it to go against, and there is no mistake nor fear involved.
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If there are copes and moisture and heat, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, putting something in the wound causing souring discharge.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	And let them be placed over the bones for as long as they remain in position.
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And then they will move more easily;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	And if it is a large bone, like that of the leg or thigh;
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	If you keep causing decay so long that the blackness is all over the bone;
puis restoure la plaie;	Then heal the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is a large part decayed in the bone, and it comes right out of it like mud;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	If it must be covered and coated all over with decay, and then heal until it is set;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to one man in his leg;
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	If you provide an example and help with your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	It was a young man in his thirties who had pain in his leg due to something that came into the bloodstream;
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	As long as the materials entered into his leg, and it came out of one large incision without any further reason to open it.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but by their madness they worked so much on piercing it open,
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and they heated various materials, and it became a fistula, and much perforation occurred that all turned their shoulders backward and moistened the shoulder joint.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	but many continued to apply this treatment for two or three months, and found no relief in the art of hands.
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	as soon as I called them, and saw their leg and the remedies with which they were treated,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and because there was perforation at great joints;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and it turned red like a young man's shoulder, and had a yellowish tint.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I pitched my tent in one of these perforations and then searched for all the perforations.
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and I found that they converged from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	So I hurried up and searched within one of these perforations until I found a part of bone.
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and I found it rotten and decomposed, and the decomposition extended deep into the bone.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I brought to me what appeared to be part of the rotten bone, and took it for granted that there was no other decay present, as that was what I had seen.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to attempt to restore the wound with similar medicines over long periods of time, but could not sew it shut.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	then again I considered it, and found the bone as before.
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and I found the decay continued in the bone, and brought it to me, and then placed it on my shoulder, and worried about whether or not I could suture the joint.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not do much more than cut into one piece of the bone, and it was thoroughly damaged throughout.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I attempted to restore it with medicines again; and it was healed and sewn quickly.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and it is unlikely that I would consider furthering this treatment except due to its slight effectiveness, which cannot withstand any more.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and out of fear that I might die from it.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	Because the bleeding often occurred, but he was completely cured.
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	And from the place of the bone grew a hard stone, and it was well-formed and had no harm or contrary effect in any way, neither to the upper nor to the lower part, nor when coming or going.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken at no joint point, it should be sutured in this manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take one thread, and stretch it at the top of the bone that is open.
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and commands it not to extend upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and places another thicker thread on top of the first one, and ties it to the stone that is above the bone.
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and are extended so that you can pull the corrupted stone downwards.
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and find the stone above the bone where you see the suture, which does not tear the stone.
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and places straw or cloth under the bone so that it can cover the corrupted stone;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is enough suture such that one can see and feel the corruption, and another time of suture too.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is deformed and does not open, and the corruption is in its midst or within a part of it.
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	if you find the stone intact; then place straw under it.
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then suture the part of the corruption to another part of it, as we have said before:
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is at the joint, suture the joint that is corrupted, and stitches on either side of it.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if the corruption du roi le soustant en l’est-il neuf tiens aoutrains deffortsaint in theese end of l’itg and itensin le :14 centuries, la. Itesain oulden theeslain (ifaince. Iaulx lai0
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	illeverre. This century. Il, andire:sthes. 13argeat ilustra il, the rightfuls. :il. Theousteincelain.
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but nevertheless it is necessary that you investigate that corrosion, as it opens to you.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and manifest it in all ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve oppose you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and know that the cutting instrument and hairs are many, according to the arrangement of bones and appearance of teeth.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this reason it is necessary to provide an equivalent example of its working instrument in every case.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to knowledge of this craft.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the ways of diseases.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if for that instrument which you need according to what it requires.
dou feu	fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulders fall either due to moisture within or because of dryness outside;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have the treatment for that corrosion by medical cures, and it does not benefit them.
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	if it is necessary to cover that limb up to its joint or where the corrosion comes;
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	whether it is by death or by malice, which is greater, the defect of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	. Ameasure andre (itgallast:0:
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	And afterwards, after darkness, he touches the corroded joints of the limb.
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and takes hold throughout the entire body; if you hurry too much with covering.
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it is due to the puncture from any venomous beasts, like a sea scorpion and wasp and similar creatures.
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if the corrosion is at the top of the joints, it cauters him there, and does not give him any space to recover simply by hand (or without further medical intervention).
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes just by hand, then he cauters the joint, so that the corrosion does not spread to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	And if it comes to the arm, then he cauters at the cost (the elbow joint), and if he does not succeed in stopping it there, then it is his death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	but there is no measure for the quantity of his virtue (strength or vital force);
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and so much about these corrosions that come to the body: if it comes first on one joint, then he cauters after the next joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	but if it comes on one or other part, then he cauters all over that body part;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	but if it rises in the leg, then he cauters at the joint between the knee and the ankle.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	but if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy for that patient than to let him bleed with straw.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the way to cover or bandage the limb so that it does not extend upwards and downwards;
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	nage of the English translate : "Aragne're. AIr'tire,surelater tirail:escaly A. ici, theur lea wail. Thewelle tolere (isueille. Intervile decair and thennealte, what.
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And you draw out the chaff between the two joints of one large socket, until the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	and then the cloth or silk, and place one piece of linen in each section, so that the silk does not touch the healthy skin;
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and wipe away the other injury and abscesses for the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if blood comes when you are working, if it is necessary to cauterize the wound immediately.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	or you place on some restrictive powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed.
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then bind the painful limb with one stitch, and care for it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened at one of those homes where there is faith:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	there was a darkness that seemed like the ash of fire.
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and that corruption came first in the devotion of this house, so much so as it consumed all their faith.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when he saw the corruption, he took measures to cover up the faith, and it was healed.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and after ten days there returned the corruption to him or came from his hand, and he came to me.
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I placed restrictive substances on the corruption after purifying the fire'its effects, but it could not stop the corrosion.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he told me to put my hand on it, but I had no hope of repelling the substance.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and I also doubted whether if I touched his hand, he would suffer.
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	because the virtue of this man was weak; and he despairing of all, he returned to his homeland.
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and took measures to cover his hand, and it was healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And I have no further information on this matter because of what it has been done, if one is knowledgeable about it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Never does an incision take place in the flesh of the churl, and it lingers so long that a great assembly of bowels is formed.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And then they go and pierce it, and delay in doing so like some peasants.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin that is above is also very delicate like a silken dressing.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and they will not hurt the bone nor the nerve, and such illnesses are called "healthy" when evacuated.
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and is not called a fistula;
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so elongated that it bends to the bone as it pierces through, then it is called a fistula.
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the cooking so that you take out the whole skin, and immediately when it is delicate, like silken dresses.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not happen by its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you have a promise that the skin hardens and its corruption is not in formation,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the skin becomes stiff like a churl if you treat it with this cleansing process:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	look if the breasts are large and the bowels within that have a pungent odour.
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	and this Egyptian medicinal cleansing process is as follows:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	take some hay and oil, and boil it gently, and set it in the flame, like a vallet.
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	As long as the medicine is red, and also thick like honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	And then they take it according to your necessity, both in water and in honey.
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And when cleansing the chest, and holding back the wound.
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And let the medicine penetrate by .ii hours, then extract it by drawing out.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times, until the chest is movable and unbound.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	And never uses water cleansing with ashes.
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	When this medicine is not present, and you require ash of oak wood, pour water above it.
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	Then pour the liquid, and when you know that the chest is well-formed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	And if they cannot endure it, nor Egyptian medicine or water with ashes help them.
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	If the water cleansing with honey has a little bit of litharge (arsenic) in it.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	Or you cleanse with honey and mead, which the honey has properties to shape and cleanse.
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	And the wine purifies it;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	And when you have done this, and you promise that the chest is well-shaped,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	If this cleansing causes it to grow within him.
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And you should expect a discharging diathesis (a condition where the body disposes of morbid humors or fluids), and do it with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	Or you cleanse with various medicines and ointments, which I have previously described as having properties or treatments.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	And if the wound in his chest is small, and the cauldrons of cleansing cannot enter it.
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	If you increase it slightly with a piece of iron and cover it with an Egyptian ointment tent,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	Or a Basilican ointment, as long as it is enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	And if the wound is too broad, and let it be only .i. that the cleansing can enter at all.
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if he pricks up his head so high above, or low down below where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bow is in full draw, it does not allow for relaxation of the string.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover his chest as you see fit.
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	If it appears in such a way that the bow is drawn down to the lowest point where it is.
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	For when the bow is in full draw, it does not allow for relaxation of the string.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover his chest as you see fit.
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	If it is drawn in such a manner that the bow goes swiftly backward and does not lose any of its tension;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	And take consolidant remedies to apply to his chest,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	And are beneath a piece of linen that covers the entire chest;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	Then draws upon the point where his pricked chest is; if somewhat wider second time,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	Because they should be hot plasters under another piece of fabric according to the quantity of the prick (wound size).
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	And he puts it on the point of his pricked chest to align the bow, and does not remove its sharp ends once every day.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	And who is on top of his pricked chest, often he removes it to draw back the bow.
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And he sees what comes from the bowstring, if it's poison or a bit, or partly good to eat, or indigestible.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	And hearsels of medicine.
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	La viex: "un, siens laissez au monde surfaire. iefses souffrir, ceteral nlatera les eulge itali'soullower ate cautheirrechertoast.tio theorelaborle desgic Frencher latin:
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	nifloud ifreves. Expeller,seueltuse.nent
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	And then he dislocates it in the morning or at noon, and when you dislocate the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and changes another dressing, and renews the bandage.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if his breasts become bowed out after many days, you know that the breasts do not move.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle cautery is applied after long wounds, you should not despair of health.
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	because the health approaches. For it is known that some have delayed cleaning their wounds and those which do the contrary;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if bowed sides become evident in his chest after many days, you know that the breasts do not move.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the breasts delay in rising, and are distant, then you should apply mixed wet and dry medicines.
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	as if dislocation occurs because there is great part of silica (vitriol), and it is the first-line treatment;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	apply dislocation and they do it with rose oil, and the poultice made from a little thick wine in substance.
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then they conserve and make it useful; and this makes them better cooked or roasted.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	if dislocations are present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	or take my advice and oil and incense, and burn it at the fire when he is smoldering in it.
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	seslater.
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	And roots of the celestial lily, which is also like flour a hundredfold.
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	And using simple or composite ones: grind them up, and mix it into the honey that I mentioned earlier, and use it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	And if the treatment is dislocated, and not healed by this treatment.
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	And thus you know that the compaction is done, and pressing into the bone, or hard limbs, or the blood vessels.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If the treatment of the ulcer, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the incision of the vein ("veine" is likely a misspelling and should be "vena", as in Latin, indicating blood vessel; however, assuming 'v' was intended to mean 'vein', it would still refer to an opening made into a vein)
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panniculus is an incision made on the dorsal side of the flap of the hand's skin ("pouchet" likely means "flap" or "projection")
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	either in place, or by chance, it may move into other areas ("dois" appears to be an error and might be intended as "dos", referring to different locations where the tissue could displace)
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	And when it is swollen, and if we do not take care; then a secondary incision occurs ('chaus' likely means 'incision', though in context here might be an error for 'complication')
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And they will grow and contract until the flap's root grows ('racine de l'ungle') or perhaps it could mean 'root of the vein'; however, based on context, I assume 'racine' refers to the underlying base structure of the surgical flap.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And the infection comes just to the bone ('jusc’a l'os'), and as it occurs; it causes a pungent pain, and there are the two broad joints ('dou doi larges'), and is discolored ('est li color fuxe').
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it if we have said before (in surgery) and the treatment does not benefit ('ne profit mie')
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	"O, jei" (incomplete sentence: "cunest, iare du fie incommodablement le cheveille.
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is very helpful if the bone and joint are healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if it presses on the joint afterwards, and swelling begins, and bruising.
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	since you must place the bandage over the joint where there is no pressure from the joint.
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and raise it upwards, and carefully remove the clotted blood softly and lightly,
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and place on top of the bandage medicinal and caustic substances to prevent all infection,
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then continue with ointments as long as it remains healthy,
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then remove it because as long as the bone has been corroded, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the deformation has occurred, then remove it within a few days as long as it's been described earlier.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and continue treating as long as it remains healthy;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it's unhealthy, and bandaged, and it emits great pain, then you must first heal it;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then remove the joint capsule sharply by cutting above it;
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and ensure that the cut does not widen at the level of the bandage above the joint, as it would cause too much pain for the patient;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if something happens, put an application on it to alleviate.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the hidden pain in the hand;
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The dislocated joint is found in some people's hands by chance entirely inflamed;
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	And sometimes they find bones therein or fragments of bone, and never an elbow;
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	And none of them arise at the root of the joint nor in any place within it;
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	And those that are dislocated in any other place do not stop moving;
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and those that dislocate at the joint itself by chance remain silent;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	lalimenta:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	nagreurs afeurtami iaurextecthermextel:ncelle vesefices andcitérnsconces:s :<ithecifireviseachagnevreignesse:dez tota 1 to lentreimangenerchevel soandecteurant, seurantes.gheignes;s la maincrewentiagnes andable,urexilex
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	There who is born at the root of the jointing, it is painful to heal: hold it tightly with your cover.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In those who are born or need to be placed in the abdomen, it is necessary that you first form a round cavity just below the bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cover the bone with a suitable cloth for that purpose, and then heal it until it is healthy again.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The wounds that come together either by birth or the joining of a cut wound, or by scalding with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary that you cover the burned area, so that they must be repaired according to their natural forms.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place two pieces of woollen cloth or linen dipped in rose oil to prevent them from joining together.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or place two thin pieces of cloth between them until the edges are joined, as is required.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	Wounds that come from neither of their sides with the palm, cover those burned areas as it is required.
Des vils	Of ills (which refers to various illnesses or troubles)
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	These vices are like thick, overloaded wrappings filled with excessive and melancholic elements that come from more than one part of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And it is more frequent in the legs of those who walk and work and carry heavy loads, compared to others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must never attempt to spit out any part of it, and then heal the wound from within the body cavity.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment with fire is done in a certain manner: one covers them and burns the blackened flesh.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other way is to bind the wound and then burn it entirely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The shape of the leg, and then it's with strong heat.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then stretch out the leg of the patient above the knee, just above the part below the groin.
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then puncture the vein in one spot, or two spots, or three spots, with a wide, large needle.
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then remove and draw the dark blood with your hand from one end to the other, as long as the patient can bear it without causing too much pain.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then put in the wound, and he commands that you wrap the area with black meat wrapped tightly.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And repeat the evacuation and salve application when the wounds are flat, and let it be done for the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	Their advice regarding the patient's leg is as follows: raise the patient's leg, if it has much hair. (Note: The translation provided assumes that "levement" refers to raising the leg, which may not be an accurate direct translation of the Old French text.)
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then apply water or a bath to it and let the leg be immersed in warm water until it turns red and swells up. (Note: The translation provided assumes that "bain" refers to water or a bath.)
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you do not have water, then heat it over the fire and puncture a spot on the vein above the knee or in the area near the ankle. (Note: The translation assumes "baing" refers to "bain," which is translated as "water." It also interprets the action of heating something by the fire, likely referring to warming a cloth or compress that may be applied topically.)
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then stretch the skin over the infection, and tear the vein from one part to another as much as it hurts. (Note: The translation assumes "aoevre" is related to handling or treatment of an injury/infection, "incine" refers to a small wound, and "escorche" translates literally to tearing but contextually means drawing out the infection.)
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And she turns red and black, and when it heals or looks as if a broken rope is mended; (Note: The translation interprets "rouge" as the color red associated with inflammation and "noire" as darkened skin from infection. It also metaphorically compares the recovery process to repairing a torn rope, which may imply restoring integrity.)
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	Then wrap the wound around it, so that the skin remains loose, and then tighten the infection-stricken area; (Note: "boute" is likely translated as "wrap," which is consistent with historical treatment methods. The translation assumes nocturne.").
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	surname ent'saintement,sentence:entire of the-aidilentre:icenture ices and itentence. Ager. Luponge pasentleague.entice.tribble. Andirect isentence.
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then let him hold the arrow as you have done, and cut it to another point, as you have first done.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then make a different size, if that is what you are familiar with, then cut and hold the arrow at the desired point of entry.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then draw it out and cut again to the second size; then stretch it in length increments until it bleeds fully, and then hold.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	And if you cannot draw and lift it, then insert a strong needle with two thick threads into it.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And cut and draw it, and insert a wire of some kind, and turn your hand from one side to the other until it bleeds fully.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And make sure she does not hold, for if it holds, then you cannot draw or lift her, and it becomes harmful to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have cut her completely, if you place soft linen soaked in wine and oil over the wound, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if she is twisted and crushed together in one piece, and not straight as we have said before, then:
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	However, it is intended that you split the arrow without piercing her further; and cut it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The form of iron used to hold the arrow if it is bent, and does not pierce her further;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And it is of considerable thickness because if it were slightly bent, it would pierce the vein, but if it is large as we have said before, and this is its form:
De la voinne civile	Of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is in the legs, either in warm parts or there are no trees, and on dry ground where it does not dampen.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	And by chance it moves to another place but mostly in the legs, and this occurs due to dampness that affects under the skin.
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	And like when it goes inside the body of a snake and towards, tightening between flesh and bone.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if there are signs indicating the beginning of this vein that it causes a very great inflammation in the leg.
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then changes the skin, and begins the vein like a root emerging from a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the shoulder joint is opened, it indicates that you should wrap around a piece of cloth about half an inch and three quarters inches long and wide, and the neck.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it touches the point of pressure, if the wrap is around the cloth, and the new one.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, then take a part of it, wrap the remaining part, and do not cover the root as long as it has completely come out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	because if you cover it, it goes back into the skin, and causes abscess or dampness or disease.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	for which reason it must be treated little by little and only up to the joint, and nothing remains or goes wrong.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and there are no cases where this vein is treated by the palm of the hand or with force;
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and there have come to me already some who had it emerge from four palms' length, and when you cover it, one root or pit comes out immediately, and the wound heals at once.
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and it discharges everything inside, and clears the matter that is in there, and dress wounds with various herbs to prevent moisture every day, then treat them as for abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And there is never any movement in this vein, and most especially when it opens at the joint or junction.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and it goes much deeper, and jumps upwards; treat them as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of things that come out between skin and bone.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	ge auge :cexin. Transcute.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	And it is a small verse that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the entire body rising and falling.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	And he feels well in each limb, as long as it tears the skin or it goes, and jumps around.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	And it is affected by the discharge of many humors, like worms and snakes and lice or in the abdomen.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	And there is doubt about its malignancy, for when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and comes to the oil.
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	By chance it retreats, and destroys the oil; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you have seen it cured and drained, but cannot remove it unless when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	So it is then that you must lie above and below a strong ligament tightly bound:
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	Then cover it up and bind firmly on it; and the mark is made upon the skin, and you do not remove it:
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If you cauterize with fire above it, as long as it moves:
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	And the greater harm it does, which is that it tears the oil; as we have said:
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	And if you see it come or approach the oil close by, then bind below it firmly with a strong form, and bind above it strongly, and bind it:
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	And it is necessary to use the patient's disorder of the modification of corporeal bodies with remedies for diseased humors that are causing such issues:
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And if it is of rotten meats, discharge:
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	And pain that comes from windiness:
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is prevalent in our land "winter", and it is pain that affects some limbs.
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	And it moves from one member to another; and I have told you this.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I called upon a woman ill, and found in her arms a small swelling at the vein site.
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	And afterward, I saw it rise like a worm into the shoulder.
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	As quickly as anything, like live gold when it is cut away from its source in another place.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	The pain then moved away from there, and was focused on the shoulder.
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	And then, shortly afterward, it spread throughout the entire body, until it reached another arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then she told me that it was turning around in her body again, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled much as she moved from one member to another, for I had never seen this illness manifest in such a manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	To that extent, I had always seen others move pain from one place to another.
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	But I had never seen it that way before, as I saw in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	And I considered it might be because the woman had a weak chest and the veins were found,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and because of this moisture constraint;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and do not appear according to this reason for those who are delightful, and have wet hearts and returned veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you see curing this disease, and the patient's great pain if it opens as we have said:
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	if the clotted blood above and below happens suddenly, and then pours out as much as that moisture constraint on the vein causes to leak.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the vein; and if you do not see it with your eyes.
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if the treatment of that which drives away moisture, like foul pills and other similar things.
Des saiettes	Arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various according to their shapes and according to how they stick into two hearts or cause injury.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety of them is that there are some which have great points, and others small, and hairs, and joined;
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those which have two angles, and those which have lengths, and those which are made up of parts;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and those which hurt in no limb if they hurt according to two ways: whether the principal hair is affected, or a secondary one;
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	as with skull, heart, liver, pericardium, bowel, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When they hurt in no part of these members and their sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards.
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	it is clear that you must be careful in extracting this arrow because the wound comes about in many ways.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not in place, treat the wound accordingly.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the sign of the skull when the arrow hits and pierces through the bone, and it jumps upwards which is above the skull.
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	is when there are blindness and loss of sight and convulsions and inflamed tendons, and spasm and confusion in thinking, and vomiting from the colon.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps without causing harm to the nostrils or ears; and maybe it affects speech and voice.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and white hairs.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	:200s. English:
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of swelling when it presses on the body, is that it is close to the left breast, and feels as if it were pierced into something hard and not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And perhaps the swelling also moves like a chicken, with black blood flowing, and cold sweat and shivering, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	So you can now feel doubt that the wound has opened again.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of discharge that never left a mark was that without bleeding from the wound it would spring up, and the throat swells, and the patient has deep red breathing and suffers high-pitched coughs and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the discharge wept in the coverings next to the small hips, it is near the crotch area; and there is great pain and deep-breathing, and all limbs of the thighs are affected.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the discharge weeps into the abdomen, perhaps there is no relief from the wound as it makes the intestines feel unsettled with digestion.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the discharge weeps into the abdomen and springs forth from the intestinal tract, with no hope in curing it, nor removing the effluent.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	savour :lalice,lai, thexent leger. In French morier'sage laiculetise cartea caurescure ailgaugeat:gerrejurte, et iaitifera,lalic:ca:sac,laterite.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the arm and the backbone of the spine and the waist and the hip joints and the legs, and the seemingly member, are safe according to many conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	The spleen is in the left artery or vein and it's not poisonous, as I will tell you because you asked for it.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened in one house where a splinter struck the root of the nerve:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I attempted it, and it was torn apart from the fat of the ear on the other side, and he became sound again without any signs of injury.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I tore to pieces one splinter that struck in the fat underneayer of paper there:
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the splinter was replaced, but it only pushed towards his flesh:
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and it was large of an Armenian bow, made from every light iron that had gone into ears; the person healed without any other misfortunes:
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And I tore from the throat of a crippled man a splinter that was Arabic in origin and had been inserted into ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I cut off the hairs, and by withdrawing as much as I tore it from, he was healed of his crippling:
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I tore from one house that he was said to be blind or crippled and thought he had died:
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and since it had passed thirty years, his position did not change:
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut under the splinter and extracted it; I tore it out without causing any other misfortune:
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you find a house where there was struck down a splinter on the back or healed the wound above it:
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	And then and if it came ailures de la poing se lis in .i.e saies of ainees cest-legerance sgreet:2010s le :rime demeans lesmesurecause to thege. It's an oculosage.
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	Not found to be harmful in any of its natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And seeks another man who has been struck by a stone on his face and was sewn up the wound.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And suffered great pain then as well as many others like this.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And threw a stone at a prince who was lying among his nobles.
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	And was slightly inclined to the right side; and the stone was completely recovered
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I called for the care after it was thrown at him 2 years ago. When I found the wound, it was very wide.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I searched the wound thoroughly and did not feel it at all.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	And it hurt in his right ear with pain and pressure.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the point of the stone.
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I placed on his back the embalming tissue, for he did not inflate it.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	And I saw it in the stone again.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I placed the embalming materials many years ago, and healed his wound right away, but then suffered for a long time with great pain.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	As long as he felt the stone in his neck; and he told me this.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I applied a caustic medicine to the wound by hand many years ago when it was open.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	And I tried it, and felt the head of the arrow sticking to the skin.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then I applied the overlying dressing with this medicinal water until the head of the arrow became clearly visible.
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	And lasted well for three years.
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	And then I attempted to draw out the wound that I could not remove with my pincers from either side.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	And I continued to subtly manipulate and engage with various stringing techniques for one year until the pincers were well made.
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	According to what came out in this chapter's conclusion, as long as I treated it and left the wound open.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And they judge that the cardiogram cannot restore a broken nose.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I then reopened it, and sealed the wound, and healed the patient's severe injuries entirely.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	But you said about the quality of extracting some arrows?
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	If you put your treatment there that I don't mention, because books cannot cover everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	But the master surgeons know a little about it and where it is both present and absent.
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	This has involved nine works and no instrument, in the removal of things extracted within this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not come from limbs unless according to a certain number of techniques.
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or by the vein or they enter through another side.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which jumps out or enters is an arrow entering the muscles of the body, and it has never done so now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it doesn't jump anymore, let her leave as long as his muscles are pained or healed by the issue.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And also if it's fixed in the bone and cannot be removed, let her stay for some years, and move each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it jumps again, and if it doesn't jump, then pierce deeply into everything with one or two subtle methods until the entry point is widened, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is lodged in the skull's main part and it goes to one of the brain ventricles.
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	And some of the accidents that I mentioned above: but let it be, although not.
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	cte. Inoudre.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is not lodged deeply into the bone but merely on it, and does not come out with a twitch,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and no longer endures the maladies any more years if there is an injury to the joint.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very deeply embedded and cannot be extracted, then I advise treatments as I have told you; then heal the joint until it becomes healthy again.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is repositioned back into the joint that cannot be seen, if it threatens the entire limb.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, if there is no suitable instrument available;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot suture the wound tightly, and with the perfection of extracting the arrow.
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone or muscle or vein as long as the wound remains large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and extract the arrow if you can, and where it has ears in the arrowhead holding onto it tightly.
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if you bury the stone that is embedded by a distance of one-and-aayer that you can do.
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or flatten the ears of the arrowhead as much as possible to facilitate extraction.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and very carefully so as not to damage the arrowhead while extracting it more forcefully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, if the arrow remains lodged deep inside the limb until you can extract it gently.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if such drawing forth the blood doth counter to our prescribed therapies in its chapter of healing, then it shall be that thou administer these measures as we have aforestated.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	And guard thou against severing nerve and vein within thy wound, and as for the manner in which thee might perform such an extraction with averted peril.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	Whether thou hast extracted it with haste or gently, and according to the shape of that which remained when drawn out from its place.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	In the early Middle Agoïsque seneur laisser. 13th laisses la:rèche. tostère. Iting in thymeraise deviser lex, auk aout- It'sesme kills in English translate fromage deleve.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The shoulder that comes from another place, or it opens up any part of him, or the skin is inflamed at such an area where one can see or feel it immediately:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Take this size now so that the forceps can grasp it, and then extract: if it has already jumped.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is caught in the bone, turn your round hand gently inside the bone, as long as it enters into the bone, and enlarge the bone, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot be extracted, let it still remain, and then repeat the extraction as long as it jumps out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if it was from cautery, thrust into its entire length.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if it was crushed, and you see to administer a splint, with the help of one such instrument (a bandage).
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	so that the point of the cautery enters into the head of the splinting instrument; and then thrust in.
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the cautery is crushed, thrust that instrument with its pointed end into it, to aid in extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the cautery is touched, it must be that you cover all its length or where the venom is located, if possible.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then treat the wound as it covers.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the cautery is crushed or in the abdomen or bladder or thigh, and it is near, then you may cover it over if it covers.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	but do not cover the vein and nerve, and then extract it, as is appropriate.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat her so long as she remains healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The forceps have handles that are similar to the beak of a bird, and this one is made thusly:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they come in many shapes: large, medium-sized, and small, depending on the size of the cautery.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the beak-like handle on these forceps is similar to that of a bird's pen.
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	so that you can thrust into the cautery point, as is its form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the design of these forceps for thrusting and assessing whether it is this one:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins:
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Veins that are healthy, and they may have been touched by fire.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	it is known that: there are bones behind the ears, which are called the "little herbaceous" ones.
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the small arteries appearing in their temple regions.
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and veins located in the corners of the eyes' lips, which are called "asprites".
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and there are veins on the forehead, and in the upper part of the nose.
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the girdles (or belts) which are around it [referring to body part].
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and there are veins above the lips, and these are called "augerchicks".
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and there are veins under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins that are commonly found in each arm are... (The rest of the line is incomplete, but we can infer a continuation based on medical knowledge and Old French structure).
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is cranial and on the right side of the ribcage, and they call them "veins in the head's chest" (This phrase appears to describe vein locations near or within the skull area and adjacent anatomical structures. The translation reflects a likely misunderstanding or mistranslation from the Old French original since it doesn't seem to align with known medical terminology.)
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the movement is called "fast," and it consists of cranial and abdominal (This line discusses a type of movement or action related to veins. In anatomical terms, however, there's no widely recognized term 'faste.' A more coherent translation considering standard medical terminology might be: "and the motion is called 'fast,' encompassing both cranial and abdominal veins.")
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	Gentle Readers and esteemed members of our learned society, we refer to it as "gravitation" (Here, the abdomen. It would be the natural law that governs all heavenly bodies in a straight line. This is notewhen they are called the gravitational force:
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	(17th: '': "toes :ermentilogy, the terre. Forrest:tile. In ancient. The: "Itkine. Istar: it'sare, ical sentence."
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And it is that which heals when openly visible above the bag.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the saverstone is the vein located between the little finger and the ring finger, and if it bursts (by number 10).
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	And in the leg and where there are three veins: one is situated above the right side of the hip pocket.
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	And the second sinus which is on the right side of the ankle joint; and the vein that lies inside, which is in the other side's ankle joint.
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	And in the other leg there are three veins on them (those).
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The good veins that are after the ears aid in ancient plagues and migraines.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	And the quality of the better one, as I told you, and it is that you straighten out the head of the malady.
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	And it burns the skin or veins which are covered with harsh cloth; then you tighten the malady's neck to a pinpoint.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	So long as the three veins show behind the ears in two layers of the head's top part,
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	And when you see them on your left side, and do you feel the bird-like qualities of it therein, if they are spread out.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	Then take the needle, and pierce it through the vein just below the bone, then lift your hand over all of the vein upward.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	And cut and the skin and vein well through two-thirds of its length, and make to remove the blood as you see it.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And stretch it out so that it remains sound.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	:fransemal theur of the Old French 2000, parchief.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The dislocation of the two arteries that are in the temple, if it has been long known for emigration.
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and diarrhea is customary, and at the heart of tears, there are the waters.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and if the quality of the second temple is so as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is as if the patient's distended neck causes the two veins to appear openly.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and it feels his hand on your head, and then he takes from you;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	and lifts up his hand on the vein in your head above its indicator, and thrusts the needle inside;
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and lifts up the vein in your head, and draws blood, just as you have done with other veins, and takes out the blood according to its necessity;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then releases the malady, and places your head on the vein for an hour, then puts a cloth on it;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then forms the clot, and leaves it until she is healthy again; we have spoken about their feeding and extraction or beginning of their book;
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The dislocation of the vein in the forehead is as significant as the temple dislocations and old facial diseases, and for emigration, and rheumatism;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and if the patient's distended neck is twisted so as to make the vein appear;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then takes the instrument that is called "fosser," whose form it has;
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	:as it is a lore estime. Canto ennages aillement desgoth in French. It'sou:Gothic alph: Getchief: (it's:age ate. Here, in the: Gloss. The English fromage. Ijac andre:s :meat.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then apply cautery to the patient's neck, and hold the vein until it is sound and free of any previous inflammation with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Always it is not that the flames are too much, and the vein cuts crookedly, as the bone is close by, and sometimes breaks the veins when they are subtle.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The veins that are in the joints aid the blood vessels, and to the nipple, and to the armpit, and to the groin, and among other things, related to the illnesses of the face.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their veins is that when they are drawn tightly, it twists them in no way as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then the vein, and cut its length twice with a little flame, wide but without any force, as there is no pressure.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they break it; then treat the blood gently, as you have experience with, and tie up above the wound well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The vein of the nose is worthless in terms of bleeding, and other things, such as skin diseases.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	if it swells like a nose or armpit that comes into the face, especially when old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	And the quality of the vein is such that it tightens its neck, then draw out the nose with your left hand.
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take the subtle flame long, and place it in the space between the two nostrils.
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	because the vein does not open well enough, and now begins to treat properly.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not pull too far, treat the blood according to your necessity, then tie it up for a night because it is restored very quickly.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The veins of the inner thighs aid in the tightening of the groin, and in the beginning of measles, and many illnesses, and inflammation, and chancroid, and venereal disease, and warts.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of the vein is such that it tightens its neck between one and both sides, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	And let the masters stand above the head of the patient's vein, and see it in one place.
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	Then cut the vein long in one place wide, and treat the blood gently, according to your experience.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then cut another vein in the other thigh, tie up the joint, and draw out the veins gently.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	so that the patient's veins do not tighten; and let it be until the wound is healed in the morning.
De la sainie des leivres	From the veins of books (Note: This phrase does not appear in the Old French text provided but might be related to an entirely different topic as it's a modern English expression)
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The veins above the upper lip aid in blood collection in the mouth, and contamination of gums, and cracks on the lips and nostrils. (Note: This line does not seem to correspond with any specific historical context or original content)
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of health is for it to sit well on the patient before you, and restrain its neck as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	Then turn the tongue and look at the joints; one is on the right jaw and the other on the left.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	And they are known by such that they are black, and for this reason that they have narrow black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	However, examine both of them, and if you do not know them, then you doubt them:
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	If you examine the larger part of each joint, and also do similar examinations on both sides because it is a common way:
De la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the health on the tongue:
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The health of these veins that are on the tongue assists after the check-up of the head (cephalic), and is close to the throat (gorge), and includes diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth:
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the better quality of health is when they see between your hands in front of the sun, and have a light tongue, and look at each side jaw vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	If both are healthy, and do not strive too much, for here they are the arteries:
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins which are commonly healthy are considered according to this method:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	Or you pinch it with one finger or touch it lightly as they do for 'tendons':
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	:gallusthode:
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of this feathered creature is very famous, and it is as wide as you can see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And there must be skill to open the veins that have large visible masses of blood and contain clotted blood.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is that form of the feathered olive branch.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And is more finely pointed, and it is for the better to pierce delicately those veins, or there be clotted yellow blood within.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The holy of the church, which is one such vein, assists in diseases that plague the throat, chest, and belly.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is for the benefactor that he cleans his throat and warms himself from the artery lying within.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he pierces the artery, and blood flows forth from it, then indeed he must prevent this as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And it must never be pricked the feathered creature but rather cut like silk.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the holy of the church does not openly show itself, then it must be extracted and replaced.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	Or you wish for no drop from it, or you heal in its presence near the arm where it appears openly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And it will be cut gently like silk, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you happen to know the holy of the malady, then it must be that thou extirpate thy arm until thou art acquainted with the hairs.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then mark the joint, and then tie up the arm, and cut off the vein with a sharp tool.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And be careful not to injure the artery when you see the vein swollen, for it is an artery: avoid doing so.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it protruding like the urine of a child, and it is red and subtle, you know that it is from an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hurry up now, and stretch your arm for a long time, then bend your arm where the swollen is pricked many times.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then tie up your arm, and let it stay like that, and do not move the misaligned ones so much out of fear, until they are healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the swollen is not pricked, and it goes away by itself, and there is no medicine for you at that time, then cut the artery if it has opened, as it retreats its head. And lance the swollen.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a figwort herbaceous plant, and make it, and take one of the middle parts and tie well to the other day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If the swollen is pricked, that's good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that lanced blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And lance-ing the prickings is not done in various positions for the small opening of the wound, and the presence of the band on the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The healing process of the vein in such a way helps it treat blood at the head and heart inside.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of the basilar and cephalic components, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	And it is necessary for the surgeon that he knows which nerve is underneoce, and if it has been too much pierced, and then restore the nerve.
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it swells up and its cure may be delayed or not achieved.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And if this nerve opens multiple times and does not open in any person due to its subtlety, it is necessary for you to clean the artery with sharp instruments; avoid hurting the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between two nerves, then make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The healing of the cephalic component helps draw out blood from the head and aid in its recovery.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is necessary to clean more with a sharp instrument on the oleander vein or the myrtle vein, as it is safer from all other veins because it does not contain any nerve or artery within.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Always inquire about the more serious limb, and do not blame if it needs to be done for the first time, but repeat.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And sometimes this swelling appears in some people; don't worry about it happening for the first time.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the healing is according to your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing that you must know about caustic healing if it is beneficial in order to keep healthy.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	il veintresaina.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	And it is the sickness done in one of the three veins that exist: namely, cephalic, fistula, and basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And it should be done in the beginning of each day to the patient's wound, and in spring and winter after eating when signs of fullness appear.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	And it must be done the first year or the second day after two or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The treatment which is given for diseases has no fixed time limit, but when the need arises in days or months, at all hours and in every moment.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it does not need to be done for children just at twelve years old, or women who have been pregnant only up to four months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Do not need to be treated the ones who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when anyone wishes to be treated in any way possible, it is necessary that they drink a laxative.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	If there is much food retained in them (intestines), so that the veins draw off the excess from the intestines to avoid harming the main body parts.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	And do not need to treat those who are too full of meat, or drunken, as long as they have it.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And it is necessary to treat after a colicky passion (cramps), vomiting, and abdominal discharge, multiplicity of pregnancies in women, labor, resting and eating, and whatever strength or armoury.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then heure.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	Cease deffent, les malfic: lesx.
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	lez enle.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	: the defface of ce.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	nose.
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	Then it is removed from above a small part, for when it is too loose or little, correction without is not possible.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then the fire heats up both hands until veins swell and smell.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	Then they pour a little oil on the wound of a patient for a bit, then put their implement to the vein above that part with their left hand for a short time until it heats up.
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	that vein does not burst at the injury.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there were cases where veins burst like strings pulled by the healer, and such as are flat with little swelling.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	If when it comes into contact with the flame, if there is withdrawal from the heat, and they cannot open the vein, then such are these examples.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if it heals the vein, for if it is too narrow, then such must be taken into account by the healers in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein has been done for the first time, it is good; but if not, then still, and on that part of the body whereof the hair are disent in those parts, ceu desgauche to be malaide la chair a fief.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	seseme itte. It's in Old Frenchie medievalmente laide:20. : 1ère. Which of theuceslalong theater to theend, "Iean (andante : Istejacmeat : a king, forsoing.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	By chance it will come to cutting open an abscess; nor enters water or bath, unless he pleases, then the sanction may recur.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the incision is small, or without careful cutting and you doubt that it won't bleed as much as you have seen, then beware in that very incision of me, doing everything with precision.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And the upper part is heated quickly, so that the flesh may swell; because this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the swollen flesh, do not repeat the surgery, and place a little bit of oil there, for it loosens the blood clot in that area, as oil is lighter than blood.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And then apply oil in every surgery you perform to drain the veins, for it helps lighten the course of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	And this makes the tooth and bowels ache when placed over that area; if it is done subtly without removing too much, yet excessively so can cause pain therein.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there are large abscesses that often occur, especially when it is only healed after the opening of the vein has been small.
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	If you rush and place it over the area with a damp sponge in water and tightly bind it for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And it is necessary to do this after the blood has drained from the vein and if the area remains discolored (black or green) for any period of time, then there will still be no issue.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see anything, apply it with olive oil or mirthis (Miriam's robe) in juice of calament; that is the customary practice to use.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times occurs incision and appearance in the proper order of the church: therefore put your hand on it, and if you relieve the moisture from the joint, then that is the wrong appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So that you do not place anything of what we have said beforehand, for there is often a stroke without affecting the artery; but he made an encrustation with dry salt to harden the joint, and then it was treated again until it was sound.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treats each blood according to its quality, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it come out so that it is red; and if you see it thick, let it become more liquidated; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And must to those who are weak and feeble, and know the extraction of blood, make larger wounds, and burn them widely.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for those who are flawed, do the opposite, and keep them stronger often, and make them healthier by cutting at an angle, not by pressing.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this way of treatment is safe from the flowing of blood and compression of nerves, and it's better than the long or wide cuts.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for those whose coughs need the treatment, he must give them milk and juice from Grenadian apples...if they are congested, treat it two or three times with blood.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if he has a cold complexion, you must wash him before the treatment with milk-whey juice...or honey syrup with aromatic spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if his palm has the treatment done, after letting out much blood, he must inhale strong-smelling broth and well-scented syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And use other things that we have said in the dissection or extraction of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if it tries to throw off its arms, and heaving again at times, when it is greatly weakened by great swelling, it must heal little and little, according to the continuity of its strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if it tries to throw off its arms after the first swelling, and it has great strength, then it must heal for two hours or more after the first swelling, or after the second hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if it starts to swell in another area, then it must be healed for two days or a week, depending on its condition.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For there is much blood inside the already swollen body, and it brings fever; when it must remove a large amount, and widen the abscess until it ruptures in the center.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	then that you treat all swelling conditions, and place your hand on their shoulders when they are healing, so that the wound does not move from the center.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this happens many times when they neglect the swelling.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it does not matter if you dislocate their arm, and extract the blood a second time, and the abscess is closed, so that you apply pressure firmly on top.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	not if it's painful, because that would be bad.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let it heal for the second time if you have not reached the tip of the flame, as long as the abscess with which the vein was pierced has started to burst.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and place a little rope moistened in water on top, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has burst, let it be and not squeeze it, as long as the abscess is calming down.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if you need to extract blood for a second time, then let it heal in that spot, or another vein, or the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein releases the arm from its position near the head of the vein because it is made up of that part.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of treatment for these injuries is to let the hands be moistened with warm water until the bruises turn red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then loosen slightly if it has healed well in that vein, and now let the abscess heal without being too wide or long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and if the abscess is wide, or heals well near the joint of the hand, and does not drain on its own, then moisten it with warm water and let the blood in it be reabsorbed until there is enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	but if it's an empyema, do not warm the hand more than necessary because you put it in ice rather than heat.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the healing of this vein is better than all other veins, as it has neither artery nor nerve in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	And the healing of the right hand's palm is equal in all diseases of the liver, and that is its method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	ke. It'isexagain:age. Aidle inage. Theeslentric to thei age:sicle leveinage deca veille. ices aillet a luii: ither.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if the health of the wound is crossed, and if you heal it completely, then it does not cause any pain.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	And do not overstrain too much, for the nerves are all cut from flesh without skin.
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And then place the hand back in hot water, so that it is not frozen in the wound, and cannot come out of it.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as expertly as possible, then place it in a vein with oil and wire for immediate soldering, and do so for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The weakness in the left hand is like mouse disease, and do everything I've told you for the right hand as well.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The weakness in the shoulder is like all the diseases that are here at the heart.
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	As with diseases of the muscles, and retention of flowers (or perhaps a misinterpretation for "retention" in medical terms), and disease of veins, and illnesses of joints and old legs, and similar maladies.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of its weakness is that it causes the patient to feel pain in hot water, and rub on the vein until it bleeds.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and through it runs much blood.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	if it is only the blood flow or at the ankle, which moves (or bleeds).
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it above the vein, then tendons that are there (presumably in or around this area), and also take care of the wound as well; and let them be soft again.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot come out on its own, put the wick back into the water, and let the vein be well drained.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if it needs to be done for the first time, if repeated secondly above a small amount, because its parts are salted.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and so make the same with the other identical wick.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein of the calf is at the knee, and its sign is equal to the pain of hiccoughs, when it is heated with blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its sign is that it bleeds between the bath and above the knee; stretched for three degrees in twisting.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	For otherwise the vein will not open; and if it does open, then let it be cleansed in all ways that you can.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And it is worth trying to cauterize it, because its parts are salty and it can be easily corrected with one's own hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not cauterize it, if it does not respond to any of the methods we have tried on either side of the vein or at its base and tip, and give out nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And make so much correction to the wound that you can see it, and then loosen its ligament, and put cautery under linen and restrain it; it is now sound again.
Des sainies de ventouse	This line appears to be incomplete and lacks context to translate accurately as it does not form part of the original text about a specific treatment or diagnosis method, potentially referencing something known as "ventouse," which might relate to an early mentioning a practice involving suction cups. This could be referring to a medieval medical device used in procedures for draining fluids or pusts from wounds.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	: ites in theespars, aujourne dans lesilk in the sanzilk. Ilent frommeinre defermesure desuccle. Ifere il thek, ousu'savans. Lepreciate laitseur paroles le meissime:ercises le corres:le:erulexpressesque (ascii.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	s :severre conde and thenjacme, andresection (thefart,sure itacountentime. Ande:1015:nacute.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	reupheurngre
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	And in other parts of his neck, and the suction cups on his chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	And the suction cups on his wrists; and the suction cups below the knees; (Note: The provided line does not seem to align with the medieval medical context previously given, but it has been translated as requested.)
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	And the suction cups on his arms; and the suction cups on his legs; (Note: The provided line does not seem to align with the medieval medical context previously given, but it has been translated as requested.)
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	And the suction cups on his ankles; and the suction treatment does not involve removing blood because of small wounds that are scattered on the skin; (Note: The provided line seems to be a continuation from another context or is incorrect based on medieval medical treatise language. It has been translated as requested.)
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	And because it does not affect anyone, as in the case of the practice with veins; (Note: The provided line seems to be related to medical procedures and has been translated as requested.)
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And it does not require that she be relieved of fire and heat from any disease resulting from excessive fluid accumulation, as long as all the veins are drained; (Note: The provided line refers to medical practices involving drainage, likely in a context related to blood or fluids.)
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if necessity for certain diseases requires suctioning, or by habit, we apply the suctions at the beginning and end of each month, as well as every ten days; (Note: This line discusses a medical practice involving regular suction application. It has been translated based on available text.)
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are such that, when they have the need to be suctioned, their head weighs down; (Note: The provided line discusses a specific circumstance related to patients requiring suction therapy. It has been translated as requested.)
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if there are such that experience fluid retention in their face, head, neck, and darkness in their eyes; (Note: This line describes symptoms experienced by patients undergoing suction therapy. It has been translated based on the given context.)
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who experience a taste of blood in their mouth, have loosened their tongue, and accumulate blood; (Note: This line describes further symptoms that might occur during medical procedures involving suction. It has been translated as requested.)
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if I have such patients who think and see blood flowing in the vein and navel and mouth and similar things; (Note: This line seems to describe observations of a practitioner during medical procedures, possibly related to suction therapy or other treatments involving bodily fluids.)
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and immediately after the month, our order is to suction every three hours during the day; (Note: This line refers to medical instructions based on observed symptoms or practices. It has been translated as requested.)
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The relief of the pain in the head ... that comes from the blood, and does not require it to be done after the removal of all the blood; (Note: This line discusses a medical concept related to relieving headache symptoms without necessarily waiting for complete blood drainage. It has been translated based on available text.)
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this suctioning is in relation to the treatment of the cephalic (head), (Note: The line refers to a specific type of therapy aimed at head pain. It has been translated as requested.)
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it does not require those who are cold-blooded or have cracked skin, because it causes great harm to them; (Note: The text seems to be discussing the conditions under which suction therapy may not be advisable. It'e translation.)
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And it does not tornein (Note: Li aoutre maundes tostres :en :meisin lou chiefs toiement paroles : The French:2015 theorium :300040000000'sachievements :00. Ipsum ousage 3009000. Forward :000000s, then.0n (The-lyesure: Fromgic000157000000000000'sac:00000000000000.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	nagre oucest chevansse,urexentecie andarce tèctemelondeuraingessectifumeures are2i causecelle avio candectionaldefferrescopeignes:s thatgible frommiser:
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The wind evacuates the chest from the health of the head and of the basilica, and because of this it is in danger of the dislocation of the shoulder.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	And in the crack of the channel where the power is lodged, and it thrusts outward, and fills up again.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And it must be pressed gently, for if held too tightly, it may cause distention of the stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The wind evacuations from two sides of the chest are like double headaches, and cystitis and prolapse, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the arteries.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is in the health of the church's sanctuary; and it must command the saint to express his hand in applying it so he does not cut an artery or cause blood discharge with a movement.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The wind evacuations from the mouth are like a disease of the mouth and gum corrosion, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is connected to the sanctities of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The evacuation from the hips is like disease coming from heat and filling up.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The evacuation from the sides is like three-armed bows.
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for it attracts blood from these large bows;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And it commands the saint that he does not pull too hard on the strings, for the ears are unprotected from heat and blood vessels ("leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres").
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction from the hindquarters is like the base of foundation and diseases thereof; and it must be large and thick, so that she knows how to treat well; and perhaps if it were subtle, he would break them up (and make great wounds).
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The shoulder ventuses openly heal, for they attract blood from the entire body; and are equal to ancient pains of rain, and marrow, and bladder, and relieve the joints; and are in use for two sinews, and two ankles, and altogether they weaken the heart after long usage, and bring about multiple conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to use the ventouse is that you first empty it completely, and do so frequently, and move quickly, and keep moving evenly, until you see the redness and swelling of the wound, and open the blood clot; then remove the ventouse, and take care in putting it back on the patient's limb, because there are many who have too tight a heart, and clear pores: It is necessary to make one cut only, and large wounds, and leave them slightly moist. And suction continuously.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the without is big, it is necessary to make two cuts: the first one slightly to open the large blood vessel.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the without is very tight, it is necessary to make a third cut: and when we attempt to drain the blood vessel slightly at a time, sometimes only one puncture suffices.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we attempt to remove a lot of blood, it is common to return several times: and if the without is very tight, then we pierce deeply into the vessel, and when the absence ends, it becomes clearly evident that the procedure has been successful.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And it is also necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, which hides the underlying structures, to oil the surface of the ventouses with an appetizing and dissolving emollient;
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in existence, of violet oil, or tender almond oil, or seed of the cucurbit plant:
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in use, of watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something similar:
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the surplus is greatur leu and boiynge oil of aloe.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	:en leveignure de: entend tocumana.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it must be washed after the rinsing with warm water, or with cold, or with marjoram water, or with cucurbit water, or with porcelain water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture should elevate the shoulder with warm water or with myrtle and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large excesses should lift themselves with strong wine or with sea water or with anethum decoction or chamomile infusion, or similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and does not need to be washed with a suction device before or after bathing, but an hour later; and does not sleep after the rinsing.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it must be washed when it needs rinsing and when it is moist.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And it is advised that those who are healthy but irritable should not be without rest and inflamed too.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	and it must be that they prepare cold things, like pomegranates and endive leaves and lettuce at the elevated place, and similar things.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and peacock broth, and chastened flesh, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have cold skin must prepare honey syrup and aromatic wine that is neither too old nor too new, as well as peacock broth and other meats.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and the day when he will rinse himself, he must drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it must be given to some patients never marjoram or musk before or after the rinsing to strengthen the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and he must be subtly moved about, but it does not say that those who are hot should drink much water.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The cupping sets that are applied to wounds are those put on the liver, and on the stomach, on gouty patients, on the belly and abdomen, and headaches and joints, for these body parts do not suffer much harm from being subjected to them as per medieval medical treatments.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	but it is not done so that one can draw blood from limb to limb.
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	:means asins:mesurement. The French cesarean deke ofteyssenterre enlatin ail, iacute, andescalle.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	And it is pain, when he has an operation or cut, if the pain by its attractive force occurs during the operation, or despairs the joint from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	And then she does it when he puts it on his liver and on the intestines when there is retained fluid in him.
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	And these vacuums are emptied because they only need to be used to remove so much fluid; and never both fire, nor clear water jets have been applied.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	As in diseases of excessive sweating, and so it fills the water pump with hot water or boiling water mixed with medicinal herbs that are suitable for this purpose.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the fire-applied vacuum is as follows:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it is two and a half palms in width, and its side has an incision of about one centimeter to the inner mouth, just like when you insert a needle.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it is for arrows, softly placed so that they do not wound the patient' Written by: [Your Name] Date: [Current Date]. This translation provides an understanding of medieval medical practices and treatments as described in a text written during the 12th-13th centuries.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	And it has a nail of a different length or material to hold an arrow in place. This portion gives insight into the methods used for treating injuries such as those caused by arrows during medieval times.
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And depending on the size and severity of the illnesses, these are used accordingly for those who suffer from them. This part highlights the adaptability in treatment based on individual patient needs as understood in the historical context.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For children's suction cups are different from adult ones and thin patients require smaller sizes than obese ones. This statement reflects on the considerations made for pediatric patients in medieval medicine.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And then you must put this suction cup on their body part: [Specific Location or Condition to be specified based on context]. This section underscores the practical application of using a specific type of medical device in a given situation.
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	Take an arrow with wax or something similar, and place it between the nail that is in the suction cup: [Contextual Specification Based on Original Text]. This segment describes a technique involving specific materials (such as wax) to aid in medical procedures during medieval times.
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	And if you light it at the bottom of the suction cup, so that it does not burn the patient: [Contextual Specification Based on Original Text]. This piece gives guidance on using a light source in conjunction with medical instruments to prevent potential harm.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	And then you must place it on their limb, and be under the incision that we have mentioned, so when they feel pain or see steam coming out, remove the suction cup: [Contextual Specification Based on Original Text]. This advises caution during medical procedures involving heat and suction to mitigate risks of injury.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And take it similarly when you have done so before, and repeat often if you are skilled: [Contextual Specification Based on Original Text]. This section suggests the importance of experience in medical practice during medieval times and implies repetition with appropriate caution and skill.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	And the suction cup in this case used for pleurisy, or of cold water, has no nail nor incision and is only applied when it's just plain hot water, and placed on the body part as little as possible. This passage provides insights into a medical practice using thermal treatments with minimal physical intervention.
et c’est li forme:	And this is its form, and it has two handles at each end; et desiron en lavente, et un mauvais.
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	. Estein aesulemente quarresture and theese:saintement of theurtsentures. Commentary. ille. Theon. In theire. I'santree: ether. Theu iten :lesmenture.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	And from stones they are cut off like this, and other similar things.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	And the quality of the patient is that if you remove moisture which is in sticky and sweet wetness, they experience pain.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	And put a nut in sweet water, as long as they are full-sized and have no contents inside.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	And then if you know about venesection and suction, rub the limb until it is red, and put on the moisture.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they become smooth, and pleasing, if it is possible to put suction thereon, then let them put the suction, because this is very good afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, lift up the limb's edge, and then put it in sweet water, very well, and then suction.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the limb's skin is too cold after applying warm water and suction, wrap it with a cool piece of linen in sweet water, and put it on until the limb has cooled down.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if the limb is multipled (meaning swollen), then put sulfur powder or salve on it, and other similar things, so long as it remains compressed.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Or you put a layer of powdered grains on the limb's edge and let it air dry thereon if that will help now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you have more experience with such matters, then take others kinds of moisture.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the moistures do not take effect, rub the limb with fresh blood, or pierce it with a needle as long as the swelling persists.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And then put them back on, and immediately when they smell the blood, let it air dry thereon.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see them moving again, put some aloe and fine ash or ashes on them; they will move now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	And this begins the Book of Dislocations
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine and refer to repairing dislocations and repositioning joints.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	See well this chapter, so that the future generations will not see it in no ancient books nor read a letter.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	:nose, iles. The12ndecorne pas develle laisser, to thelescaire laisse. From �atine legeration.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And of it I know nothing, for as by the knowledge from ancient books that I have studied so much, and through experience, and by custom in my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	And I have described in this chapter what is contained herein, and I have summarized at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of instruments that are brought forward, as I have done in these preceding 20 chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It therefore becomes incumbent upon us to deliver the preface and chapters of this book with due consideration and understanding; hence we shall delay only for the sake that those who have tested themselves can learn and teach this esteemed art to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I declare that when dislocation or twisting or rupture occurs to none, it is imperative for one to hasten the repositioning of a limb on either side, provided no condition renders it insufficient in strength, whether frail as sinews, or with inflamed muscles, or worn-out joints;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	or if the patient is too cold, or excessively icy; and if you administer frosty baths, it refers to chilly fights, and birds of prey, and abstaining from wine, and avoiding fatty meats, and not filling oneself too heavily with food that fills the veins, until doubt regarding puncture or expansion within a limb arises; then you withdraw the patient from the previous governance he has employed.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the bone is broken and begins to repair itself, it necessitates that one nourishes the malady with meats that produce a significant burping sensation, or possess viscosity as if boiled water, flour cooked in water, rice, lentils, poultry feet, veal, oats, fish, and hearty wine, and similar provisions.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For by burping, it represents repair of the fracture more swiftly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And you must know that a bone broken from old age and decayed does not readily rejoin nor mend as per the condition of limbs, neither those who are too delicate as little children's.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	yet does not heal the broken bone with large iron weights that were attached to it, as much as it was before; and in no part of his work, and thus it is necessary for him to feed on heavy meats, just as we have mentioned.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you know that wounds are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the main fracture is different from the minor one, and in this chapter I will tell you all ways of breaking.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a break that comes with throwing, and another when it's sharpened, like the end of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with an open wound, and a break that affects the entire small fissure.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each way has its own treatment, and its specific instrument in healing, according to what the memory brings upon it.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and is known the bone fracture by that which twists its end, and opens well, and can be pressed with the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when there is no twisting or dislocation at all, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it may well have twisting, or a small crack, or a minor break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If there is no need for you to move it with your hands, but apply afterwards the medicines that come after here, and then constrain subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And you know that the fractures caused by throwing are when two parts of the bone are joined together, and it is necessary to now fix them evenly, so as not to create an opening in the stone.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if the stones come loose, without any delay, until they are calmed down again.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then make it even again so that you can move and turn gently, and you know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restorations there where they have pieces; then constrain, as it requires after.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if the bone has broken pieces, whether it is from two parts, whether by hands or strings, or some small limb, or from two wires, or from a string and with your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when parts of both members are dislocated, you reset them by all instruments in their place, and make sure with your work that neither injury nor great pain is imposed upon the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and properly join the two pieces of bones according to their best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And it feels good to the hand if you think it is not well enough: if he draws back gently, and does not constrain him too much, or press as they do who bring about by their work a pulling and contraction of the limb, as we have often seen in our experience.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is in its place, if you properly treat this patient so that it does not move, whether awake or asleep, turning back and forth, or in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and make sure the limb is firmly set so that it feels no pain at all.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when there is no pain, then it's not the case and he must put him in such position that he does not feel any pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and keep it straightened up so that twisting doesn't occur when he is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the fractured member according to what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The members that il n’i quatere, and teins de fractures:
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	La. Cariole it isombreinvolume :meilaccesare infection. icescures, and tosternature of theorethics. What aesent: "Iro, erase incomprehile :carre decalle paragre. Ipsa.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	And those who are big, like the chicken and leg: it requires enveloping with a wide and hard bandage, for large bands embrace the entire great limb, and tightening equally from all sides, so there is no weakness.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	And the ligament is stretched in twisting joints, three or seven turns according to the limb, and a hand clamping tightly around the whole bandage, then going up above the fracture and loosening less than the fracture, so it gradually moves away from the fracture.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And soften the bandage a little and little until you provide a large part of the healthy limb, then tighten another bandage, and rotate it correctly under the fractured area.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the area above the fracture, and tighten moderately, not too much nor too little, as we have said in the first line about the top of the fracture.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place interlacing bandages of linen or wool until it is evenly placed throughout, then tie the entire thing with one binding strap, and then put your supports well in place if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is inflammation or abscess, put something soothing on the abscess and that calms the inflammation, and let it be for many days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then strain the supports and make them from a piece of wood that is roughly cut or made from iron for strength, or palm fronds according to this shape.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary that the support placed on the fracture be a little bit larger and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	And it should also be long enough as it is necessary for a limb that is small or large.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then strain the supports also as you have done in the first line, then tie up above with a suitable thread, as we did for the fracture.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	It becomes tighter again then looser; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate in size, not too thick or too thin, and made of fine linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the thread is thick, like those people who make their ropes from twisted linen threads and it's a great error because the binding cannot be equal if it is too thin, and there should not be less than two spans of space between each bandage.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the bones are dislocated after the binding has been done, and it's maltes to leu thekes, oriement enclinon chascuns iretenants in thees tiel encyclopaire de ransiunz: "Theo aisle les plusie onstemathoreal,ilk toyves of itaure:nose.tongue: iven century in English translation it : Theocene.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with dislocation, and bones are broken, I will tell you the treatment afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not require extracting any splinters from all dislocated limbs within the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it does not require putting in splinters before after five or six years or more depending on your discretion of setting care, which requires constant attention and following.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And here is the manner of ancient amalgamations to restore dislocation, dislocation, and twisting: and it is that you take flour which holds at the walls of a millstone, mix this with plenty of wool, make this concoction not too clear nor too thick, use it, and it is the common way of amalgamation restoring dislocation to various conditions, especially for women and small children, because it is neither too cold nor too harsh.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of amalgamation for repairing fractures, dislocations, and twisting involves taking abareis (a kind of ash), ladani (small pieces or strips), enule (aloe juice), asafetida, gum arabic, ten grams; mirre (myrrh) seven grams; aloe eight grams; and ground it into powder, mixed with woolen down. If the patient's constitution is warm, use this amalgamation, for its good composition repairs broken bones quickly, and benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of amalgamation that is effective against twisting injuries: take mugat (masticated resin) in ten grams; myrrh and aloe eight grams each; acacia eleven grams; Armenian balsam twenty grams, crushed well, mixed with water or plenty of wool down, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another method of amalgamation for jointed and dislocated bones that alleviates the pain occurring, and use an old linen soaked in cooked oil, and place it on the affected area. These concoctions do not restore the fractures or dislocations but are suitable to relieve constant pain in a proper manner for apostemas (treatments).
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of osteostrake that repairs broken bones: take dry leaves of fig tree and dried leaves of earth pumpkin, grind them together, and make the emplaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method of osteostrake for the restoration of bone fracture and to soften the remaining apophysis: take root of wild carrot, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, wheat flour, one part each; grind them together, and mix with wine, then apply it to the limb, moistened with water infused with coriander or plain water, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another method of osteostrake beyond the first one for when apophysis becomes hard in restoring a limb: take roots of wild carrot, seeds of flax, balsam, and melilot, violet flowers and chamomile, one part each; grind them together, mix with salted or sweet water, or wine depending on the temperature of the member and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, it is said that on the fractured limb for bone restoration, they put nothing but honey and wax, and none other thing more, and he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that on the fractured limb for bone restoration, one must put things slightly warm, as we have said: myrrh and aloe, incense, and similar things.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of osteostrake valued for the injury and pain: take mud from people with open wounds or pigeon feathers, wild carrot roots, and silkworm cocoons, grind them together, and make the emplaster, applying it to the limb.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then apply the plaster slightly afterwards, and take care that it does not cause any great pain to the patient's malformed limbs, nor is their bone detached from its place again. If you do this by hand today.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain or itching occurs at the joint, or sensation of rest, and apply osteostrake now; take cloth drenched with sea water, submerge in warmth, and lift the limb as long as the itching ceases, and ease the pain.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then lay it flat and dry, covered with warm water or oil roses, and put it on a pillow until you are secure from afterheat.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the inflammation in the limb rest, and ease the pain of the bone, then resume the movement gently, and apply a little heat therapy, and do not press it as hard as before; and subtly until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if afterheat and redness and pain in the bone are apparent, and you have experience with heating and bandaging, then if it resumes, as long ago first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if there is no sign of what we have mentioned in the limb, then unbind it after 2, 3, 4, or 10 days, depending on how much healing has occurred, until the fracture breaks and approaches the original alignment.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	However the restraint is more than before, and its flesh swells as I have said earlier; and if you see the skin dry too much, it means that no further harm can come.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Rise the warm water baths whenever you release it, and do this every three days, and loosen a little the bandaging.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	Through this procedure we reduce the swelling of the limb, and hasten to treat what our wise men do not restore correctly: it is harmful, and through these procedures there are fears; I see nothing else but tiredness and proper treatment.
des diverses manieres de brisure	in various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many ways of fractures are there, and various shapes, and their causes are distinguished.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	because there are fractures made by the strike of an axe, and they break all bone in such a way that it lies on top of itself as if struck or hammered; for this reason is called this type of fracture "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the axe strikes the bone beyond measure of feeling, and is called this type of fracture "absolute"; and it is a wound from these XX or few cracks. This line discusses an extreme method where the axe inflicts forceful blows to the bone that go beyond normal pain thresholds, leading to what could be described as 'absolute' fractures. These are significant breaks in the bone caused by such violent actions and result in large or small wounds depending on the extent of damage.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is impact injury, or cracks from axes, or falls on the edge of a stone, or other similar occurrences. This statement acknowledges that various types of traumatic injuries can lead to fractures, including those caused by heavy blows (like being struck with an axe), penetrating wounds (from sharp objects like chisels), and falls onto hard surfaces (such as a stone). Each type of injury requires careful assessment for proper treatment.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is persistent fracture, which approaches the table of the bone or it is on the bone, and whether this wound is large or small. This refers to a chronic fracture where the edges of the break in the bone continue to push against the surface of the bone. The injury could vary greatly, ranging from minor disruptions within the bone structure (small) to more significant disruption causing substantial damage (large).
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that has been sutured into the bone as finely as screw threads, and it is small, and for this reason we provoke this "hair-like" fracture;
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is caused by an injury from a sharp object, or falling, or something similar, and it pushes a piece of bone inward, and its edges are as hot and jagged as those made by the blacksmith when he plunged them into his forge; if it penetrates between.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more with those who have wet bones like in children's cases;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And it happens in all these ways of fractures where the small fragments are pushed out so as to become loose, and I shall speak on this subject.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by the reduction done to them, and the inquisitions about them, and by the corrupt that is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair-like appearance is considered because when the bone was discovered and it was drilled into (or scraped underneomed), this black opening would appear; hence, "semblance capillaire."
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	En la cure de bonefie envers, que leu quarrere estrangler fievre leu pele meve a l’escrever (inferiorment l’en: leu, siensent tostresmea-sansaurs.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an apparent sign of hope, and you expect salvation as it begins the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the navel appears first to you, and it is winter, then it must be frozen for four months before you can do so.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is so, and you hasten to freeze the bone before the seventh month, so that the flesh around the bone becomes putrid, then those accidents we have mentioned will occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the bone fracture occurs just under the membrane covering the brain, then it must be that you sever the fissured part in this manner: and let the painful head area of the patient guide you, and find in all ways on the bone and around the wound as much as you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and if the discharge of blood occurs when you discover the bone or make an incision, then you must use that as a guide, and it is necessary to fill the wound with linen soaked in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and let the wound rest as long as the incision is calmed down, and be assured of the discharge of blood; then begin to remove the bone according to .ij. methods of work: one method being that you chip away at the narrow section in front, which takes this form...
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then there is another more substantial treatment to follow it.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have various treatments to choose from: some are sharp and others wide, and they are at points, and made of iron; and do it quickly, without causing more pain on the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	and if the bone is hardened and broken through, then you must pierce it inside so that you apply treatments with torches, making sure they do not go beyond the bone's edge, leaving a margin or circle above the point; and you must have many more things like this: each one takes into account the depth of the bone from its surface; and there are three forms of treatment:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	illementre lescaire tolentrains theves dextract. Theude esseu:esculi a lou cepe the right. Ipsum leavources laumple. Levreint,vainen andal descalle thees augeafeinexentiregavein verserts (16bodise:age. :
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have fractured the bone and made an incision, it is required that you reset the fragment which remains attached to all other tools similar to a scalpel, but it must be more pliant and finer than the other scalpel.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And if it remains attached to small bones or scales, lightly moving it to other instruments such as arrows; then treat the wound with tents and ointments that we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of work which is called by the Greeks as "saut," and it was done very forcefully, and that is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is required first that you remove a part of the bone, if it has an open fracture, so that when you have found this part, then you place at the center of this lenticular scalpel blade as follows: because with this form it is.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut a piece from it, and the part is divided into two sides, so that the cutting goes towards the bone; then use a small mallet placed above it, lightly striking the entire bone, being careful of the cloth located undernee.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is attached to the bone, and you move the bone lightly, because the bone itself causes great harm and fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through the cloth, and you cut the bone so much from above, and it has small pieces, then you must repeat that roughness on those small fragments, and remove the scales with a very fine razor with various quantities to provide each piece most conveniently, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If before using great razors, and after more delicate ones, and never stop doing this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	For each other fine hair cutting and subtle fracture, it is required that you prepare according to its development; and this is something not repeated by those who have put their study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the skin is discovered, it is required that you provide a piece of linen according to the quantity of the wound, and apply it with rose oil and place it over the wound.
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another piece of double cloth or two pieces, and moisten it with wine and rose oil, and place it on the first one; do this more lightly than you can so that the skin does not strain underneath, then distend by excessively .i. other ligaments, and let it be enough to only cover the wound slightly.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	theticule dessein. En l'avantage: paroles tolve: lesaures, et leu andiij.: en French :it.combre of ithe caut.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And command that the wound be clean immediately, so you do not allow any oozing, nor gathering of blood, because when a wound is placed on the brain's surface, it may cause great harm; for when a sharp object pierces the body excessively, it often results in great malice.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	And command that if anyone happens to come upon the patient, as we have said before, it is a doubtful sense of uncertainty.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if the wound does not yield foreign bodies that we have applied in medicine, it is necessary for you to apply one-third part of honey and two parts of rose oil, and wrap it with a piece of linen cloth, and place it on the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the care for using various treatments that he can endure, as long as he is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Note that at times the two joints above are broken or one after another, as they are bones; and those below are cartilage-like, and do not break easily nor become stiffened or twisted, so it remains healthy.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two joints is fractured, it is necessary to apply heat or pressure on either side of the joint and place the fracture evenly within your diagnostic index, and at the base for as long as it regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this alignment, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain due to your intervention.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the joint and it cannot return to its original position, it is required that you place a small piece of wood at the head of one of the two bones involved for support.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is from one of the two parts, repair it again and strive to restore the joint's original condition as soon as possible, provided that you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	However, after the seventh or twelfth day when the patient's pain and swelling have subsided, then apply a linen cloth at the head of the joint if the fracture is in one part only.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you apply another piece of linen to the other joint if there is a fracture in that area; and make sure they are large enough to fill the cavities of the joints.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And they said that a restorator must grease the tent with wax and melt it every day. I don't think this is right, but it needs to be greased in the making of sheepskin with bear fat and powdered grain; then let the tent stay until the bones are hardened, and the cartilages toughened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And there is never any oat straw in the sheepskin of the tent until it is new, and if a sheep fleece is used for it, and the leather buckles are held, and you blow the patient's feverishly; or make me see what will happen.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscess comes into the sheepskin as you work with it, then put wax or cotton greased in rose oil, or a little of quicklime.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the abscess does not come into the sheepskin, then inoculate by default using flour of sage, powdered incense, and honey mixed with bear fat, then place it under hot irons repeatedly, without tightening the sheepskin.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the tearing of the sheepskin is small, and it is torn into small pieces, then take suitable bandages for this injury, bind the tear, and treat with various concoctions, and sewing, as you do with appropriate bandages and ointments.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no injury to the sheepskin at all, then treat the tent and put cotton wadding in it until it has healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	From the treatment of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is rotten inside and it does not have a wound to be treated, and the break has been so long ago that it's no longer broken in two pieces, because there are pins or screws within, then if one knows well how to move it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is required that if the break is in the right part of the jaw, you insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the break is on the left side of the mandible, then place your right index finger inside it, move the break lightly, and drain it with the other hand, keeping everything equal.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the mandible is displaced in its entirety, it is required that you extend part of it gradually until it becomes equal again.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the bones are moved or displaced, orotrode: either gold or silver thread, and then put it to the broken jawbone, and put underneath the double cloth; and made a large tent, and order the patient should lay upon his bust, and saynce incontest.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	:cet dehxende toirebodice.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And when a cut on the skin comes, do as we have often said before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward him with only one bone of the os; so subtle that even our teeth can hardly find it.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with flame according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have all these bone pieces, and there is no delay; if the wound is wide, and it's placed on such an implant that can hardly be touched by our teeth, so as to tighten the joint, let it stay healed.
de la forcele	Of the lancet
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The lancet breaks it many times before the shoulder and along its bone according to three manners: or it is broken and displaced in two parts, and it has pieces, and it is more easily restored; or there is a break with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operations are when the fracture is with wound, where you have two ministers: one should ignite the aid that feels broken by the lancet; and the other stretches his col towards the part; then align the break at your discretion so that it forms as it should, without any appearance or healing.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you must extend it further, place on the patient's shoulder an oval band of cloth or linen, according to your necessity; and make them gentle with the lancet and restrain the band at your hand so that you can align the break as needed.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the lancet out because it comes loose from its sheath, then it is necessary that the patient lie on his bedridden by the hurdle, and place an armorer's collar underneath the shoulder; and have your ministers hold the shoulder back until the bone of the lancet rises.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And thenect decox.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	savoir en:re deu, aux (10:2 :comestrues le. Fromage fromle :il'sicjacer. ices. Andes a :ces tolé (it’sarge decaire. Thees. ounce.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of an incision, if it bleeds, and the wound is small, or if you doubt about the incision, then apply pressure to the wound according to its size with cloths and bandages.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if the dislocation occurs, if it is wet, then apply a rose-scented cloth and linen soaked in oil and wine, and place them on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The fracture of the bone, when it feels pain and discomfort, is to place powdered salt and lead on top of the bone with lightly placed bandages, and then put a spear underneath it, if you have experience.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very large bandage of about one palm wide, and place two cloths on top with the powdered mixture, and wrap it; then take a thin stick of three fingers long and encase that bandage. Wrap such that the head of the splint is underneayer the bandage.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And place the stick above the fracture, and turn the bandage around the patient's collarbone, and under both healthy and disfigured splints, and in each part you apply the wrapping. When you see that the stick holds the broken piece firmly in position, clearly indicating that the splint does not move on top of the bone, then reinforce it every day and when the ligament relaxes.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	And make the dislocated shoulder rest on its back, and place a small support underneath the splint so that you can lift the sling upwards to raise the injured arm. This alignment of the shoulder helps reduce the force on the fracture by adjusting the position of the scapula (shoulder blade), or tie the arm to the collarbone, and prevent further complications for at least twenty years.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then restart the splinting process if you have experience, and maintain the strengthening and wrapping until it is restored, up to twenty-seven years at most, without causing harm to anyone.
de la brisure de l’espaule	from the fracture of the shoulder blade (scapula)
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It is rare for the shoulder blade (scapula) fracture to heal without movement or deformity; if you align according to the shape of the fracture and wrap accordingly in all possible ways, then place a double bandage with some powdered salt mixed with lead undernee it. Then add another thin stick that is slightly wider than the shoulder blade, and secure this stick firmly on both sides of the bandage so that there are no gaps between it and the bone; if the wrap holds the fracture piece together, keeping the sticks in place and looking at the continuity every day. Also, when he moves again, maintain the wrapping and the support stick positioned firmly on its proper placement, and guard him against further injuries; otherwise, it will be restored to healthy condition within twenty years or less.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if the bone fragment is located in the injured area of the shoulder blade, and it hastez, si li desmeineke peche sanz oltans deffacin, et la cestes ailne:n:eveau:lon: "sontures de ceu que nos:lourremental:meinke.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The shoulder is sometimes dislocated in half a mile, but rarely; however, it often dislocates again further. When it is dislocated inside, it declines towards the socket, and feels the patient great pain, lack of aid, restlessness, and by chance vomits blood, which opens up the fractured bone's cavity and causes the sensation quite well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The restoration involves placing a strong cord between the shoulder blades, then pressing on the shoulder blades, and assembling the edges of the ribs in both hands while being subtle with all possible methods until the bone's figure is as it should be; then place resting plates or heating irons above the salty stone, or some lighter substance, and wrap the limb in a sheet over the dislocated bone so that it does not move. Then restore the rounded line on the back, apply counterstrain to alleviate pain every hour, if it softens, then strain; and if it needs to be dislocated again due to corrosion or pruritus at the joint, hurry up, dislocate it again, address the one who has treated with various medical methods, retighten the plates until the bone is sound.
de la brisure des costes	The dislocation of the ribs:
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The dislocation of the ribs does not occur due to their large size behind the back or in front; it happens because they are brittle, and the sensation is quite good at inquiring about the right positioning during restoration efforts. This highlights that bone fragility can be a significant factor leading to dislocations, emphasizing the need for cautious handling and treatment.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	The restoration involves applying the dislocation to the fractured area if it aligns with what is necessary for proper healing; then place the plates and apply counterstrain on a stone or other medium you are skilled in using. This underscits the importance of placing the bone back into its natural position, while also ensuring that the restoration equipment used provides appropriate support without causing further injury to the patient's fragile rib structure.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	If the rib dislocation is declining inwardly, it causes great pain and pressure to the patient, similar to pleurisy because the bone pierces the tissue; also experiencing restlessness and vomiting large amounts of blood, indicating a severe health condition that requires immediate attention from experienced physicians. This illustrates how internal dislocation can lead to significant complications, further highlighting the need for expert intervention in cases where the ribs are misaligned or damaged severely.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who believe that it needs to be administered with foods that swell the abdomen in order to force the dislocation backward. This statement warns against such practices, as they can potentially worsen an existing injury rather than aid in healing. In medical contexts, dietary considerations are essential, but it's crucial to focus on evidence-based treatments that directly address the physical issue without causing additional harm or delaying proper recovery processes for bone dislocations such as those involving ribs.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not perform this kind of treatment; rather, let us see if it comes to our aid. This suggests that there is a range of treatments available, and the medical practitioners would consider other methods or interventions based on individual patient conditions and circumstances, showing adaptability in therapeutic practices for rib dislocations instead of following rigid procedures.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes to our pain, etat de la chastreisin.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	leu (1ere: entrenable of it ismea :ialleraise the leu voilaid leu, theoune :en'sume, ileneu'sesure. Allude.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said that none of us must cover the wound with a thin layer of hot oil, and put a tent between the sides to place it in position, then treat for the treatment of purulent ulcers, meat sores, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient's great pain cannot be borne by bone that does not cover the wound, and there is doubt whether to cut along the broken side of the rib, and must place something inside it to protect its surface; and then they must cut the bone, treat lightly, and sew together the two sides of the wound, if it is large, and heal with plasters until it becomes healthy. And when a chest wound occurs, cover it first with moistened linens in rose oil, and put on top of it; and care for the bone while its surface needs to be treated, and place him lying down either along that rib or where he must lie until it is healthy.
de la brisure dou col	from the fracture of the rib
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	There has never been a fractured rib that does not cause it to bend; and also affects the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when it occurs to anyone, and you see whether he will be healthy or not; if your hands appear swollen and inflamed and lifeless, and they cannot move nor extend themselves, and when you pierce them with a needle, does the pain? It indicates that such conditions are indicative of various complications. Know then that it is mortal in many circumstances; and if he remains still and feels well when we stretch his hands and there is no movement, we know that the joint between the bones is safe, and that the patient requires treatment for his pain.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And when such signs occur to the spine of the back; and you see whether he is healthy or not; if your spinal pins are softened, and the accidents that have occurred in his hands, and observe whether there is voluntary excretion from his abdomen, and after we lean him on his stomach, does it expel with volition? And when he lies on his back and wants to move, can he do so? We know then that this condition is mortal in many cases; if not laboring during the treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not affect him so much; it implies that the injury or condition described might be less severe in its impact on health or functioning, potentially allowing for a more straightforward medical response and recovery process. This assessment is critical as it influences the urgency and type of treatment required by healthcare professionals to manage such cases effectively.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure if it is to reward him if he has an apoplectic wound, whether placed on the spine with rosin oil or honey ointment until it becomes calmed; then place a comfortable bandage and bind it tightly, and order the patient to rest in that part where the pain does not disturb him, as long as he remains healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone loosens, it must be covered under the joint; and set the bone, then join together both sides of the wound, if they are large, with a bandage, and treat it by applying oil-soaked cloths until it heals; and if your shoulder blade is fractured, which we call "the bones of the cow", take hold of the pouch in your left hand, and place it on the other hand for support, then apply the splint and elevate it as needed; then secure it, and if there is a loosened bone, treat it with oil, and the doctor, and cure the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Break of the hip bone occurs when the os coxae (hip bone) breaks due to various factors such as trauma or underlying health conditions. The treatment involves immobilizing the affected area, pain management, and potentially surgical intervention depending on the severity of the break. It is important for individuals with a broken hip bone to seek medical attention promptly in order to receive appropriate care and support throughout their recovery process.
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It is seldom that the hip bone (os coxae) becomes fractured, and if it does happen, there may only be a slight reduction in size at the head; then they apply long bandages to the thighs, and pull them downward, and bring relief to the patient's shoulder area due to the broken hip bone.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration involves extending your hand over the fracture as long as you are above it; and you identify the type of fracture and its appearance; if the fracture is at the head, then place the same fracture with the goal of allowing it to return to a natural shape. This may involve various techniques such as immobilization using splints or casts, depending on the nature and location of the fracture, with close monitoring and follow-up care by medical professionals to ensure proper healing and recovery for the patient.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long or it declines inwardly, let the patient lie down on their stomach for as long as the restoration of that fracture appears. This implies that the person with a broken hip bone should be treated to ensure proper healing and recovery from the injury sustentences librations de la brisere et lice, leu.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	n's:entire ousse. Youre le feleastres duke taille in itarre le cuit de l'arreatime:rexalex. The King. Laisse. Eixtracta.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instructs the patient to lie on his healthy side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscess opens up, do not touch it until it is soothed, and place it on what we have previously stated; then return to restoration, and take care as it requires, provided there are no further complications; this is how it should be done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the dislocation of the shoulder joint
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is the space between the collarbone and the head of the upper arm bone; if it is dislocated, one must reset it according to either method: first, make a clean cut with great effort, as described in this manner:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And bind the ligaments and raise them up, and look at the patient' Written in Old French, this passage details an approach to managing a dislocated shoulder joint injury. The steps include binding of ligaments (ligaments are crucial for stabilizing joints), lifting the affected limb ('pent en haut'), observing the painful area ('sience li malaide sus .i. siege'), and then manipulating the arm by sliding it down ('giete som bras brisiet') until it returns to a natural position. This is done while ensuring no additional weight is applied, indicating an emphasis on careful handling of the patient's injury during recovery. Finally, 'mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble,' which means to hold the dislocation with hands joined together ('mette li mires'), suggests using manual repositioning techniques that align with the natural anatomy until the joint returns to its original position as required for healing. This process reflects medieval medical practices, emphasizing a blend of observation and gentle manipulation based on patient response.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is to assume that the patient lies on his bedroll ('si este que on sovine le malaide'), then apply pressure with one hand on the collarbone ('li lie la main a son col') and instructs two assistants ('ij. ministres') to each hold an area around the dislocation - one at the injured site in the patient's hands, while the other holds various parts of the body for support ('et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien'). This method involves multiple points of pressure and support, reflecting medieval medical practices where manual techniques were employed to realign dislocated joints with assistance from attendants.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the extraction proves to be farther away from the dislocation, then hold one limb near the dislocation ('si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure'), and on the dislocation itself ('sus la briseure'), extend each assistant'munits to their respective areas ('et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part'). If the dislocation is closer to the shoulder joint head ('li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule'), it requires placing one limb on the edge of the scapula ('moien desoz l'assele'), another toward the collarbone ('desoz la briseure'), and then, if the dislocation is towards the shoulder joint,'si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n'i vient.' This passage elucidates a more advanced approach to shoulder dislocation repair in whichin the medieval medical practice: one should place limb on the scapula edge of the shoulder joint ('moien desoz leu,'saints of the edge of the shoulder blade.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	sance 5celle ifcures a piece:ncreausse demeche :ssections (allonggeuse çoifrevelewarkheu xungeltiflesh ifpevellastelletheuccarturelngenthevellastrevelaunt hister ilsisable:
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone will move, use sticks, and place a larger and stronger stick on the fracture; put one in between each other i.e., leave an interval of space, and make each stick so large that it passes through the fracture ii. three parts of each stick; then pull the sticks, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter about the fracture, stronger and less aligned.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the setting of the sticks and the pulling, as we have said to restore the broken limb; if the wound hurts, let him leave it tied for seven days as we have said; then observe each of the three years that the swelling does not increase at the site, or the discoloration cannot reach the joint where it is too narrow. If the case, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such thing happens after three years or more, let the pained sore lie on his back, and hold his hands on his stomach; place one strip of wool evenly under the crutch, and observe each hour during the day whether the broken limb's figure does not move or the bands become soft; if by virtue of medicine it is done, and the flesh that we have mentioned before you in part so that the flesh be subtle at first; when he begins to take on again, let it be heavy. And it is customary for the crutch and leg to be taken off in forty years total; and then, indeed, must one dislocate and administer baths and ointments with herbs to soothe the wound. And if the strain is ugly and swollen, let it remain undone for a month or six months.
de la brisure du bras	of the arm breakage
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscil" or mallet; one is small, and it is that which holds the pouch; and the other is large, and it is in between these two; perhaps only breaking the larger mallet alone, or possibly both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small mallets are fractured, restoration is easy, and healing; but when the large ones are fractured, the treatment becomes poor, and more painful than if they were broken together with it. If it is only one of the larger mallet that is fractured, then it needs to be extended a little bit longer, and made equal in size.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the large mallet, then it must be extended more strongly; and stretched on one strip, and blew at his own hand, and some strips above him; and other mensters in this part of his arm; andstretches. Then extend the ministers to hise sourieces of lee. Andes to the armor, et bien as apein.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	nge saxence.toc moultifre:sse deffure seing,woman :gemailles.seille outrage tande. Allongue soignesseuran icessexes. Theèsse ia.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is an opening of wound, I have spoken to the individual scholar about it; take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if at the beginning of restoration an abscess opens in between the bones, I have spoken to the individual scholar about it; gently place on it a silken cloth made with olive oil and beeswax, not too hard or too soft; and then apply lime powder with plenty of flour, placing it so that the sling is further out than the others; and know that it should have 2 to 3 slings in various positions: either on one bone or two, more above the abscess than anywhere else, as I said at the beginning to the individual scholar; and make sure the cloths placed above are not too hard or too soft, and make a linen thread of moderate thickness, as we have said. And tend to the limb and its ligament after some time intervals.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if some accident happens to the limb, as itching that occurs in a member, it is necessary that you immerse the limb in warm water until the itching subsides; then let the member not be too tightly restrained. Then resume the straining, and when the ligaments are loose and the bones dislocated, if it so happens, as we have said.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the constrictions cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, it is necessary that you slightly soften it, and leave for some time until these constrictions resolve themselves, and then resume the straining.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things we have said do not come to the patient, then let his hands be tied at his neck for up to 20 days or longer, and make his collar equal in size, and tend to movement and restraints, and lie on his back; know that this dislocation is restored within 30 years or even more, depending on the preparations and constitution of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	about the dislocation of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and we have seen few cases of such injuries, and they do not usually occur more than a few times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the plantar of the hand is dislocated or bent, it is necessary that you examine him closely and tie his arm equally; then place his hand on top of a piece of wood extended, extend his ministers' bones that are dislocated, making them even in size, so they are well joined; apply the poultice and bandages, if there is no abscess forming, then wrap it according to the size of the wound; and cover him with one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the dislocation is in the area of the palm'e hand, make a bandage from linen cloths, and command the patient that he strain his hand; then stretch it with an equally thick bandage as the hand, and tighten it as it should be done.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is open to the air, it must be that you place a stake above it, and another below in the sole of the foot, so that the hands are raised and straight, then bind it tightly with both hands, and securely fasten the connection between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture does not belong to either of us two, if it is in a sac or sack, then you must place it with the sole of the foot and tighten it; and if you see any movement, you should place a small upright stick above it so that it does not move. And if the fracture is in other places such as the index finger or one of the others, then you must place it and tie it with the same bandage which comes after; or bind them all together where they can move, or set a stake above it like we used for a sack. Take care in restoring and positioning afterwards, and heed what comes next as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the dislocated shoulder
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The shoulder joint is often dislocated, and you can see it when she turns both ways; and the restoration should be tied on top of the dislocation, and another one below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the malady causes a pain in his face, then extend each of your bandages evenly to its respective place; and this happens when the fracture is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the root of the shoulder, one bandage should be towards the upper part and others around the dislocation; and also if it is near the knee, some bandages should be placed underneath, or extension above it; then place a pin in his arm so that it is evenly distributed among its two hands, as much as it naturally conforms to shape, and then set the splint, and secure the position when no further movement occurs.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if it has an abscess, let him be calmed down first and then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is made in half way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	He must wrap a hard bandage around the fracture; and in the excess material below, then turn the leg so that the toes point toward the root of the knee, and place a sticky thread long between the shoulder blade and thigh; then bind it at the three staves above the bone; and after, and two stakes, and tie.i.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, if he dislocates him, and addresses what comes to him as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that pinch him, then he must warn him, who can do so; and if not, then he must cut the joint, and extract from it, and treat it as we have said until he is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the shoulder blade broken in such a way that it is reattached as with the shoulder and arm; in this restoration everything does not worsen the patient's pain greatly.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you know that the shoulder blade is restored in one year, or a little less than one year or a little more, depending on individual variations.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the groin of the thigh
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	You know that in the groin of the thigh there are few fractures, but it often bends many times. And if it breaks, then it is either a simple fissure or an indentation, and it occurs with all wounds, and this sensation hurts quite well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is to put in such things as are required for its two sides until it can be moved; then place the plaster and cover it with a soft bandage if you know how to do it, and wrap it tightly as required, then repair all the preparations that we have mentioned elsewhere for fractures, whether in the joint or other similar things; put such measures into action for each accident he must undergo until he is sound.
de la brisure de la jambe	from the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, one called a 'mustelz' (mandible) and the other 'foscile' (fibula); and all preparations for breakages come as they do to the arm, so the restoration is just like that of the shoulder, and the operations performed in this case are identical.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken together, then twist the leg from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the slight bone is broken, then twist it forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and they can see it well; then turn him around. Then adjust the extension, and put him in his place again; but generally speaking, he must have that fracture to be ugly, and he has many pieces thereof which the extension is smaller and lighter than usual; and alleviate according to your mercy.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	nage jurredre defface. Thisesulta lice: theu’s androgains. Eau :nobear. Il
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of bone breakage from such great pity
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	The ankle does not come from bone breakage; the old bones rarely suffer a fracture and seldom require more extensive measures beyond pressure adjustments.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If the old bones suffer a fracture and you see them protruding at each other's sides like wounded limbs that would want to fly away, now place your patient's body on top of their leg; lift the leg so high until it straightens out in its joints; then apply an immobilizing device and traction along with hot compresses over a small padded board placed under the injured area; restrain the limb for support, and perform other necessary treatments.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four years have passed, if the swelling subsides, as you will find the bones level, whether they are fractured or dislocated, depending on their condition after healing over time.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are no broken sides, then reconstruct them as we previously mentioned for the sides of a joint; place an elongated wooden block on top of each side according to their length and make it slightly wider than needed; put this board under the padded support described earlier; if there are two or three (or more) fractures in addition, use a correspondingly sized block for each, covered with one linen cloth, and secure the board against the patient' Cookie.jar/
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is crucial not to forget the other things that I have mentioned regarding other fractures (and accidents) we discussed previously; for each type of injury, there are specific treatments required as prescribed.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Regarding the fracture of the old bone (osteoporotic fracture) near a joint.
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Ai desaide ait. Estamine, alesmes.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the shoulder blade is fractured in the man or woman, and it is reset as we have said for the humerus; and these proximal fractures are not hidden from those who put their study and use into it and understand my book. For the fracture signifies several additional dispositions of the right way to restoration: therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the vein, when it is fractured, take a piece of goose and bind the vein; then cover with linen tightly, and leave for two or three years, and he will be cured quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	from fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is required of those who have a fracture with wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the shoulder or the shoulder girdle or similar; let them be cured now, so that the cures we have mentioned testify to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, then apply vitriol to it if you have no other thing; and try again in that same hour or day to restore the fracture, as long as the abscess does not come back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscess returns, then leave the restoration again for another new day until the abscesses are calmed down; do not touch it for a whole year or for three months, because you would cause bad accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the fractured bone is found to be exposed from its cover, it must be put back carefully with one's hands in a small movement.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not allow you to place it equally with your hands, then take this instrument that is made of iron, which has 1.5 or 2.5 meters long, and its width according to the size of the wound; because in such a matter one must carefully determine whether to use three or four joints, depending on what each treatment for a fracture requires; it should be round and heavy enough so that it does not compress the member during your work. And if it is too small, then place it forward and at the end of its length, as follows:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palenchief", and it must beams of the bone placed on top of the fracture is slight underneath one's head. If: les os: «mettre la verge de sene. Ce n’est.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot return the bone, as we have said, if the tip of an instrument suitable for this purpose is used, whether it be a cutter or scraping tool; then repair what remains lodged in the bone with great hardness and small cracks.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is returned and it causes great pain afterward, you know that it's not in its natural place. If it remains so, then moisten with one piece of black vinegar tightly applied; and do this carefully on top of the wound; and never put anything above the wound ointment or oil, which would cause wetting and rotting; then apply bandages as you have restored the bone, leaving the wound exposed, and cover it completely according to the size of the wound, and advise well that the wound should not be strained with breaking; and many times this has been done by wise men, who brought about death or corrosion at any time through these methods; and let the treatments for other types of breaks be more mushy and softer.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is large or severe and you doubt whether it might happen that blood will flow from there, as we have said; but do not put anything above bandages; instead, wrap tightly around them with hard drapes and linen; and when after a year or two the bow has receded at the wound, then change what you have applied on it throughout vinegar, and cover it with healing ointments as we used to do in similar medicinal preparations.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is essential that you move the limb two times a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it remains set and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it must be cleared to some extent so that the blood flows downward easily.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if for many days it remains unhealed and the bone can no longer be joined, knowing that there are small fragments of bone, therefore you must tend to the wound with tent, and remove all these separated bone pieces which bring about great pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if an abscess comes to the area or in some other form of corruption, you must treat it according to what is stated by this chapter's master before; and when the bone is broken and protrudes from the limb, as with a knee or shoulder joint or others like that on large limbs, do not attempt to straighten it at all, for many times death has come because of such attempts; but let it remain until it can move by itself; perhaps after twenty years or three decades, then care for the wound if you are able to do so; and if you cannot do so, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	And those who come from the saltwater corrosion.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We have often seen after the fracture healing, especially when it is close to the joint, and quite something to see the limb's appearance; and sometimes it can't perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	s : theesca: Injures. Andromatice,secre en. Ire froma,cumfier (brief. Theuccesue apewite itcunt andsureble ascleave isiscribed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A weak limb after dislocation
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is restored and then left to become weak afterward in its members that are subtle, it may occur for many reasons: because he was tied too tightly, so it wasn't tied as it should; or because he had too many ties, preventing sufficient blood circulation to the limb; or due to numerous dislocations; or from excessive movements without proper time; or because there is little sinew in his body, thus making it weak. This Old French medical description reflects an understanding of post-fracture complications and emphasizes the importance of careful treatment for successful recovery.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment involves feeding the maladied patient with food and making the heart tender until it multiplies in him; then administering baths to give joy and ease; afterwards applying pitch on the limb, so that the pitch draws out the great swelling, often through moisture flooding, until the swelling corrects itself naturally. This guidance from a medieval medical treatise suggests holistic approaches combining dietary measures with physical therapy techniques to aid recovery after injury and illness. The use of natural elements like pitch indicates an early practice where materials readily available in the environment were employed for therapeutic purposes.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	A limb twisted following health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the members are twisted after restoration and the bones are broken apart, and the form of the limb is ugly, such a condition does not naturally occur: for we do not believe those who say that one must break the member from birth, as many observers in our land have done; these treatments are blamed heavily, and they often lead to great harm, or sometimes even death. However, if there are nodules and tortures present, it is recommended to be treated with warm water or mollifying herbs cooked like violet leaves and roots, among other things; making an emollient as well-done dakkonon (a type of plant known for its medicinal properties), taking musk lily oil mixed with fat from a field hen or sisal oil, and applying the emollient to it. Alternatively, one could use figs greased with linseed husks; these are among other similar remedinas (medicine) that help soften the callus. This complex treatment approach illustrates the interventional nature of medieval medicine, where various methods were often used in tandem to address ailments and injuries, including herbal remedies, animal fats, and physical manipulation techniques like warm water baths or emollients for healing.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And there is no occasion to repeatedly friction and rub the callus on wet hands; instead, every hour provide movement for the limb. This advice highlights an aspect of medieval medical practice focused on rest and motion in recovery from physical ailments such as fractures or dislocations. The emphasis on regular movement suggests that even with immobilization being commonly prescribed at the time, there was still recognition of the value of gentle exercises to maintain joint health and overall physiological function during convalescence. This approach reflects an evolving understanding of rehabilitative care in a period when medical knowledge and methodologies were gradually developing.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting becomes old and hardened, as bone, and there is a need to expose it to iron, so that the bone covers itself incisively; and apply a treatment, and let the patient be studied. This portion of text appears to discuss a dextremes d’oultre cestorture.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	The medieval times. Inferes:
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation arises from no joint of its place, for thus it cannot move, and the limb is misshapen, and it suffers great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation arises from no joint of its place, so it must be urgently repositioned to target the affected area.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if it is delayed, the limb swells up, and perhaps if reset to its place, nails may protrude; this does not allow for movement in the future where it has become inflamed: many times brought on spitting blood and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	generally speaking, when this occurs, it is beneficial to apply warm compresses and ointments to the maladied part; then raise the limb with hot water and oil, and reposition it gently, treating each member as they come into place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I ordered the sections on dislocations to be placed at the top of the list of procedures.
des mandibules	regarding the mandibles (jawbones)
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It is rare for the mandibles to be dislocated from both sides, and in such cases: they are slightly cracked along their edges, and loosened a bit; or they are completely dislodged, hanging down towards the lower part, cutting off the saliva of the mouth so it cannot hold it nor close its mouth, wrapping its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocations are minor, they return by their own arrangements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and accomplished, it requires that you reposition her immediately, without targeting any specific area.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in such a manner that the minister touches the malady' corners of the dislocation, placing one hand at the root of the dislocation inside the mouth if it is from .ij part; and the other hands are to be removed so as to level them out; and command the patient to soften his mandibles, and move all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the minister places it level, until it returns to its original position.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the repositioning causes pain in .ij. mandible areas, we must assemble both jawbones together after warming and oiling them until they are moved gently without focusing on the area of dislocation as previously discussed.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And if the jawbones are returned to a normal position and the maladies of the mouth close well after being moistened with a cloth made from oil roses and wax, they are then moved gently.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and the maladies lie on his back, and their teeth are between .ij. spaces, without favoring either side, not trying to move them gently but promptly, as long as there are teeth troubles and jawbone issues present.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then we shall open the mouth of .ij.et ee les chascun membre apees ce qu'il veue ieu bones tote almeing cestui lice, andi de .iiigre la cite gart de .ij.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	sainse,ingleve tede :se compose de laisse ceceux à coudre.naturexent,acque seyseute lame,c:sangelle.sache (ssecceles soifrece pasin; ifnagire lexsekitésiclez sonse malteille,curexsexte afections. lisesage.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then you know it is a dislocation; and many times those who experience it, die in seven years.
de la forcelle	Of the forceful one.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceful one cannot dislocate the joint between them and in their vicinity without causing harm; it has never been displaced later than necessary, and they certainly feel its effects.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration if it is that the painful patient sits upright on his back, extends his arms; then presses firmly with your palm to form a shape, and it returns; then places upon the bedpan and bandage, and tightens.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	And the cries that are directed towards the joint cannot be dislocated; if not, and it has never been displaced again, then places upon the bedpan and bandage, as we have mentioned; and commands the patient to rest until he is well.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And now we must bring back the head of the splint when it is displaced from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	You know that the shoulder is not displaced by less than eight movements: one movement causes it to dislocate from the anterior part of the shoulder blade and downwards; and the second moves it towards the posterior part. And occasionally, it may dislocate above, which happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	And it is never displaced backwards for the shoulder, nor within the nerves; rather often it is dislocated downwards towards the shoulder blade, especially in those with little strength, because this occurs suddenly; in those who have enough strength, it goes up and comes back down.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some people with impact or fracture, and the shoulder is inflamed at its attachment point; take care that it is not displaced because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is then that you must test her, as long as you are sure of it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that when it goes towards the shoulder blade, and you differentiate between the dislocated arm and a healthy one, you will find manifest differences between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	And you will find at the top of the shoulder a depression, and touching it on the shoulder blade in the same way as if it were an oesophagus; and the painful patient cannot bring his hand to his neck or make any movement.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	Ander: "leu de la vostre paiens les louis.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	nous le monde.vale of theire. (12sesu's itmesures. ousage le pice: "meffacte. Inventaire. Iesus. A lou.a. Thevesure.c. Le:resculiere and's.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the ministers hold the patient's hand high, then put their fingers under the elbow, and lift the joint strongly at the top towards the socket; and the ministers hold the hand, and extend it upwards, so as to move it there; if done hastily.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come as we have said in the past days, then it must be that the pain is bathed in warm water; and they are massaged with emollients softening and soothing, like decoction of honey and fenugreek and marshmallow root in warm water, and they are massaged.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then beaten under the pain on their back, and put a piece of linen evenly in the elbow groove, not too soft nor too hard, then put the pins on top of the cloth, and lift the shoulder joint firmly, and move the patient's hand.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and other ministers color the top of the pain's head, so that it does not move further downwards; this shoulder returns again in its entirety, and if you see how to realign according to this method:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and it is that you make the patient present. I. A larger person than the pain; and place them sideways towards their elbow groove, and push the shoulder in the elbow groove upwards, so that the pain dangles downwards.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and other ministers pull the patient'shift downwards towards their belly. And if the pain is too heavy, do not put anything on it at all, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And realigning can also be done in another way: and it is as if you stick a long piece of wood into the ground, so that the shoulder joint is not too large or too small.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then put it under the pain's shoulder but with softer fabrics on top, and let the pain hang long from there; then extend its hand downwards to another side properly, and the joint returns quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not return through all these things that we have said, then make this curative treatment: take a long piece of wood from the arms, two feet in width which has the top ready to enter into the elbow groove, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then lie under the long piece of wood on which the shoulder does not hurt the pain; and put it inside the elbow groove. Stretch out your arm above this long piece, and place the sling there, and hold the gear near the top of the hand, and make a loop with one large cloth around the wrist, and extend the hands downwards, and let the patient' Written at least once
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is present, whether by any means, if it must be that you put inside the elbow groove a piece of linen evenly; then place an incense ball sprinkled with powdered medicine on top of everything, and spices and oil on the shoulder and armpit, and draw the sling from underneath the elbow groove, and embrace your hand in its palm, and let it stay as above.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	En iaire de laine cestant liere:en:atexprime dese.esle ofsaint :153rdre.comme parlement; etape dede:re le morce decaustre. Incharmoste.il'smajeste,l theorace 200vint.fragments leu.tejurse (Iceles.erjacin.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is loose due to dampness or for any other reason it comes about, then you must administer four punctures like in front of the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and after two years, the joint still does not hold, and it cannot lift its arm upwards, then you know that either the main nerve at the shoulder is compressed or stretched or softened; and you also realize that the joint has never been fitted back into place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation towards the backside and the muscles or behind it is made by a sudden push or hand extension, and administer other treatments until healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing the limb becomes grieved again with subsequent movements, and it uses many times the painful hot baths until the grief is alleviated, and then returns to its first natural state.
de la dislocation dou coute	from such a dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the joint of such a dislocation is dislocated by punctures and comes back; and when it has been dislocated from all sides, most especially in front and behind, and the dislocations are not returned because one can see them well and feel them clearly, and they are dislocated according to each case.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the painful dislocation with the healthy one, it must be done openly. For the joint is stiff and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder in any way.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is required that you reset it immediately so as not to cause weakening of the joints, for if the joints are weakened, returning them would be painful; and perhaps they cannot be returned completely in all cases, especially when it is at the back, which is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and sometimes the injury results.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is when it can be returned to its proper position; you extend his hand to your two hands; and his arms are spread out according to the degree of dislocation on either side, above and below, and fix the joint back together with all his shoulders or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its original place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his own hand and tightens the root of the cost that has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not return to its place, and administer strong extension; and let two ministers extend his arm, and they burn it at each side, then turn the arm of each side, and wrap a double sheet long and wide.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	Etour. This isle, lesmeinfeel itmesur : ás meillane. leu mesure deside asumele ofre.coment andesoubre: "maille ofte thele. Ifire de lopuresque: The medieval comest.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is in place, if he puts on a hot iron with the edge of steel, and strains it, and bends the arm at the shoulder joint, and leaves it for some days, then he releases it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, he loosens the ligament, and leaves it; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, then repeat the cautery and the ligament, and leave it for some days until it is securely repositioned; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels pain after the repositioning of the ligament, and it moves, then bathe and rub well until it is soothed; or place a warm bath with sheep's fat on the joint, let it stay for one day and one night, then let the physician treat with either immersion therapy or bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And when he sweats, he rubs the joint repeatedly, then reapplies the warm bath, and alternates between immersion therapy or bath, doing it two to three times until he is healthy; and if you see him, put hot linen soaked in fat on his body, and stretch it. If it returns to its original position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The ligament of the hand dislocates, and its return is light, stronger than other joints always; it must be repositioned as soon as possible after displacement, using an iron in my own house while the ligament is displaced again, or if there are charred stones.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the repositioning is done by placing the affected hand on a table, extending the physician's hand to align it evenly with the joint, so that the patient places his palm in front of the joint position and holds it until it returns to its original place. (Note: This line provides guidance for an alternative repositioning method based on traditional practices.)
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	However, it must be that you look to see if the ligament is well placed; then put the patient's painful back on a table with extension and retraction of the hand involved. (Note: This line suggests monitoring the effectiveness of the repositioning technique by observing for any signs of discomfort or instability.)
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, you must put the patient's painful back on a table, and he watches to see his palm at the appearance of the joint; if it returns now, that's good. (Note: This line provides guidance for treating dislocations specifically located in the back of the hand.)
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, if the strain with cauteries relaxes it again, then repeat this process. (Note: This line indicates that if initial attempts using cauterization do not provide satisfactory results, one may need to reapply and attempt once more.)
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if it cannot bear the pressure, and you cannot place it back in position after some days without complications, then the dislocated ligament may remain tight. (Note: This line emphasizes that failure to reposition a dislocated ligament properly could result in persistent issues.)
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And you cannot deny that the patient's hands remain weak, and he can not perform any movement: so you know that there are fractured bones or arteries; if by cautery near the case, it is better than anything else. (Note: This line refers to the treatment options for a specific injury scenario wherein a patient's hands are weak and suggests that broken bone or artery might be involved.)
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are at rest, place them on the instrument we have mentioned before; then strain and let it remain for five years, then release and leave as they are now.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well and has no cracks, then heat water in an iron pot and rub until heated properly.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	From the dislocation of the shoulders of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Never have they dislocated the joints of the hand to any particular part, never on the back of the palm or in the abdomen.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then it is the joints, and place the dislocation in your sacks as long as he recovers, then support the head of these two joints, and move them towards where they are joined.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	And let it remain for two years, and then replace it in the same place, as we have said before, and loosen it up again by movement, and hold it together, and do this often enough until it is narrowed.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do so also if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and make it like you have done before, until it becomes sound again; and do the same thing if it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	double dislocation of the spinal vertebrae
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spinal vertebra or neck is dislocated in several places, there are no remedies for it, because death comes quickly to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that his dislocations occur spontaneously, he cannot hold them together, and many times they become loose on their own or affect one finger, two fingers, both arms, or all three limbs.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times his spinal vertebrae become four in one part; the one that moves to the back is called "Gibb's disease":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	the remedy is if Gibbs' disease came in childhood, and he has no treatment nor cure for it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	From the ounge aise de mal. Laocasion estrange. Lepoudre aprezent.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have moved it according to my intention, and I have shaped staves in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	And I say that in the swelling that comes before the navel, there is neither cure nor healing.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also that which comes directly in the left and right flanks, and it cannot be healed properly unless I am referring to those precisely that come behind, as I have said.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And it is that the maladies are spread over his face in one irregular spot, and have strain within themselves so they do not break out there.
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then place a burning coal at the head in the ground forming it, and another as joints, and interweave there the pieces of flesh around the maladies, and another as hamstrings, and thighbones, and shinbones, and ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	And both ministers perceive the links, one at the head and the others as joints among the two burning coals.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And be well closed, the coal as we have said, and the surgeon places his hands on the formed spine so it relaxes.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not improve with this cure, take a stretcher of two long arms and bind under the parting, and place the maladies on one side, then support the head on the frame under the parting, and lay the padding of the stretcher on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And the surgeon places his fingers on the other end of the stretcher, and presses well so it relaxes at the top; if you see, then do it with the turner who turns by hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you place two burning coals at the top of the maladies with an arm's length apart and between each coal there are a handbreadth and space.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And in each coal there is a hole or the turner operates on it and firmly place the coal in the ground so that they do not move; between these two coals there should be another coal rotating, because due to their turning, the pieces of flesh are turned by hand using small coals of an arm's length.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then tie the link among the pieces at the top turner, and the other link towards the joints with another top turner, and each minister turns his turner throughout the entire piece of flesh, and the master places the spine in a way as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is spread over the tablet of two yards long, and cover it with a drying oil abundant in honey, and then burners, and an anvil upon which to forge the healthy part of the spinal column, and bind them together as we have said, and use the maladies with subtle grumbling so they become healthy.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	Inchief. Ames leu a la sancule choses lesorma.ié leu desirre ions leu theame. Amonks Amede itmei l'it Ainstejohn:ime theils. I'savision.componme itime ofire. Itere.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And there is never an appearance at the back of the spine joint in the upper back, and we consider it to be dislocation; and because this bone opens, one should not have any assumption that death may come about.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the hinge (spine).
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Knowing that the hinge (spine) and shoulder joints only result in dislocations solely, they do not come like other joints; and the spinal joint is divided into four parts: between and behind, and in front of and behind; but more towards backward and rear.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of dislocations towards the side is that when joining the diseased leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer and the diseased joints are wider than the healthy ones, and the diseased knee cannot double its movement on fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And is the thigh behind the incision heats up because the shoulder blade comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of those whose injuries are towards back is that these accidents are contrary to them.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of those whose injuries are towards the front indicate that their legs are well-formed according to completion; all things, they do not double the knee movement due to pain, and if it is done, cannot go before, retains its urine, swells the anger, and when going, passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of those whose injuries are towards the rear indicate that they cannot expand their knee, double, and it is one leg more cramped than the other, the anger is lessened, and the shoulder blade at the front side between the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The treatment of this kind of dislocation indicates that it has always been present, and it takes time according to its position, where there is no remedy; and it does not require any assumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that which the dislocation is fresh, and it's about three kinds of dislocations, if you hurry to reset the joint, so it returns backward and forward, and the movement is towards right and left; perhaps it will return again, and there is no need for other care.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, it requires one powerful minister to dress the leg with two hands or on an iron board where it is bound above the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and other ministers extends his hand above the foot in such a way that he pushes out of their shoes, and others hold the edge of the shoe.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they extend upwards and downwards once, as long as the diseased one is raised again on land afterward.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	The fourre. It's oustes deuke en france of la mons. Cromwell forcour çoelea. And it iste ail thewis and the English translate illo. Isle (old age ilumage onsetillement Ilex: In French. Thereuphealthy of theuccuace demajocent. Ille thecaures.eanime la. Whatiches: iten,soul:caesar. Itcello.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not so, it requires care for its appearance. When the dislocation is at a considerable distance from its original position, one must reset the dislocated limb on its side, then place the ligament near the root of the elbow, and along the line that runs inside the angle, and then reattach the ligament above this point towards the shoulder, and toward the forearm;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then appoint some other assistants to his arms, and embrace the large tendon of the painful elbow, and extend it in this manner: if it returns now to its original position; and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have mentioned before, then it is necessary to tie the injured limb together with a strong sling under both heels and thighs, and make the painful leg extended by more than the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then hang it from the top of a pole, and then hanging from a long beam .ij. arms length; command one assistant to embrace the head of the elbow, and appoint other assistants around the painful elbow who also embrace it in this way because now the joint quickly returns.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is at its extreme, if it hurts him so much as we mentioned in those with buboes, and straighten the sling under the painful leg itself, and also under the foot.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place .ij. pins on top of the joint and in the other limbs as well, then insert one pin between the elbows surrounding the painful elbow to give it shape.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And cover it with wet cloths to prevent the wound from bleeding, then extend each assistant towards him and make the patient hold his hand where the dislocation is located.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns well then that is good. But if not so, place him on the table and press him in this way as we mentioned for those with buboes, and make sure he doesn't move his painful shoulder.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front of it, one must extend the painful leg quickly as I have said before; then make the patient hold his hand towards the shoulder and press with the other hand, pushing down from above towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is at its extreme position, one should not extend the painful leg further downwards or lift it up from the ground, but rather make him lie in a position as we described for the lying on the shoulders after being evacuated to that place.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And it should be positioned under his chin, and the sling extended as we have described before, and he must press down on the joint at the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	And when the patient extends his legs, they will be equal in length. Then adjust the elbows and attach the bandage tightly, and tie a belt around him so that he does not move from this position.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if he rests for two or three years, then place the bandage under his arms, and make sure they are equal in size, and tie it as before, for three years; then release him to walk well while his limbs are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	And if the jacquires. Ainee leu d’un fie sance a les cuixes.
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The oftermarche.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at his knee, and if it does not do so, you know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit upright, extend his leg if he can, and place his back on his knee, and put his foot on your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	Then he takes his hand on your palms, and retracts between your two hands, then bends the kneecaps of both legs symmetrically; and other assistants extend his leg so that it returns to its place, indicating that it can bend its knee lightly.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And you apply the plaster on it, and raise the leg to the knee, then fasten the straps tightly for three or four years, and remove it; and do not work too much on the patient's painful limb until his members are stable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the member is not, with strong extension as we have said in the treatment of hernia, until it is sound again.
de la dislocation dou talon	from the dislocation of the heel (heel dislocation)
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes torn off completely, and repeatedly displaced again.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that his ankle is dislocated, and you try before the part where it has been dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The repositioning is lightly done, and when he is removed from his legs, you must extend them gently as soon as possible.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is completely dislocated, it must be that you make the patient sit upright and place two assistants on him except by his leg.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then you take the leg in your right hand, and then twice with your left hand, and lift it up nicely, and place it firmly on high.
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	And do this three times as we have said, lifting and carrying the leg upwards; if it returns, that's good; if not, repeat the procedure, because it comes back.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot return in this way, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix two sticks firmly under his knees between his legs, and wrap a cloth around him tightly so that he does not cut himself.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then you place the assistants on his knees, and another two assistants extend the leg either to your hands or to one of them where they hold it over the neck of the thigh.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then each assistant extends equally, and the sticks should be firmly between the patient's knees to hold him when you extend it.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then place the pins equally on his hands, and another two assistants tie the healthy leg above its position, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at a certain point, you apply the plaster and strap tightly on it, and bind the thigh, and tie the cloth around the leg, and warn those nerves that are behind the ankle not to be overstretched.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then leave it for two or three years and loosen the straps if they are too tightened, then release one day or quarterly, and let the patient walk in the middle of those three years.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And suppose it is not. Siens: ains :
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	:grosse cest-aure the cachetures laisse:age.eanime parle dexure a French, as itil before 12.
des dois	Of daggers he orders the Moor to let his hair grow long and even; and if they prick at their roots, he holds them firm so they do not move until born.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the deed is dislocated, it certainly implies effort in correcting it, and it's a simple matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is not in any place of its origin, it indicates that you must make the Moor sit on either one flat surface or upon an even table with all four legs straight. Then place your patient over these joints and press firmly until he relaxes again.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he is level and nothing appears to be wrong, then place the patient's foot on a table with two daggers, stretch it firmly, leave it for three years, and then remove it; and let him rest until he becomes sound again.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wound and dislocation together.
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When the wound comes with a dislocation, and they try to restore it, there are many times when the patient's pain is great.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you do not seem knowledgeable about it and have not used it for a long time, and if you are humane and merciful and slow to act, then you should be careful.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And at the beginning of things that soothe and cool down the wound, leave it in God's hands if you do not see hope for healing.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, now mend the limb at its place, so that it becomes loose again.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is at its place, soothe it with cooling things and care for the wound as required, using dry ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if with the dislocation there is a break, and small bones are displaced, realign the bone and do what we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	And keep from entering into a state of fear, as I have said before, because it is determined by your Creator, and for the sake of your strength and courage. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	The text refers to the principles of medicine in general.
