O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the tail of the science of medicine, and its completion with explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I completed this book with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, meaning "chirurgy".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and it has existed throughout all time; if it is perished, then the science also withers away, and there are no delays to be made for these burnings that ancient books have described, which were wrought by hand.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from that arises the mistake and pride, leading to closed understanding and the distance of science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I have revived this treatise entirely according to the path of exposition and declaration, abbreviation; and together with the forms of cautery instruments and other tools from the work, accompanied by the alignment of its declaration and preparation as is proper for such a matter.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of the hands are found in our time, it has elongated the art of medicine.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is incumbent upon those who meddle with the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so long as they know correctly about bones and their forms and joints and separations from flesh, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of limbs, and movement and resting states, and their source of origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, Hippocrates said that not with him is much, and with the work it remains little; and particularly in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that those who are not acquainted with these things, they will err and harm people; therefore I have written about many times those who interfrom others engaged in this science and abandon it and sense.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision on an abscess or the lumbus of a woman, and cutting into the arteries; for so much blood comes out that the woman dies between her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I see another man who betrays a wound of a peasant with a large wound; he took away a piece of the bladder with him and died in three years' time.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him for betraying the sick man and saw his ill condition and the size of the wound, and knew well whether he would die from it.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I see another man who was in treatment of the duke of our land, who had his leg broken and with the breakage he suffered an injury; and due to ignorance, the physician pressed the fracture onto the wound with great force, did not allow any salve on the wound at all, and commanded him not to remove it either; and so it lasted until his leg was completely emptied of blood, and he came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him and hurriedly came to unbreak his leg; when I broke it, he immediately felt no pain at all.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every path of his correction was already confirmed or a member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not stop until all members were lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I see another man who collapsed a richly decorated abscess and then inflamed due to the malice of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a scab, when it is full of black bile, it does not require that we touch it with iron unless it has been torn away so that we can completely remove what has corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, I warn you that work done by hands is divided into three parts: it means, whether there has been danger in multiple positions; and I will show in each of these sections what dangers are present in the book.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For that is why you must beware so that no unwise physician can speak ill of your cases.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you take up your arms and engage in your maladies quickly and firmly, and use the best way so that by God' Cooks you come to salvation and are blessed; and leave diseases susceptible of great suffering; and arm yourself so that no one doubts you and you can come from this world to another of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	The French king advised in no uncertain terms that "You should not treat bad illnesses and be called foolish doctors."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this text into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire and flame cautions and medical cauteries and procedures from the chief down to the feet; and the forms of incision, and operations with a cautery, and everything necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and bladders and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and in that chapter are ordered, and the forms of blearies.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	:mein :loresme encelobis: ounge tote mea :anctre developpaises. Andre it'smeantainces quinjourneaux :mei-dementures aureelves. Itou, etextemajustice.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	And so as we remember from the old times, it is required that I tell you of the quality and harm of such a dislocation for each individual condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality and harm of such dislocations are the longest words and the most subtle science and secret remedies; and from this topic, they spoke to others and agreed on it, but few were satisfied with their words because I fear the consequences.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps everywhere in any condition, for example, when there is hot matter and dry matter, such as the following two conditions: it is called a warm-matter condition, and it is called a dry-matter condition.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the case of warm and dry combined matter, no one came up with an opinion, and they said that cautery is great help; while others said the opposite, claiming that cautery is only useful for a disease caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot and should not be considered a remedy for heat-related diseases caused by heat or dryness; and those who said otherwise claimed that cautery provides great help in treating warm and dry illnesses brought on by the body's own factors.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the matter of the patient with their moisture in relation to warm-matter conditions, you increase the pain.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in all ways, we avoid it unless those who have tried it and know the chapter on cauteries, and the variety of warm-matter conditions in patients, as well as the causes and dispositions of their diseases, and remedies and spaces between the tenth hour; for other cold-dry complexions, we do not fear.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the wise ones gathered together and agreed on cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And you must know that in the combination of fire, it is a secret of treatments, and more beneficial than hot medicinal cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple and does not come from the member that is inflamed; it does not harm other members much at all.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	The hot medicinal cauteries originate from another part of the body and bring about serious remediation in the member affected, which may ultimately harm the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire for its height and beneficial properties does not cause harm unless there is an excess of it.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	I have found this through experiment and from the long-standing service and study that I put in the art, and for this reason, I apologize for the length of my wording, but it is only to reveal the secret which was hidden by fire, and the quality of the olden work.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And you know, son, that they agree on in what time should be done the cauteries, and they advise others as well.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is applicable in all times, because the harm caused by using aids to cauterization lies deep within the member; and particularly when cauteries are necessary for painful and urgent conditions that cannot wait any longer for more serious damage to occur.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And you never think, my dear son, how the wise man does; because with cauterization healing a sound disease has no return; and they say so: but it is not as the doctors claim, for cautery is not just medicine that alters complexion, and dries the humors which are the cause of pain, and its worth lies in quickly restoring value to health and virtue through its work.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is said that the disease changes according to the constitution of the sick person and its appearance and virtue; and in it are accumulated superfluous elements through acquisitions of meats and other things if not administered by cautery when there are few excesses and moisture, as with cauteries for pain or similar signs, and little pain does not return again. But this is rare.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many do not understand for what reasons they call the backbones of medicine "cauterization," and it is seen; but they believe that cautery has no value after traditional medicine, although their understanding is mistaken, and cauterization is called the backbone of medicine because when we administer our treatments on any disease and these do not work, then we use cautery, and it proves its worth.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	And it appears well enough that cauterization is indeed part of the backbone of medicine, not according to the beliefs of common people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that the caustic instruments of gold are more effective than those made of iron and did not mention their value by virtue of its gold or the height of its substance; they said that the flesh of cautery does not fall into ruin, but this is not true because I have tried it myself, and found in some cases that it works. Gold instruments are worth more than those made of iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And of course when you heat the gold instrument, you do not know how it becomes cold by its color, and if heated too much; they place it in the fire, and so there is enough impediment for that.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use our cautery as if it has made our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	gearce. ici.
dou cautere olivaire	Of fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	Fire cauteries are due to moisture and cold applied on the head, and it has been caused by various diseases such as "soda" (likely referring to dropsy or edema), and many humors descending upon the chief body parts including ears, and from numerous dreams and pain of density and throat, and mainly all illnesses that come from cold similarly as paralysis and tetanus and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that it purges the maladies by using medicine that dissolves the chief (the main body part affected) to a degree, usually either one or two nuisances or three, depending on how the patient's condition and habits can endure; and then it makes another attempt at the chief.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then it falls into your hands and you place your hands on the body's flesh; afterwards, you put the root of your palm upon the patient's root between their two eyes; and if there comes time for my assistance, when they bleed from within (indicating internal bleeding), you heat up this cautery called "olivare," as per its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And you write on the limb with ink, and slowly pull out your hand piece by piece until it breaks apart; then lightly lift your hand, and reward the limb if you see the bone as I have said; but if you do not see it, continue applying the cautery until you can see the bone as I told you; afterwards take a small amount of thread, and wrap it in soft cotton inside, and place it on the limb, and let it rest for three years; after that, remove the cotton and cover it with burlap; and leave it until the fracture is healed. Afterward, treat the puncture wound which they call "tetrapharmacy," so long as it remains sound.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if they said by the ancients that as more time passes and the wound is cleaned, it helps more with purging; thus, for this reason it assists in cleansing.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And ofce :1604 li ous ; seignures. Etarre desinon paraphrase laissons levant au.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And it is said that the other cautery should be made loose thereupon, and pressed so hard that the bone also becomes as wide as a little ring which women put in their hollows for the reason that fluids come out of it; and then one must let the wound heal slowly over time; after that, one should cure and know well.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two kinds of cauteries do not seem very good in every way; fires that cause no fear to any man; it seems to me that I should leave them; for the shoulder is weakened by continuous application of solutions, as we have observed other limbs; and since the patient's malady is naturally feeble, and the first use of cautery is more salve and mild for me, and with this practice I make my work in such a way that salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the agonizing pain at the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in every way the pain comes chronic and lasts long, then it should use the patient's malady herbs and pills called "cochies," and cleaning of chief, oils, and plasters; and if one does the cautery that we have mentioned before, and it is not worthwhile.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be wary that the patient's shoulder is of strong nature and should not be too cold; however, cauterize it on the mentioned cautery a little bit as we have discussed above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After making cautery in each of the two horns above the bone as we have said before, and make one or two sticks called "vassels"; and it is that you put ventouses on them; and keep your hand away so that you do not touch the bone with this treatment; for the malady feels much greater pain in this cautery than others, which I will discuss further; and it must be that those who make cauteries in the horns are more subtle than those who cauterize most of the chief'inaspect:
dou cautere dou chief	the two kinds of cauteries
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the chief comes with simple pain and extends to the oil, and the shoulder is cleansed by universal remedies, and it has been done the other cures which I have mentioned concerning the divisions of diseases, and all this does not profit: however, do make cauterizations according to these two manners of medicine and feast.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The fire cautery in medicine requires you to prepare a dozen doses of warmth, and peel off the skin and scrape it. Then make an incision where the pain holds tightly so that you can restore the dose of warmth under the skin; and when it is restored, hold it well and let it remain as such for twenty hours. Then release it and treat the wound with a fire treatment, leaving the injury until two or three years pass. Then place a deep pit in clay so that the pus may come out of it.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the fire treatment as long as he is sounding; and if you find any of these burning medications that I have written about or treated with various burn treatments.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the iron cautery as follows: its shape is like this...
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And they call it "closed" because the head is shaped like a clover or has about one curl of curvature, and in appearance is very small; and he applies it to the painful area, holding your hand therein and rearranging it slightly, so that the artery's pressure becomes relaxed enough for blood to flow again.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After applying cotton to the wound, and placing it on the painful area for two years; then he puts moistened cotton in burlap, and treats this ulcer with fire therapy until it is sound; if you want to cauterize this migraine with a cautery called "cultellar," at all points of its tip, and be careful not to cover the artery within this migraine that isn't ancient.
de emigraine	of an ulcer
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When curing ulcers as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and it does not profit one; therefore, you must heat the "cultellar" (cauterization tool) until it is white; then touch the remaining piece with a line half an arm's length away, and extend your hand once, ensuring that you do not hit the artery and let the bone remain unharmed, and ensure that the joint does not have involuntary movements or spasms of the jaw muscle; and advise to remove blood from the artery as it is cauterized, or withdrawal. And I will tell you how the sinew remains in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not relieve the disease, and the patient suffers greatly, then also in the middle of the head cauterize it as we have said before, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, apply the cautery that we or the chapter on artery extraction mentioned, with a pair of knives (each one having two); and these cauteries are better than this one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of pain in the ears from a colder part
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear comes from cold, and there are remedies and other treatments we have mentioned in this division, and the pain does not stop, but instead sharpen this cautery which is called "pincers," for thus it has its form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After piercing the malady in the ear, or inside both ears where the pain holds on both sides, and then move slightly away from the root of the ear so that you have marked its base; and with x pincers for each ear afterwards cure the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated with a cautery is not painful except for those that move by mucus, just as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make cauteries like those coming from sucking and discharge of sputum.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this kind of torture that moves by mucus and discharge from the head and gargling, and it does not worth doing so then must you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little distance forward in the jaw joint; and place the cautery on the part that opens up smoothly, and apply the cautery to the top of the ear above a bit from the helix (the outer ridge), and another further along similar as you would for a wound; let the cautery remain in place until the movement decreases significantly, and this is the form of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And there is the cuticular cautery that we have described before, but it is somewhat more subtle and requires that the knife be slightly larger; after curing the area as I have previously stated, so long as it heals.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexia is old and you treat it as we have described, and it does not benefit, and the painful diseases, and he's feverei: two knives ofchief out of fievre cauterie demeinne que nous avoutre maladie.
de litargie	apele on: ouldrevoir :rime seneighneigure, et siembre it'soldice enmeasures lemonade. Thejneme, soffi theifrom mevepremerdextent, anstomes fromage ofse decade indie androfier :faire: frommeasure.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient long years and medicines that dull the brain; afterward, he treats the head of the sick person completely, and puts a mustard plaster on his occiput (the back part of the skull), which is written or mentioned in treatises on emplastrum (a type of medical plaster); and this is the way of cautery: as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is sound at that time, good; and if not, then he makes .iij. (two) emplastrum compressions on the top of the head descending towards the neck, with an interval of one between each compression, and applies about .i. (one) large piece; and treats it as for other cases, and if you see that the patient is suffering, then he makes .i. (one) emplastrum at the same time; and if skillful, .ij. (two) others on the two corners, and treats it until it becomes sound, and those compressions are called "olivare," as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldest part of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is required that the head of the sick person be treated with long years and everything we have said before; then he treats the head of the sick person first, and makes compressions on the top of the head and at each corner, and one behind and two on the spine near the neck; if you have more skill in this matter, and the patient's body is moist and the sickness great suffering, and the illness is very serious, then he makes three compressions on the spine of the back; and allows him to rest as long as his strength returns, and move your hand gently; after that treats until it becomes sound, and those compressions are called "olivare," which we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	This word 'de l’epilempsie' is not a part of the original text provided from medieval medical treatise but it appears to be an instruction for translation related to epilepsy treatment, which may have been discussed in similar contexts. In the context of medieval medicine and based on common practices at the time, one might infer that if such a condition was addressed, it would involve various methods including bloodletting or herbal remedies as they lacked an understanding of neurological diseases compared to modern standards. However, without direct reference in the given text, this is speculative and not a translation from the provided lines.
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should not use strong cautery on those who are phlegmatic; and it is required to first cleanse the brain of years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division where the malady is large and causing great suffering with painful medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot suffer, he makes gargling and chewing to cleanse the brain; after that treats the top of the head with compressions as we have said before, and a compression on the vassal' Written in Old French, around 12th-century medical texts.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is very young, then he makes a subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	Due to melancholy are the superfluous substances or corrupted moisture and thick mucus, and therefore our previously mentioned caustic made with sharp knives for someone who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the superfluous substances decline into melancholy, and it is the moistened part of the malady's head, then he drinks something so that his brain is cleansed accordingly with what appears before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After removing the head of the malady; after making a fine linen cloth like a circle and placing it around the head; and if the maladies are twisted and well held from all sides; then presenting the linen, and covered with old goat's wool, and heating it by fire immediately so that he can bear the burden on his back; after removing the circle in sections near the head, and letting it cool down; and making this treatment once a week with another beneficial governance, so long as the patient is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or if you see that the patient is treated with more points when performing cauterization. This method of cauterization greatly relieves the brain; and then, placing it on cotton moistened with fat and lined with sheepskin.
de l’awe des eulz	from the hands
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the hands first come out by the signs that I have mentioned in this division, then it begins and he starts to drink something cleansing for the head of the malady, and keeps it from all moisture, and makes him sweat or bathe several times without food.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands to repeat his chief's head and makes him a cauterization therein, and does two cauteries in the two temples where the hands are joined together or in one; and after every cauterization along all the veins and arteries that run underneath the temple, and lets the cautery extend long according to its breadth of the temple; and then sends it outward.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision of the cavity, how you should press it; and never have made a cautery or hit inside these two bones.
dou cors des larmes	Translation of the given Old French phrase "dou cors des larmes" line by line into contemporary English would simply result in:
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears from these eyes are ancient and customary and are near the veins, which are in the appearance of this chief above; and we see that it is excessive cold fluid humors, accordingly with the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of this section: one cautery draws the head, and two cauteries on each temple, and two more cauteries between these bones if there's need for more, then he should lance above the scapulae with all a little cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Two corners of tears from these eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you apply medicine as we have mentioned in the division and it does not benefit at all, indeed after the head, and makes the overbearing of one large arrow on each bone; afterwards he draws one large arrow across the veins called "clavicle," which is two arrows under the shoulder blades, a little bit beneath them from the artery you must warn against.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And that is the shape called "clavicle":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, indeed the cauterization with this cautery which is called "oliver" has its form like so:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see to make two cauterizations on the shoulders as well as the shoulder blades are; and do not let go of the hand until only three-fourths of the paper is burned, in the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	Two hairs that touch the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No occasion ever occurs that the hairs of the oils are converted to parched lands, and they grip the oil, and it is made with two cauterizations according to two methods: whether by fire or by hot medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Or cautery of fire commands the hairs to let them grow long and straight as they are until they become adults; and if they grip their roots, it keeps its teeth so that they do not move while growing.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	:en'ses. Enitgall ittevenge tithoe la colures desires encomposition. The thees.lyse anderitgive en françaiscitation. Whichil fromenture.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cautery on your face that you have done only a few times and very little, let the wounds heal in that spot; and the sign of health from the old days is that you see the retracted paper, and the hairs raised to the length of one's foot; then lightly touch it, and leave it for two years, then put moistened cotton wrapped in cloth on it until it is fully healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterward the hairs grow back, and the paper becomes loose again in this manner as you have done before; and when the hairs are gone, cauterize until the paper is lifted back to its natural position, and does not prick the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The hot cautery in medicine you must order the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a piece of parchment shaped like the leaf of myrtle; take two ounces each of soap flakes and boiling water, grind them well together; apply it quickly so it doesn't cool down, and spread it on the paper where you have placed the hairs; and if the illness is confined to one oil only, then treat it accordingly in that amount as well; and put cotton moistened with warm water under the oil; and let the malady be within your power and present this twofold showing of medicine to the patient, and press a little bit every time the patient feels discomfort from the treatment, just like one does with fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	And when you have done that for a long time, the medicine has taken effect on your duty.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the irritation is not present, raise the oil again; reward yourself if you see the paper raised as it was by constraint of fire or incision; and if so, that is well done. If this is not the case, then still apply medicine on the oil or the medicine has not been applied yet, until your operations are evened out and the hairs are at the toe length; then wrap moistened cotton in cloth over it while the wound heals, after taking care of the "dafenis" (a type of ointment) and other treatments as long as the wound is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you know that you must take great care in performing your work so that the medicine does not stick to the hairs. If the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs prick in the oil, then repeat the treatment on the spot where it is softened by the paper properly as before; then continue treating until healed; and this is the form of myrtle leaf:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that men's hair varies greatly in length and thickness, and according to this you are bound not to repeat the same method with everyone. And do not apply it directly to those who have been studied in this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment by caustic therapy (cauterization)
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you cure such diseases as we have described, and your cures do not benefit from it; yet it is necessary that you perform the caution in this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	:screameine:120re (it:give saxue alexin itesse.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula it is overturned, and I extract the pus, and dry it; if it is closed, then do the operation and pull out the bone; after that place a hot cautery firmly on it, and hold your hand at the part near the edge of the wound below the oil, so that your hands do not make mistakes; and put the cautery in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come at the beginning of the cautery to the bone, it would be good. But if not, if you need to repeat the cautery again, and as long as you have experience, let it for three years; after that I put cotton moistened in tallow there, and the treatment of the ointment desiccative until he is sound, and for forty-two years pass so that he is sound, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone becomes exposed; and according to what comes from your master.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a way to cauterize a fistula that none of the ancient ones mentioned. When dealing with a fistula, you cut its opening; afterward, place in the narrow slit about one inch underneocarbon steel (a type of alloy):
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And you make the quantity of about one ounce; and hold your hand tightly on it so that the molten lead does not move until it reaches its oil; then it is necessary to put cotton moistened in beeswax or tallow underneath, where the molten lead forms the floor of the fistula, and this leads to a well-healed healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is sounded by our previous cautery method, that's good. But if not, then it is necessary to administer an injection into the joint below the neck of the abscess according to what needs to be done in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	and cracked lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Sometimes they have cracked lips that are called "poils," and particularly in the mouths of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you cure these cracked lips as we have described in sections, the cure does not benefit, but rather a small caustic needle according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And you immediately apply that medicine to those cracks so long as they are still open; after the cure, treat the wound with healing ointment until it is sound.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the abscess in the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	ses theu. (12-3630reiser aitse cestrop.deur leslui :victims0soldier. This. 40v. The10:100n3rdose, and with17raxorfele.
dou movement des dens	Of fire cautery commands the Malade let the hairs grow long and smooth; if they prick at their root, he binds them tightly so they do not move until they are born.
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, you treat it with medicine, but that does not work, so put the chief of maladies in your health; after removing the cautery which forms there afterwards, in such a manner as to place an anchor on the tooth; and apply heat quickly inside the cautery, holding your hand tightly until the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; then remove your hand and repeat the cautery according to your desire; after filling his mouth with dirty water, and leave it for a few hours until foul odors emerge.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And such teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums restricted, and the corrupted moisture checked.
de la dolor des dens	about the pain in the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain in teeth comes from cold, or it's due to cold or heat, and medical treatments are not worthwhile; therefore, there is a need for cautery according to certain methods: and cautery with wax and cautery with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with wax is such that you need wax of various types; the end in a spoon made of iron or slag; after applying cotton and covering it on top of the tip of a tent, and molding moistened wax into shape, and place it quickly under the painful tooth tightly holding your hand until it cools down; then do this frequently so that its virtue is worn out at the root of the tooth, and if you see molten wax lathered with cotton in the wax mold, and put it on the neighboring tooth, and place a heated iron there as much as your heat reaches the top of the opposite tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The complete fire caustic consists of such that you will need a piece of iron or brass, and it should be large so that the hairs do not flex at the mouth of the patient; after heating the caustic, from then on this will come out afterwards, and place it on the teeth and hold your hand there until the caustics are cooled down; do this often, because the pain will be in my own or the following day. And it must that the patient fills his mouth with good fat quickly in the hurry of this caustic: and this is the form of the caustic.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And do a caustic on the head that you wish, and according to what you can; and this is the form of the caustic.
des scrophules	Sores (Scorbut)
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrophulae are of mucus and cold moisture, and not responding to digestion by medicines, then heat the caustic on the head that comes after it warms up; and cover it with holes for the fumes to escape from the other side; and place the caustic hot under the abscess once, or twice as much, so long as it moves at the base of the abscess, and if the abscess is small, then apply the caustic according to its quantity, and leave it there for three years; and wrap it with moistened cotton in wool until the pus oozes out; after this treatment cleanse the skin and bandage so long as it heals.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moistures overcome the channels of blood flow, especially in cases with cold complexion, it must first be voided by curative medicines; afterward apply a caustic to the root of the throat and keep that you do not touch your neck anymore but just slightly heat; afterwards apply another caustic at the joint between the collarbone and the head of the spine, which we have in front as "clavicle" form; and cure the skin so long as it has been said before, until it heals.
de la toust	From the thrust (a violent forward pushing action)
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	All diseases of the blood are cold moisture, and these patients do not have fever or chill, and it is an ancient disease that you apply two caustics to the vein in its usual place; another caustic must be applied between the two breasts; and this "clavicle" form as described previously.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, apply caustic by pressing the entire thing which is called "punctures" of this form in front in ear disease; and these punctures should be about thirty or more, or slightly less than that, after treating the skin as previously stated, and applying the caustic for three times according to this shape.
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because the caustic is lighter in that way, since you apply it at about three points on the skin'occausal pain and injury:
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After thoroughly examining the patient's back and chest; after applying pressure in the lymph nodes located within the intercostal spaces with your left hand; and if the ligature is displaced inside, cauterize with a pair of forceps shaped like .ij. knots that fit into this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And cauterize the wound as much as it penetrates into the chest, and bring forth the fragments together with four knives; and for this reason cauterization is performed with a pair of forceps that have three hooks, because thus the shape of cauterization consists of these three hooks, and according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the instrument that has three hooks:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And never is it attached on this .i. nerve so that it can have .viii. forceps.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After putting the patient on the cautery board with a rope; after allowing the patient to rest, and make sure not to move their limbs too much during this time so that they can be well supported.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, this happens rarely; however, when it does, a cautery on the thick cautery hook or many forceps clamping occurs - because the ligament is redirected, and the muscle moisture is removed from the dislocation, making it less painful.
dou cautere de pleuresin	two pieces of lungs
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The old doctors said that the lungs must be cauterized with roots of hellebore (Helleborus niger), and in this manner: take one root long as you can find, dry it or soak it as well; and a few small hooks at the back of his neck between the throat and the collarbone, and some hooks below the fifth ribcage, and a pair of hooks behind them; and another hook in the stomach, and another between two other knee joints, and never squeeze your hand tightly as one would breathe.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	ienergic: theor,sesure a. Andalus.i.tractéan. I:cumbers tol's. iver ofer resuel fromage enecountaire.
de la mice	of moisture
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When curing the disease of dampness for which we have mentioned in our discussions on treatments, and it does not help at all, so they apply 3 kinds of fire cauterization techniques that are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	From which method do you perform 2 or 3 cauterizations, depending on the length of the hairs and the shape of the instruments we have discussed before, and don't bring your hand close to all the fire, but usually somewhere on their back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another method of cauterization is when you heat the instrument with 2 or 3 notches, as we have demonstrated in the dislocation of a shoulder; and lift the place where there is dampness, whether it comes from the left side of the patient or from the right, and raise your hand according to the location of the dampness, according to its length, and use the cauterization tool accordingly to the width of the affected area.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After you heat the notches so that they are clearly visible on the other side, and then drive blisters with the cauterization tool, and in this way you have three; after healing when it gets pus by long abscesses, as mentioned in the preceding treatments.
de ydropisie	from edema (or dampness, as in medical terminology)
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Fire cauterization is not effective for edema but only when the technique called "asclythes" is applied; when you treat according to the methods we have mentioned in our divisions of treatment, and your treatment does not help at all, so it requires that you perform three cauterizations on the swelling, and one under the stomach, and one over the liver, and two beneath the dampness, and three behind the spine near the vertebrae, and one in the place where there is pain; and make sure the instruments are close to that part of the vertebra.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cauterization tool exposed to allow pus to drain from long abscesses, and do not stop the treatment of the patient after the cauterization; healing would occur, and all three applications (the three cauterizations) with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cauterization instrument for treating the bellyache that we have mentioned before; and let it be on his back so far as he is nowhere.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the joints are swollen in that which is dropsical (indicating edema or fluid accumulation), and they glow with a yellow hue, it requires you to perform cauterization on the back of the hand between the little finger and ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery as if turning. And do not enter too deeply into the wound, otherwise there would be deeper burns in the yellow coloration, and let the cauterizing proceed according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards perform two cauterizations in each leg at the tip of the clavicle; and let one of them be along the side of the groin forward and the other behind, within the thigh, and leave the cauterizations to work over time so that they cleanse the fluid out; after treating the others as we have mentioned.
de la menoison	In the medicine
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution for the stomach comes from cold and moisture, to such an extent that its retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are affected, and it cannot be treated by any methods of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly with great weakness, if he says so much before or cauterize the stomach according to what he has said here or cauterize the stomach with a cautery, let four cauteries circulate beneath it with very subtle movements along one cautery of the clavicle and four others under each such cautery.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisturizers and the suffering patient, then make one cautery on the hip joint, and one each at every joint, and four little cauteries inside the stomach near the large one, for the cure is beneficial as long as it has good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the treatment for edemas
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When the edemas are ancient and moitie demein togeunche escrevantes les maundre: incarne deffacres: In ices estrangent, et en : leger. Thise (16three :nterprezent.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	g’sse.ece.comme ting n’ailes.è:sanglore,èxent,ably.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	gallege
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you heal the armchair, if it seems like a shaver, and then you burn it all over that place on the armchair holds it; and let your hand so much that the cautery grows at the birth of the vein, for since it cuts; do this once or twice, and if there is much of it in the armchair, cauterize each one as we have said; after the treatments with ointments benefit as long as they are healthy; and when you cauterize with a great shaver above the cat's skin, then there will be more help.
de plaie mal curee	Poorly treated wound.
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	As the sick cannot bear cutting or surgery, we will tell them in their own words that there is a disease which cannot be healed unless it's treated with cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When there is no fistula, and it's aged and filled with lime and decayed moisture, if you do a thorough treatment to the whole tent according to how much of the tent has entered into the fistula, and restart cauterization as long as those pores and corroded parts are done, once or twice or three times depending on the quantity needed; and warn the nerves that are in it, and big veins. If the fistula is connected to the bladder and intestines, then beware of these vessels, and do not perform such actions haphazardly, and think that it's not a permanent condition; after curing the tent so long as it's healthy, and if the materials are bone-like, you know that the fistula is healed entirely; and if they are not bone-like, then recognize that the bones have decayed in the hole; and thus as one of these we will tell them in their own words.
de la maladie des reins	Disease of the kidneys.
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of frolic comes with heavy winds and doesn't affect women, it requires that you perform cauterization on both sides of the kidneys using one of the clavicle cauteries we have mentioned before; if our previous cauterizations are made in this manner, then there will be three cauteries along a line, and more aid will result.
de la vessie	Of the bladder.
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from moisture, causing the sick to retain urine, then perform cauterization in the backward part of the bladder where it begins with a downward stroke on both sides, one on the right and one on the left; and each time you do it like we've told you for an individual case; make two cauteries to the back, or three if needed; and perform clavicle cauterization according to the shape mentioned before.
de la marris	Of the mare (referring to a pregnant female horse)
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the mare is cold and moist, and she does not allow it to conceive, and the flowers are rotten and their tips appear late; and when they come out, there's great pain: and as we have said cauterization of the bladder or clavicle cauterization, and .ii.iij.
de la hainche	Aurea,et ce que il nengreis li cauterion a lou caestres ailleurs encefortune desires aicmeentres a thete choses
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	nature. ici that itax (s :gachief:severely.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cautions are not present for you, then he will do nine large cauteries of the grapevine, and also perform them as all others do; and treat until it is healthy again.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the backache
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When backache pain comes, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient's condition requires what we said in the division, and his treatment does not hold value, and the disease is ancient: therefore you must purge the maladies of the heavy humors with foul-smelling pills or other similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After he performs the caustic treatment; and this method of caustic application is based on two main approaches: namely, preparing mixtures containing fire (caustic) components. The use of fire in caustics can vary greatly, with one such method involving performing three triangular cauterizations according to this form, ensuring deep penetration and a considerable distance between each cautery point by several inches; using large olive tree branches for the cauterization process is never performed under the chief of the backache because it results in approximately two such forms:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, if the caustic is applied to the double circle that we mentioned in the dislocation of the backache; but do it in such a way that the circles contain all of the backache and every joint point bears pressure.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	sans in thel ongulx laisse lesuran.tin.iij. Ail.iij. iij. ells offer:nagainst ail.jacours.iij. Theire,le faiul.ajour. Acaïeccles, itin'savis. Itjacres.aji3rdrise. Andre.i'ses Agesuccur jac. ix.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	revanthevertimes ia deuconjejantifores and:ixtande ifcifree istoxte tolente heaule ieu nde
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I myself have seen many who suffered cauterization on the ankle of a stone, and they let it be so until the leg was completely freed, and also the joints were seen and corrupted all of them; afterwards, he had a solution with death.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two joined parts, perform cauterization on one and then the other, according to this method. // The surgeons said during the cauterization of the hernia, for this reason, make a sharp iron piece about as large as an oyster shell or slightly less, either with notches between them or without, and place these notches over .ij. parts, and also like new ones, and it should have a well-forged handle; and that is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then heat it so that it is completely red and tender to the touch, and place it on the patient's malignant hernia, and turn it over the healthy side; and after one piece of cautery is done, leave for .i. years; and then cover it with burdock (burdock root), letting the wound heal over a distance of ten days; afterwards, continue the bloodletting until it becomes sound.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim said that we use very little of this cautery because of the fear of its aftereffects, and as few people who do it; but all in all, these are good cautions which allow suffering and where they have relief.
de la dolor dou dos	of double pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or from falling down, by knocking on it, by too great evacuation, or by apparent masses of cold material expanding, none of these signs are worth cauterization, for neither is there any comparison between this and those who come from a bath of cold water.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	After this, healing of pestilence is voidie ores in thexample of medicine of hisel aillez.
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes upon young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have become tightly constricted when they lie down, and fear; and you change in the lower back vertebrae and in our appearance which appears above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see it and you cure it, if you cauterize with this cell-cauterizer.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If the purple-colored caustic is applied to every part of the spine equally; and if you see it, cauterize along the spinal column at lines or two (or three), and let the points be close together. After curing, ensure that healed according to what we have said, and warn you not to use a caustic in gooseflesh which is covered with nerve sputum.
de la dolor des jointes	the pain at the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain in the joints is due to moisture spreading within each limb, and when such pain arises from inflamed pressure, they call it "podagre" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be treated with medicines, then curing them requires cauterization in part: apply plenty of caustic around the joint, and use an olive-shaped caustic according to this form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if it is necessary to strike under the foot's surface, you must use the entire caustic that they call "point"; and when the pains extend to other joints and this occurs frequently, then you must apply caustics of three or two cauteries under each joint, throughout the olive-shaped caustic; and if you have skill in it, do more, but hold your hand for no longer than until the ache is gone.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend to the legs and back, you must administer the caustic that we have described in its chapter; if the pains are in the hands, apply cauteries along two or three lines on each joint; and if there is no more pain at the points, then make cauterizations on every joint and on the hairs of the hand; and if the pains come to your knees or shoulders, cauterize each part, and administer good governance to the patient and treat with penitent medicine. For if you do it well and cleanse the miasma, he will be cured by God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the route of surgery
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the procedure begins, and the bellows descend to control the flames, it is essential that when you see him curing, he does not eat anything on that day; and you use tools that will allow his stomach to empty, after which let him sit on your back between your hands, commanding him to bleed the armpit until the bellows are repaited, and bandage it in such a way as to remove signs of surgery from under the hip bone, and indicate with all kinds of signs that resemble a large circle above the heart; then you apply heat to the cautery according to its form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	While he remains white and softens his hands; then bandage the bellows so they do not return to their former position; perform well on the thighs with honey and linen, and place undernee the belly, and another beneath it which will heat his hands; put the cautery according to a sign in all your palms, and you straightened the right and left until you heal the bone, but if at first time it does not happen with the bone, then repeat as long as necessary on the bone; secretly warn him that the bellows will not spring up when you apply the cautery, do not burn them; so that the maladies and other afflictions do not arise from this.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And you must understand that until the bone heals after using the cauterizing knife, your efforts are futile. It is essential for children's cautery to be subtle according to their size; and for large people also great according to their measurement; after three years care for the wound with a piece of burnt charcoal until it heals enough bone; after other ointments, ensure that the maladies last 40 years on his back as long as the wound is well sealed; and you must make sure they rest for an extended period so that the bellows do not spring up when the patient goes to bed.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	After 40 years, when he wants to arise, and made by the lesson to tes cheveis leu. La: l’amaitre douche, et siens por loyceus deschansiin. Si lautre:or quen chefe jure demeant, icyauge. Etendres ainsentence in theachievre auverbiour meillage decaustrauere:nfaire leu01er loxende entailueaise of2ean2ealice. The3rdoule2ire  iti toi15 (saintinvesturelelvein. What2ere andre.
de la routure dou ventre	Of the treatment of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When treatments come to other parts of the body and are known, seeing that they do not grow more, he does one kind of cautery according to its quantity, and either two-thirds of the circumference; afterward the treatment as we have said; and none of the ancients said such should be done by cauterizing at three angles following this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first sign is marked on the edge and draws a line above the treatment area, and another one below it, and with your hand encompasses all of the cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and more fluid.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	Of ancient pain in no part of the body
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes to no part of the body, or from falling or injury, and that pain lasts long, and medicine does not help, then it must be cauterized with a tool called "puncture," which is done according to the length, smallness, fragility, strength, location of twists, and pain; if it has been well after the first cautery, that'e sufficient. But custom dictates that another puncture must be performed on top of it, because sometimes this arises in those parts close by, so you must perform such cauterizations as long as the patient continues to feel pain.
de meselerie	Of demonstration
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The dressings are used never with cautery but only by great help, and mostly the disease that comes from putrefaction of fleas and melancholy. Can you see it cauterizing at first sight, and if it is treated according to what we have said in division, and not leaving nor returning, and you doubt whether the corruption would affect all the malady, yet I made two others near the head: one put under its crown, another on the forehead towards the temples; and two at the horns, and one behind the sinew, and with my hand so that the cautery wanes in the bone as it heals, and until the scars are formed outside by which such great humors can leave their vapors from there. The cauterization on the muscle according to what is beforehand.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	:cause theater. esse (it :geresinage demeasures totear lesire desires deer laine ceter offerre queer :cesenocles :
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And you know that the more I do with cautery, the more help he receives, and it benefits him; and you know that the suffering patient does not feel pain from cauterization as much as healthy people do, because his body is already completely corrupted. And it must be that the cauteries are large and small according to the limbs and joints, depending on what you will find in the methods of using iron; afterward treat him with flour mixed with honey and other cures until he is well again.
de enfleure	Of embryo
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When the embryo comes to no part of the body and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it is not yet healthy; nevertheless he has cauterized the member according to its size and proportion; and sometimes the cautery goes deep into the flesh where the nerve enters, making the embryo bone; and in this way every time cautery is done on hand and neck and back, at the exit of a nerve that makes the limb move, then it truly becomes bone; and everything else doesn't intervene unless someone knows about the parts of the body and the movements of the moving organs.
de albaras	Of barley
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "barley" is old and the art of medicine becomes worthless, then cauterize it with some cautery according to its quantity; until the bladder has become bone, and turned its color, then treat him with barley flour mixed several times with lentils and olive oil wrapped in rosemary leaves and plantain fibers, and pieces of colon and goose fat for each part. Mix it all together and bind it with a cloth, or let air into the wound until he is healthy again.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cautery treatment of sore (chancre)
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When the chancre comes at the beginning, and you see to arrest it with the cautery that appears like an i or II circle around the entire chancre; and all others say they have also performed cauterization in the midst of the chancre; and this does not seem good to me because I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it done before; and a more appropriate thing is that it be cauterized around with the cautery called "circular," as we have said in many of these cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of an embryo that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	"Adon, sanz emprimes de laisser dire depresneces pars. Laissiez espremeres de malades desormefer unkes comestroient entor aitres, adoesles de cilleges lesperes leu theu:esle deparasemplate ajustere aimes oference theorreverre inostraises aurelustens demejor.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced throughout the cautery, then the fire cautery takes on this shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand in the milieu of that illness which is called "adubelati" so long as the cautery has pierced the wound, and such cauteries are those by which the diseased part heats up in such a manner that the course of pus runs like water. Afterward, when it has been fully cured.
li cure dou feu par fer	The curing by fire with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens," and it essentially amounts to gangrene of the limb since it affects the limbs in the same manner that fire burns dry leaves, which implies severe destruction. If you see this disease manifesting on the surface where cauterization may be required for healing, then gently apply iron clavicle-shaped cauterizations little and large depending on what it requires of the wound or limb; afterward, burn all parts until every trace of corrosion is removed, leaving nothing except those that are charred. Then leave them for three years, and let your cauterized joints bleed with oil as long as the burning scars have healed. After this treatment of ointments engendering fire, if you see after three years that healthy limbs do not arise, it is good; but if they do not regrow, then reapply cautery to those parts which are still corroded. This gangrene has never been treated with medicine in the form of a poultice applied on top of cauterization by fire; however, all cautery done by fire is much greater aid, and I have previously said about this treatment: take what you can handle (implying that treatments should be managed according to one's capacity or expertise).
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of sticks which grow from the joints.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often occurs that the joints suffer from a disease which is called "close" according to our intention, and it is a great illness causing harm to the body; and for treating this disease there are two methods, namely cautery with fire, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery should be done similarly as if using a quill pen made of good iron, sized appropriately so that it can pierce all parts, and have very fine edges; afterwards apply it heated over the nail until the knife begins to bend at the point where it touches; then leave it for about three years so it starts decaying rot. Then a known mixture of crushed bitter herbs is applied on top of everything throughout the night, and the nail will be extracted and detached from its roots. Finally, treat the wound by pressing with charcoal until it heals completely.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if they are converted by displacement of the heart and often occurs in hands and joints, it is necessary that you administer hot water cautery; and in this manner: take a cane made of bamboo or iron, or like a quill pen, and place it over the nail and underneath, which means having rough patches on it; then place the cane so that it moistens all around, and carefully hold your hand while turning back to make sure that the edge of the cane bends at the root of the nail, and allows you to find the hot water route up to the root; and endure the painful burning from the heat for an hour; then leave it like this, and it will detach itself in all its roots. Then perform another one such that you cure all those present at the heart, then treat the wounds with charcoal.
li cure dou trembler	The word 'trembler' seems to be a misinterpretation or incomplete phrase from this context. However, if we were to relate it back to the topic of hot water and fire cautery mentioned earlier, it could refer to treating joints that are trembling due to injury or disease. In Old French medical treatises such as these, they might have suggested methods involving heat application (hot water cautery) to reduce symptoms like tremors in joints affected by ailment or inflammation.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	n ituin legesme: " :sescait lesil in theende dechief aoutre lithafte:er :it'sans leislaure lape.iifleastre,re :are.
des pustules puans	Of fire cautery command the maliard let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, he holds the eyes steady so they do not move until they are born.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Never noticed by physicians the corrupted cavities, or pustules full of rotten matter, which when they appear it is necessary to cauterize each head of the pustule: a soft iron cauterizer, if pointed with fire, or root of hellebore long, or lenticular cautery. And never are they cauterized at the beginning according to this manner, but immediately broken and loosened by the superfluous matter from which they come, and become sane; but it is necessary that such a thing be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When an arrow has been drawn, it must be extracted carefully.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are significant blood loss from the artery that is extracted to the wound caused by burns, or into an abscess opening, or at joint dislocation and similar things; and it is a very grave matter not to choke out (thrombosis).
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in every case where such things happen, if you do not immediately put your indicator on the vein opening wound and press it hard so that the pain is greatly relieved, and no more blood flows from there; then set fire to several small and large olive cauteries enough so they are all red; then apply. I, or great or little depending on the wound and its location, where the artery lies in such a way that you hold your indicator at that vein opening and press the cautery there until the bleeding stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps below your indicator when you are applying pressure on the vein opening, and the cautery has gone out, then immediately take another of those that have been heated in fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to perform this one after another until the limb is contracted; and ensure that you guard the nerve near it, and prevent any other harm from affecting the malady; and know that when the bloodcourse of an artery does not well remain closed immediately when it becomes large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned: or by cautery, or by extraction as long as it is untreated, or by tight bandaging, or by medicines applied which are capable of restraining bleeding; and be tied up and strained properly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will tightly bind the injured area with linens or place things on it, or do similar actions, if not beneficial to some extent.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if there is no examination or medicine present, he should place his index finger on the vein's wound as we have stated before, and tightly bind it above the wound and above the vein; and do not move him at all, but keep the moisture cold as much as possible until the limb is frozen and congealed and immobilized; and make incisions or operations for cautery and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have said in the first chapter of this subject that there is a requirement for fire or medicine and preparations to be used, along with operations and their causes and types of cauteries; and I have made this chapter about the principal ones by way of this path so that we can address them more quickly when needed.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so I begin with the threading (thread ligature), which you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in our first cauteries; therefore it requires much greater care.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	Because in the work of this chapter there are often evacuations of blood when opening veins, and incision above the abscess, and treatments of wounds, and extraction of arrows, and incision on bones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you that do not attempt foolishness. For many methods come in cures from those who have suffered so much with their illnesses that they died quickly due to the treatment of their disease and the severity of their condition, and therefore one should be afraid.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of these who gives his sense to you, and says: "Wait, I am guarding"; and the disease is despicable. You do not need to agree with those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater care in your honor than in your coffers, and avoid excessively but moderately on that which you are certain of, and from which you can help heal their health; and use prognostics and indications in the treatment of your ill patients so that good reputation is achieved for this well-known man.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Oh dear son, Our Lords teach you good understanding and uprightness, and if you desire the holy inspiration from His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have instructed this chapter to you in discussions with the chapters, according to what is before us as a teacher of cauteries; I have decreed for your chief judge by which you will find more easily that from which you need expertise.
dou chief plein d’aigue	head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	It often comes to the children during birth, and when the head of the child is strongly restrained by its chief judge; and there has never been a case with such a reason that we have not seen it resolved.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease outside of children, and in all those that I've witnessed it grew the wound; and because to me seems that by dividing the work into parts, I become less tired with the treatment.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child with swollen legs full of water, and the head was pressed so tightly each day that it could not hold up on its own; and he believed it to be such moisture that it became mummified, and this moisture is assembled beneath the bone above the knee joint between the thigh and the bone; and the cauterization is performed like this when the moisture is underne Written in Chinese characters.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions like a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the corners of this sign; and when you press on that part of your hand sover each other.
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision is made to remove foul matter; afterwards, I close the cuts with linen and powders, and put wine and oil on it, and leave it for five days; then I remove it, and treat the wound by tents and ointments, and allow the head to be gradually extruded, and give meat dry of foul matter to the patient until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is to look at the large opening of the abscess and the drainage, as it has never been done before from front, back, right or left side.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Now cut the abscess and drain the fluid, doing what you can according to your ability; and warn that you do not block the artery, and keep watch for bleeding of blood, so that the maladies' excretion of fluids and evacuation of foul matter occur smoothly.
de reume	In congruence with the previously translated text's context and complexity level, "de reume" translates to "of resumption." It likely refers back to the continuation of a medical treatment process or procedure that was interrupted or halted before this point in the Old French text. However, without additional context from the surrounding lines, it is challenging to provide an exact translation as related specifically to the medical procedures being described.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is a disease called "catarrh" or in the bladder, and the illness is chronic, and medicine does not help at all, then drainage with these caustic treatments will cauterize those two hundred arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, you must cover the patient's head so that their maladies repeatedly dislocate the joint; after covering it with a rough linen cloth until the arteries are visible, then stretches the patient's neck to all sides with another such cloth; then observe whether the veins appear on either side of the ears and see if they recover quickly or not; then mark those veins, then coat one and the other with a sharp spatula divided into two parts each (hundred in total), as long as it bleeds blood from the bone, and this is done through the broad joint.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, put the sharp spatula over the artery and coat it from above, cutting in a manner of two hundred parts on top.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And if the vein is cut, it continues to bleed constantly.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	ceuille sachievre:n'', and thees ofsauf la parole de:esculates. Ages. Injurgy.
de emigrainne	Of dislocation
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	Ancient dislocation comes along with fever, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temple and other similar ailments when the limb is longstanding and ancient, and it is treated by various medical methods, but none of them benefit him; rather, we extract arteries from temples and cauterize, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them so that they re-grow hair on his temples, and understands the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well with its beating, and is rarely restored wounds as in no one who is too cold; and if it is restored, he removes the lice from some cloths of him, then rubs the wound with a smooth piece of fabric, and raises the wound with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the scalpel according to this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then scrape the loose skin gently as long as you are nearing the artery, then pull it upwards using pincers, and remove well-designed cloths from each of its parts; and if the artery is slender, twist at the point of the needle, then cover that part according to the quantity indicated by two points (this appears to be a measurement indicative of length or size), because if it is not covered, it may jump out completely in all cases.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And remove the blood from .xx clots, just a bit more than that; and if the artery is large, it must lie in .x leather strips made of double-stranded strong silk so as not to let any bleeding occur during the setting of the wound, and continue applying blood pressure on the wound; then remove the excessive surplus between those clots at that time, and if you see, with the sharp cauterizing instrument cut into the bone until the hairs are removed; this is the next operation, if the patient does not have fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	And the cauterizer is a great aid for finishing the moisturizers, because of this, they provide much help in managing excessive moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	It is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills their vein with a lot of cotton and places it well on tents; and when they remove them, take care to use dry medicines that cause healing, and tents, until they are healthy; and if without cutting the artery as much as you do, you hasten by cautery, or you pour vitriol into your hand so that the vein does not become inflamed; and if this is not present, place on the vein your needle as much as possible until it freezes, and raise the vein with cold water repeatedly until the vein stops moving constantly, and restrict it in such a way as it is necessary; and who is more limber and lighter during artery extraction is to cauterize this caustic by .ij. partitions, but the partitions be well spaced to keep their heat longer there.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When the patient's blood flow is too weak, it holds less warmth.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must be between the two cutting knives, one of them should have a lot of space, and then when you have squeezed the blood vessels, place your hot iron on them until they bend to the bone, and cover the vein with these cuts; and keep the cutting knives apart because it is not evenly applied throughout; and this is the shape of this caustic.
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears from veins that are under the test of this strong force flow downward and it does not benefit from any medication made in such cases; you see the malady becoming darker, and feel the movement of walking so like a tremor; and they are held tightly and moist so that the hairs on the papers become dampened, and these papers are burned away with the heat of tears, if there is a need for this care.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And you call it "cure contuse," and you make cuts on the patient who has this malady either two or three incisions along the forehead according to the length of his forehead, so that one of them is like a dagger below the forehead pressing down into the neck; and keep away your hand from cutting arteries which are above paper.iiij. pieces in the shape of cuts, and from the mouthpieces; and separate each other piece by iiij. teeth from the continuation of these pieces of ivory, and you must docteur.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	s :  thefthevantimes<brichirecte crainscelle orfaiture  1ye hevreuccapleyxingleclection outrale,anime:sifferres
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	Of the incision on the temple just before the second incision; and scrape all the skin between the two holes there is under the bone surface, then make another similar incision right up to the other second one, and then extract this osteoma.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Insert the instrument called "cultellar" into the first hole; it is well suited for cutting one way and soft, not suited for cutting in another direction, and its shape is like this.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Place the sharp cutting edge towards the skin near the joint, and the soft cutting edge toward the bone, until it reaches the next hole; then continue to cut all tendons coming from both ends as long as the incision is continuous up to where the vein opens again, and make another similar incision right in that second hole; then extract the artery evenly, and wrap a piece of cotton in each opening, covering it with linen draped in wine and oil and wool, making sure that abscesses do not grow there; after three days apply a large amount of warm water treatment, followed by the Basilic acid wash with oil and other treatments for wounds as long as he is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	Double the strength of the bandage.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When a patient does not have hot chills habitually, and you see the tendons tight and small, causing vision impairment, and burned paper; and their hair clumps together, and at the head's base there is pain, and malar breathing occurs; therefore knowing from these events that such materials and catharsis do not come from many waters, and the treatment prescribed by him he has, it seems to be this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And command the patient to tilt his head backward, then make a large incision in front of it, and another one wide; approximately 10 cm (a little more). Start from the temple's left side toward the right temple, making an incision up to the bone; keep your hand away from the temple nerves that move around during digestion; when the bone is exposed, wash out all the blood with a sponge, and then insert cotton in between the two holes of the fracture and place linen tissue above it; then cover him with draped linens soaked in wine and oil, making sure to prevent abscesses from forming on top; when he is osteoporotic, it must be that you rub the bone as long as the blood starts to reappear, then perform excursive treatments which help bring back the digestive process.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In a similar way: take two parts of wheat flour and three parts of chalk powder, mix them together, and make an embolism in these wounds to help improve digestion throughout the body.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	The detachment of ears.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that affects the ears is one of three things: either grains or animals, or minerals or resinous substances and similar materials such as water and woolen items.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	illeague vouldes: "caesar.htmloresme : lemon. Theil. Age,comence ageing.coilice. Allsoule. Ornature. Whatsoarnece. Ages comethroachemet ofrece. Age. Describe ito deity:age.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If she jumps with the pincers, it is good; if not, then prepare the subtle extraction from a small double ulcer; and if she does not jump like that, make an ear pinch and press down on the head of the pinch or the fortress in the ear very firmly, so that nothing can go through the soft part of the pincers, then treat it thoroughly, as we have said before; and if it does not come out partially, take some honey with tweezers and pick up small birds, and use any instrument that is suitable for this purpose, and put a little cotton inside. Then press on the pinch or whatever there may be, and treat it thoroughly.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not jump from all these things that we have said before, hurry to piercing the ear so deeply that the cauldrons inside are exposed, and spasm; and in making the fissure, you first secure the deformed head of the patient with cephalic alignment, and extract the sinew according to its nature, then let the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, make a small fissure at the root of the ear depending on whether it's grease or fat; and make the fissure as if it were a moon, until you reach the piercing, and the healer according to his judgment, and suck the wound hastily with your mouth; and continue treatment until it is cured.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grains that are entangled and swollen, then prepare the subtle extraction; and if it cannot come out, then prepare a small but thin syringe according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	and prepare an incision in the grain. But do not think that it is moistened by ear moisture, until you have made many cuts; then pull out the grains gently with pincers and suck them as we have said before, so that the extraction is light.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then when the water contains such that the maladies use coughing of first-stage conditions, and plunge the ear with much cotton. And let it lie under this ear, if it jumps through; it's good. If not, take many stones according to their length of your sticks and lightly, and put a little fire to them, and place the patient's malady in one part of his ear, and jump from that stone at another hole so that he jumps out. Do this to the piercing piercing in the ear until the water is all gone, and then leap it whole; and if you see a pinch on stones fortheren.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	deans ̃nimmenter. thecques   (it'outfalle ifpele:iherreve sevellaifre ous iaifre,celle deft heveleslume ifèuvescongeinifferres.uel veleiuente
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of lodged arrows from ears, when you treat them as we have said in dividing and addressing distillations, it does not profit at all; it is required that you look into the ear with the sun: if there are no arrows present, then perform fine pinchings, and if they are not found, take the horn of this shape:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And it should be narrow and wide above. And apply the finer chiefly to the ear according to the amount of pain in the sick person; then make up such quantity that all the hairs come out. If they do not emerge, remove them from inside the cotton wool as I have said in the piercing; if they still remain so deep, moisten distillations that those who have tested it on arrow extraction and treatment found with this instrument, and you will find or extract such distillations; and when mixing oils and medicines in the ear using all of this equipment as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be made of silver or gold and narrow to a small hole, and above for distilling; and in order to press the distillation with such well-made silver equipment, if you see a razor and wrapping around the point near cotton wool, then pour your oil or juice into that and what you see of medicines in the cone, and the cone should be placed inside the ear; then put everything in the cotton wool, pressing with all the hand carefully until the liquid is distilled from the ear; and smell it for pain therein, and such distillations as much heat up on fire so that they are distilled into the ear; and make sure that it's not too cold, because the medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	The procedure of otohematomy (removal of earwax) is performed by:
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with any blockage in the ears; and this occurrence happens to children primarily due to ear trauma or wounds inside the ear, and these incidents do not lead to significant changes within the ear. There are rarely instances where one would find a lasting impact from such extractions, unless visible signs can be observed; and there is never a situation with persistent blockage that occurs after these interventions, indicating proper outcomes.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	The moment the treatment arrives that one does not see it, and the remedy's various positions in the sickness. And then place tote le malaide as you see forenince d’antique. Forene ail le veillanctre ire encoi ci dese lou caine.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be or cut in front and behind flatly, so that it does not tear the ear; if the operation is on a new cartilage or bone of the ear, then hold it with fine pincers lightly, and move the cautery gently until those parts are completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the operation is performed in the ear, then take a fine scalpel lightly and cut it slightly at the fire, then place the cartilage of the ear; if you feel the operation causing great pain to hearing, proceed gently, and make sure not to press too hard on the nerves of the ear; then put an ear tube according to its depth, and lubricate it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not do any work until the wound is healed, or you take a tube and lubricate it with rose-water and powdered vitriol; if you see an infection in the ear, cover the tube and move another moistened tube made of oil roselle and beeswax until the infection has been cleared. Then cure it as long as necessary to heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is an exudation of blood, then plunge a sponge and cloth into cold water and place it in the ear, and apply other treatments that allow the exudate to continue its course; such treatments include those for distilled remedies (distillation).
de la char des papieres	from the paper scraps
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	There is this that comes from the paper scraps when the hairs are moist and dry, you must extend them with tweezers and pincers, and hold it with a trowel at its roots; then place it on rose-water powdered.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without dissection, then you cauteer with the lenticular cautery delicately, and after the incision it moves away; and they repair many times, but never go back to their roots; and when those roots are cauterized by fire, they burn off those roots and do not come back.
de la gresle	of the grille
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times paper-thin things appear to be crumpled in shape and durability, and for this reason, this disease is called "great snow," and the remedies are: take warning that if you have great snow on one side and another, it's a light matter to know; then cover her broadly, then scour each part gently, then with pincers, and bandage. If you cannot see clearly through the paper, nothing harms the patient; and if there is a large fissure, put on an apron, and cure it until she is well; and if it's small, do not apply force, as ointments will heal her soon and soften.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the great snow descends from within to the top of the ear towards the upper part; and turn it backward, and treat with paper pincers, and bandage on both sides; and if the paper is removed by incision, that does not harm; and when the paper is crinkled, apply hot salty oil, and cure the area until the patient's earache has subsided.
de la graisse des eulz	Of the fat of the joints
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	It is a fat which gets wrinkled on sheets of paper above, and occurs more in children than in few people, causing much harm to their joints; it appears as cataracts at mornings, and they cannot see the sunlight because tears blur their eyes; hence they lie down against their cheeks and sleep there, and beneath their cheeks moistened by sweat, the exinach has been concealed which bursts out in oil. And when you press on the joint to your will and feel the exinach between your fingers.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of this treatment is to place the maladies on your head; and then take a linen cloth in the shape of a circle according to the amount of effusion from each part, and put it over them; and press with both hands onto either side so that the effusion is gathered within the circle; then make an incision as wide as the wound made at the shoulder joint, and do not let it be larger than the cut on the shoulder; and in various positions comes effusion from the fissure, according to the shape of a piece of greasy fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract a piece of cloth between your hands to the other side and turn your hand right and left as much as possible; and make sure you do not push into the fissure with oil that it does not bleed.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Et siens, cestitre d'ailleurs ofsesculte, et ilesmeaure comentures lai a laissarguille desprescripture.comparison (itjour ailmeses itgarter ceslere develastraconse desiring: "histio and thenislesme toirexerre lice:aljorne legele.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such homes that grind grain and put it on to corrupt the moisture which is delayed. Then he cures until they become healthy. And if it reaches the incision site, he treats burns softening them so much until they become healthy.
des poilz des papieres	Translation breakdown:
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper-like hairs are born other than their natural type, and they become old, if they harm the eyes, and bring on manners of diseases as accustomed to tearfulness and softening of papers and yellowing, so long as it is due to the destruction of hairs; and the cure consists in four methods: or by fire-cauterization together, or by hot water treatment according to its use or whether a physician performs caustication, and this may be done either by incision and suturing, or by slitting, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the chief hair of the patient in your left hand; if it turns white, that's good; if not, insert one needle above every two threads on each side; and whether near the margin or where the hair grows beneath these tufts, thread a second filament over all the paper, then turn the paper back to the razor; make in the part of the paper under those tufts covering the entire circumference from the large flange down to the small one; pull out another filament, and place it on the paper below as you would with a small tent made of cloth and lace, then draw above the paper a figure resembling that of a mirror-glass lamp, so that whatever size the raised paper is, this figure must be according to it.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if there is a sheet with great quantity of paper according to what the paper is softened; then make in all places along lines that you have marked, and cut quite close to one of the corners; and take one of the natural grooves near the root of an arrow, and put the linen on one of its angles where it kinks, and scrape out the flesh; and assemble two lips with a thread of such fine silk that passes through all the crevices, and drain the blood from the wound, if you see doing this; but if not, then leave the stitches and threads for three or four years, then cure the wound without any binding materials which tighten it (as they said by the ancients), and that is often done out of fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And there is another method: and it is that you draw the paper with a figure as soft and wavy as we have told, in three circles according to its shape, which is like this:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then take care of those small, equal forces according to the shape that is like this (three concentric circles). This line refers to applying a consistent and uniform force when performing medical procedures such as cauterization or incision. It's essential in maintaining balance during treatment and ensuring even healing; however, it requires understanding of anatomical structures and the procedure being applied. For modern readers:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you cannot hold the forceps (tweezers), and it's not at all different, take a needle or thread with it, and put into the figure; then another thread by the big groove, and the second thread by the small one, and place them evenly between your two hands; then work on your hand that you have marked as we have described, and assemble the leather of the wound (skin) with stitches. If an abscess appears at your incision, calm it down and treat the swelling in a soothing manner.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And there is never a case where the hair of the paper turns into: it means that you must use what we have said about the incision, but in sewing on either side it is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of the wounds is in this form: you must convert the paper and apply it according to what I have said, then make .ij. bandages with great subtlety just as long as the paper and wide strips are; and hold the ends of these bandages together at .ij. points where you hold the threads; then join them gently underne mantling made of waxed paper, and stretch the .ij. wound parts in this manner; and leave it like this for any number of years, and the skin that is stretched will dry up and harden until it breaks itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes a long time, if the wounds heal strongly, then treat them until they are healthy; and when the wound is closed up, and the paper lifted off, so that there will be no hair left; and this is the form of the .ij. bandages you make according to this figure, and in this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The tasks are such that you must use a fine needle and take one softer silk thread, then assemble the ends together subtly; make them as long as half of your thumb length; then order another finer silk thread slightly in sequence, and lay the main part on top of it; place the patient's hair back to its natural position if you declare this work delicate and thin, then with the needle chase down the root beneath the hair adhered to the skin below; pierce the paper hastily from above the root until you remove it above the natural skin level; then pull out the hair up to the thread's trace in the paper until the hair fibers protrude throughout the thread's course with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the thread is treated and the hair does not grow along the entire length you have ordered, then pull out the thread throughout its course as long as it protrudes from above and beneath through the wound until you see it through the oil; therefore if you pull out the thread and the skin, and stretch the oil and let the bandage hang for two or three years or so, while the hair straightens back to its natural position and grows again.
de la porriture de l’oil	And about the oil usage: (Note: The original text does not clearly refer to "de la porriture" which is a mistranslation, as it seems like an error in translation. However, if we interpret the contextual meaning, it could be interpreted as of the application or treatment with waxed ointment.
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or mildew appears in the oil, it has about .ij. manifestations: one natural, and the other unnatural. And occurs by severe injury, or cutting, or by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method of this operation is to break up that seam, and remove the mucus from it, and fill with linen threads until it heals; and does not require that you use in its treatment anything that dries or restricts. For if you do such a thing, the disease becomes worse than before; but the method of softening things like fenugreek; and boiling water or hot herb tea soaked cloths, and ointments melted in any kind of oil, and wrapping it with a tent, and this form of treatment.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your treatment are that you must guard against it hardening in the shape it was before; and these operations we have mentioned do not cause relapse but rather return to its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the chaff that comes into the oil.
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease which truly is called "axacrati", and natural in itself, accidents come from wounds and fissures and cautery and similar things; the method of this operation consists that you must use an awl, so that it has a double thread, and pierce into the chaff, thus making sure to go as far to the right limb as the left one, so that the threads stick out above everything in the awl by .ij. fingers; then place the chaff above the awl's point, and cover it with an area of about a spatula wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the paper's figure returns to what it should be like this, that is good; but if not, take a razor and put it in the fissure, turn the paper over, and make .ij. holes or grooves within the paper; and position the .ij. holes at the .ij. corners of the incision you made, and form one angle so that when they come together, the figure is as a letter without ".j. grizzled" lines; then glue this chaff according to how much its edges are away from it, which teaches the paper, and re-align the .ij. parts missing, and apply threads of linen fabric; then with this treatment that we have mentioned before, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a fissure or seam or cautery, it must be to make an oval-shaped incision among the hairs of the paper; and according to what I have said before; then open between the two loops of a tent, as I have mentioned above; and do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very different in shape, and the master's remedies in several other positions. And the maladie meims itself, likewise with all these treatments.
dou soudement de la papiere	of a paper seam; and break up the fissure, so that the disease will not come again.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this welding occurs at the hands in such a manner that the paper above is hard with oil white, and it cannot move or perform its natural tasks, then you must thrust the tip of a razor under the thin film beneath the skin, and lift up; and bind them as pinches, so that the thin film does not suffer too much nor too tightly, so that the patient's pain is minimal due to the thin film; and make your incision, through which you scrape off gathered fat; then raise it with water, soft water, and collagen; and after a day use bandages and similar things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	The piece of oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	The piece of oil is shaped in two manners: it appears to be nervous and hard like a stone, and another that is not nervous but looks like moist clay congealed when touched with iron and pinned down; both shapes begin towards the large margin, growing slowly until they cover the entire view and light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The manner of the incision is such that it places the patient's piece back to normal, then performs the work on it; gently touching the paper with your hand, and drawing up the piece by its double folds, and placing it above; taking a sharp needle, and dipping one hair from a horse, or cow, or ox, and a strong thread; doubling the tip of the needle slightly and pushing it into the piece, then piercing through the whole with the needle, and binding the piece with a string so that it is above the small forces around the prunelet and silk to the top of the chief, leaving its natural shape or ridge as we have described; making sure by this incision that the horse does not shed tears conventionally afterward. If the piece only becomes hardened solely with water and thread as we mentioned, then it is scraped along the soft part of the spatula delicately until its form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make sure that the spatula does not touch the fleshy tablet and break it, and that the prunelet is not pierced; after the incision drop a little bit of linen into the oil, and with this collar made of litharge, let it rest for another day until healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the piece is not nervous and you cannot push the needle in, and the pieces do not allow entry, many times this shape of the oil's skin is treated with medicines; and so I have told it in the division, and when you see it covered by oily medicine, then apply the spatula quickly according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	For the following passage: Li mauves leu sauf, liere unguessie ceameine tote aultre enivre lait vein: ivenge as demeate:ent incomme devoir d'ainsiant.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	: theesmalast, decade of the phrase aste (fromage: ás.a:ses texturis malgré lesse.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh narrows in the oil greatly, causing trouble to the joint, and it suspends at the beginning, and a part is removed but not all, so that there are no tears; then distilled into red oil made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	Of the metal which oozes out from the pupil.
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Some people never experience red metal oozing from the pupil; they cover it with paper and clamp it down tightly, forming what resembles a bull's-eye; then their work is to place the patient's head so that it supports strength, and cradle them in this position until all of the metal oozes out, ensuring that bleeding occurs during the procedure; and there is the wound on the spatula we mentioned in the incision of the toenail and its small forces which cause pain. As after this chapter's demonstration it appears.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is completed and all of it oozes out, you pour oil into the wound or distill red oil mixed with resinous medicines that appear corrosive, placing cotton on top to secure the edges; if nothing persists and there's a swelling in the abscess, then doubt at the edges, so let the oil heal the abscess edges gently; otherwise, do not leave it, continue with this method until it is sound, and then you make charred pieces of hemp placed in the oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However everything must require that you align the treatment of each weak oil along the natural pathway; and by accident, in ironwork; and never push your hand into any of these processes until you see that this limb is suffering from such a procedure.
des voines des eulz	of veins
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Those red veins that are covered with oil and allow the operation to be seen and weaken the oil throughout the years. The craftsmanship is then at what you observe first; therefore, it's true in this manner: command the malade to place his head so that it supports health, and suspend those veins all over its fold according to his wisdom, and make them subtly double as per this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two young men by ranks on one side according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then let you exert the forces subtly on those veins, and draw the blood an hour after another, until you see remove the vein's holes of the oil; and ensure that you do not bruise the spots of the spumaline, and perform this operation at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that only those veins remain unchanged; and when you have done this, distill the green and red oil from the oil jar to disrupt what is delayed.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot gather everything within that hour, then apply soothing substances to the oil^1 of things that alleviate the pain in those places, and leave it untouched for several days until the pain is eased and secured from abscessation (a buildup of pus), then resume according to this manner as long as he remains healthy; and it is the form of exerting forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the oil abscess^2 (abscess, an accumulation of pus caused by infection)
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mire they call "arissati" abscess^3: when you cure it with caustic and burning medicine according to what I have previously said (referring to the use of potent medicinal substances), and it is not healthy, then engenders in him such that you must cut into the suppurating wound (suppuration, a discharge from any part of the body consisting of pus), so that he should die if it has been thoroughly cleansed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see corruption and blackening (black discoloration indicative of necrosis), if the surgeon has all this equipment^4 there is a form; it is called "aspre chief" (roughly translated to "shocking head"), and it should be made from iron in two parts, as it is currently shaped:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the bone that is rotten^5, then turn it between your two hands (demonstrating manual manipulation of the bone), and press down a little bit so that you can see if the corruption has been resolved; do this never again, and restore the oil of excising medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	: it'sesarex30sic (itjacute .i, thefez laut :cite, inoise :ism:esce.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone next to the shoulder blade, and move your hand away from the oil for a little while, then turn all around until it pierces through the bone and feels the pain in that way if he holds his hand on his neck; and then apply dry medicine there as I have shown you, and when the flesh grows harder, the matter moves to the neck; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the issue of the oil.
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the wounds are opened entirely and they do not disturb or narrow in the neck, then you must dress the patient; first apply a mixture of aloe, cinnamon, incense, and green clay, and then bandage the wound with layers thick enough to double every three inches. Then stack the bandages according to the amount that the wound has, and repeatedly remove the plasters soaked in blood, without causing injury; afterwards remove the plasters and let the dressing be left for a day and night, if you notice it loosening, then you must unwrap it; after a week and before healing is complete, if the wound has reopened, repeat the bandaging and the application of green clay and blood-soaked plasters until it becomes healthy again. If not, continue with this treatment for as long as necessary.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Double rupture of a woven veil.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the woven veil and it tears with paper-like materials such as grains of resin, which are easily visible; then proceed according to these procedures: first, make an incision at the root of the affected area above that part, then insert another needle or a double thread around the shoulder blade; carry out this operation carefully, and remove the initial needle according to its position; then apply the second thread with padding over the vein in full, leaving it moistened with oil, and let it remain as long as the thread is sticking to the vein, then treat the wound with comforting remedies until healing takes place. And sometimes when the wound is restrained by a piece of cloth at any point around the vein, continue this treatment until complete recovery.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound gives a clear appearance, it perforates through the subcutaneous tissue that is covered with oil, corrects the moisture-filled area, and then immediately continues further; subsequently remove the bandage as much as possible until healing has occurred.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the use of oil for wound care.
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	:vocaux (aingle. OC: " itineration paraparticle other, the following.
des aigues de l’oil	Of the waters of oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have seen the examples of fluids in their division, and that it is necessary to determine; if done according to health. It is necessary that you position the patient between your crossed hands towards the light from the sun, pouring warm and concentrated oil on his body; then place the paper with the oil in your right hand where the point is to the left, or in your left hand where the point is to the right; then take it into your right hand, where the point is to the left, the instrument called "almaga," or in your left hand, where the point is to the right; then place the tip of the "almaga" next to the crown's edge by drawing a thin ray over the area of oil on the minor groove, and push the "almaga" firmly until it pierces into the cavity of the oil, and feel that the "almaga" moves within the vessel; and it is necessary that the "almaga's" marking be at the center of the measurement lines which are from the prunele to the end of the nocturne; and this crown of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper for its transparency on a horned leather, then place the instrument just there or where the fluid is, and squeeze out another groove after it. The patient now sees his dislocated shoulder before him and the instrument within his oil.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After resting a little, and the fluid rises again on the second path, apply force with the instrument, and when it is firmly attached and it does not rise, then extract the "almaga" lightly around your hand twice; and then place a small piece of gemstone in the oil and stir it within. Then we lay down oiled or linen cloths soaked in rose water and abundant with wax, and mix them with pure oil. And those who are from our time, put on underneayer with wax aboundant.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the "almaga" cannot enter into the oil due to its hardness, because it has too many parts that are hardened, then it is necessary for you to prepare the instrument called "alberet," which is in this form: (This instruction would typically accompany a drawing or description of an instrument used in conjunction with osteopathic techniques. Without visual context, one can only describe its purpose based on textual information.)
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	:meentures.i'sansuccen.meantimes a theou entendre in meffacquer. ous :x :coulevesure anticorail:lesme. The-rever, itentire. Ages.mein. Andromme. Aidir.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	When the incision on the artery comes about, you must dislocate the oil within seven days, and separate from that which causes the abscess in the incision; and when it is calmed down, you move the vein and place it upon your chin . i.e., quickly enough to cover no full year, and then immediately enter into that dark house again. And then leave a little bit of money there and disappear in its case; and know that none should intervene in this matter.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from Yarra, who told us that in peace they made an almadel for collecting water, but we have never seen anyone using it here, nor have I ever found any mention of it in our lands or books written by the ancients; and perhaps it is a novel thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the forms of almadelas, because those who do not know them see them as such: and they should be properly made from rainwater.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the main point of this subtlety is to have its head in three angles of water.
de la char sor le neis	from the place where they draw it (referring to rainwater).
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	There has never been any scorpions-like beings born or created in various ways; and if there are any that seem to have many pincers, and if it is colored with a mixed color, and if it is of pure white color. In those cases where the char is pure and not stained, you must make the malaide lie on your hands against the sun; work his nostrils, and wipe the tip on those chars, and then support that slender sharp piece under one side, so much as you know that it is entirely whole.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there is nothing left that can be covered over, then the oil must have one of those fine lightly moving insects in it; and if it does not delay anything; and if you do not penetrate into the incision or cut, as it should be done; and if they are malignant abscesses, you hasten to cauterize them so much until all the charcoal is evaporated and all the stones have been removed, then pour either water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And when the char performs its workings, know that it is healthy; and if the abscess does not penetrate so much as it should, then know that there was once stone in his bone above; and since those insects do not come to puncture it. It must be made a somewhat thick linen thread of about an inch long; and place between each other, and let us pull out the charcoal from its nose, and make the malade boy's teeth by pulling out the abscesses one by one’s teeth withdrew, adonis: ence. Etienne demein: onces a lorrever, et depeinte d'un cestude nticstemle lou fustes, le char, intres dextraie encein:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it can be made of silver or lead, resembling the cover of a lamp overturned, as in a tin, and you also do so; and if you see, it makes a closed tin-like container to empty out its head; and have one hand on top to hold it while heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	Of silver for the nail
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times the nail becomes a disease that is called "telul," and grows and becomes large as long as it remains something to look at; and for this reason, you must first coat the patient, and then dress it with cautery or hot medicine; and if you delay in covering it until it becomes large, beware if it is hard, of a foul color, and poor sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an enchanted appendage that comes to great harm when coated even once. If the appendage is from a sharp touch, not necessarily of foul color, then you can cover it completely, empty out the patient's fear and pain, and treat his foot with restrictive measures.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nail is covered and crushed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Sicken that any of these solutions come in one of these chapters, which is hardly the case for many people. It requires then that you avoid all of them; if their wounds are fresh on the whole body, first treat two eyes with a stitch; and if the eyelids are swollen on both sides, it's necessary to scour every part until they heal, then join the eyelids in one stitch, apply pressure and dragon blood poudre over them, and incense. Then place the powder underneath with a piece of iron or another similar ingot that sutures firmly; let it be absorbed by its own heat, and then treat it with ointment until it heals completely.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the stitch if it is to assemble the solution: whether by needles, as we have said in the belly-stitch; or by thread, as I have told you before.
des apostemes des levres	Dealings with eyelids' appliances
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Chauventses:
de la char des gencives	of the gums' teeth
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times it bleeds under the gums where they are pushed back, which used to be called "albulus"; this indicates that you must support it with forceps and address its root, allowing the blood or clot to dry up; then apply vitriol brine or other restraining and desiccating powders; if that gum returns after the incision and happens many times, repeat the procedure and cauterize again: if it does not return afterwards from the cautery; these are the forms for treating abscesses.
des sordens	of sounds or noises
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the tooth, between the gums in the mouth, ugly and hard scabs; and there is never a black or yellowish tooth that appears until corruption reaches the gum, and it has an odor; you must have this patient sit on your lap, hold his paws in your holy hand, and examine those teeth or scabs as long as nothing happens. Make them black and green, and yellowish and other shades, while they remain visible; if there is a reason for the first one, it's good; but if not, start again on the second day and the third, until you have examined everything; so know that teeth require various forms of tricks to be cleaned out, depending on what this work demonstrates. The razor used to remove stones from between the teeth has other forms than those used for removing them from elsewhere; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It indicates that when curing the tooth's pain, you must delay treatment as much as possible since it should not cause such high levels of suffering; this is because there is no excuse for the razor causing harm during the procedure. This statement underscores the importance of minimizing patient discomfort and avoiding unnecessary complications that could result from invasive dental treatments.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	When the patient is constrained to undergo treatment, you must be certain of which tooth needs attention; many times it causes the painful tooth ache, and make sure that it's not an infected tooth, and treat the good tooth properly; and in any case, you won't leave the suffering tooth because if it is still there, so long as its condition remains poor, since we have already wanted this for our saints; and when you are certain about which tooth needs attention, you must thoroughly clean that tooth with a strong sponge to protect all parts of the gum from any damage; then carefully remove it with subtle tweezers in small amounts and amounts until it's well loosened, and firmly hold the painful tooth in your holy hand so that it doesn't move. This directive is a detailed procedure for handling dental treatment where pain management and patient comfort are of high concern while ensuring proper diagnosis and effective intervention for oral health issues.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After extracting the tooth cleanly and carefully, and if you have done in chascuns dexpresents leslie albusque dameines lou teintes: le venture choses neufs aiguileurs legerance demein :grossoie, lespremercie ices.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And you should warn him well that you do not break it, and leave a part of it, and return to the patient with pain from the root's malice greater pains than before. And you are warned not to do as ignorant physicians do, who by their haste and boldness have never broken a joint, and they do not provide what we know; but bring forth many times due to this great affliction for the roots that remain, or for the joint that breaks, as we often experienced; and when the head of the bone is removed, wash it with wine or silk cloth and thread; and if blood comes out from the wound, frequently encountered, then apply vinegar to the wound; and if it does not work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the molars, with their first teeth remaining silent when moved, should be elongated points and large crowns, so they do not duplicate when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms.
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be large members that do not bend when pulled out, and iron well made, and teeth fit for movement.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth (or bone)
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As the root is pulled out, it indicates that you should place moistened cotton wool on burnt embers. A day or two long enough until the tooth loosens, and then drive in the picks called "algebri," which makes the teeth seem as if they are cared for; and behind them make them so well made that they resemble a plane.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not come out with all these picks, it indicates that you must find the charred piece in the root completely and use the instrument called "althali," which is known as pliers; this is so they have a shape like this.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if it is large and strong so that it does not break, and the root jumps out of this way, that's good; but if it doesn't, help with all molars, then these forms come after.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if it uses this instrument that has two points, then its form is like this.
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are used on teeth for their reason, and of this instrument which appears to be large pincers; and its form is:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be large and well-fitting to hold the bone firmly, so it does not shift; and then restore the position of medicines suitable for this purpose, and if there is an indentation in the bone, small enough, then use all these instruments.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth does not align with its natural shape and is ugly, especially in young women, it must be known that this tooth is misaligned and not straight; therefore, one should not file or polish it. However, if it has a fracture, use this instrument with this form, which resembles a small hook made of steel and sharply pointed at the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the small hammer and few hands today to endure the hardness of this tooth, and because you do not move the others, if it appears that one can grind it with a tool like this, which has an oval-shaped file as its form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the cutting tool for making needles; and grind this tooth little by little while moving it slightly so that it does not move until it breaks; then smooth out all rough edges in the end, and if the tooth has a deep indentation and bleeds the tongue, you must file the sharpness until it is level, so that it doesn't bleed the tongue or ruin speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth protrudes.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the tooth protrudes, whether by impact or displacement, and it cannot be pressed above so that it does not displace; instead, treat them with constrictive medicines and do not overdo it. It is best to restrain the tooth using a gold thread, as silver thread becomes greenish-black in time but never changes color for gold. The thread should be neither too thick nor too thin according to the space between the teeth; if you need to adjust the teeth, use the golden thread and double it between each pair of healthy teeth, then insert the wires into the misaligned teeth so that they do not impede the other side' mantle carefully and steadily until they don't move at all. Then create a loop around the root of the tooth where you can tie the threads securely without causing bleeding; let it stay this tight as long as possible, and if it shifts or the thread unwinds from another one, that will be its shape and figure for the adjustment of healthy teeth and misaligned ones as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is tightened, if you reinsert it back into its socket repeatedly, as we have said; and never insert anything that isn't natural or painful, and don't make a form of any bone teeth from another animal, rather place it in the socket where there is a deficiency, and tie it up like this, and let it stay for the whole length.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the tongue:
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	i.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see the patient's flesh is of fire color or black and hard, so that they do not feel pain, let it not be touched, for it is a carbuncle; and if it is declining towards blistering, and there is moisture in it, then it may shed an ulcer, and with the use of a spatula delicate, and remove from both sides; and if he does not recover on his work, place him under vitriol until he becomes stained, then bring him back to his work so that you treat everything thoroughly; then raise the head of the joint and its sides, and cure it with other cures until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	Removals from the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	There never comes in the throat balls called "godath," and we call them specifically .ij. almonds; when you cure them, as we have said about division, do not touch it with iron if it is small and of a reddish color, similarly for blood vessel rupture; let it remain until it dies, then either you will break it by itself, or if it's red in color with a thick root, prepare an appropriate instrument to cover it, but first make sure the "godath" rests and is calmed. Then have the malady sit before the sun so that its head lies flat, and let its limbs be stable while you work on the mouth and neck between your hands, pressing the tongue against all the instruments; this form is made of silver or fine gold like knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue against all parts of this instrument, and see the "aposteme," if you take the ulcer and hammer it in the almond, and drive it above more than you can; then do not treat anything on towels with it, but coat the instrument with it, which is its form, like some forces; and all of its parts are bent, and one side the other, and very sharp, and made of iron or silver thread:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument, then the tweezers of that shape are its form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	deparler. Injur lemonade thekes: ices ofte jorces itsalmostre lesure.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	wachtifteuigneousue si çosecruitarisiblelameintemytres.évellet outyez 3cretanscius la hapeitifieraunsechialleisserangleaulletainssuscevaille a peuauthergelethevelaire:nauisi so deuiseux tonso longaesueves, locoutheuisses in fo
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the blood comes to the eye, and it flows and becomes swollen, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and rounded, then it is called an 'eye.' If you treat it as we have discussed in division, and the treatment does not benefit, then you must cover it; for those aposteme corners are now calm, and the eye is delicate, so it must be covered; and that which has grown and is no longer long is either pink or blackish in color, so you must remove the incision from it. For there is great danger to the patient with this malady. Therefore, when you see it according to the manner we have discussed before, place him facing the sun, press his tongue on the instrument we mentioned earlier; then pierce inside each of those three points I've described in the puncture; and make sure not to go beyond what is naturally necessary for healing. After the incision, use that which we have previously mentioned about the incision at these three points, and treat it until it is cured. If there is fear with this covering, then you must use an engine of persuasion in the cauterization against his pain. And the manner of this caustic is hot flame. And let him put his head on your hand, and press his tongue on the instrument that our chaplain mentioned for cautery, and heat it with burning water so that it's not too thick or transparent; and shape the handle as follows:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Either you place a hair or a piece of medication on the head like the handle of a ladle, and apply the instrument to all the medicine under the eye; let the patient lie with his side, so that saliva and muscle secretions flow from his mouth into the medicine inside, ensuring it doesn't go down to the throat or bleed. Then take your hand and press the medicine under the eye for about an hour, until you see it is not sticky anymore and the medication dissolution is complete; if you see signs of this happening, wrap cotton around any instrument used, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument over all the cotton inside the cannon above the eye. Do this often as long as the cauterization of the medicine has healed, then let it dry out, and afterwards treat with warm water for three to five days or perform a second cautery treatment around the eye after removing any remaining medication from underneath; raise the patient's head either with cold water or gargling as needed until fully healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This remedy is better than the incision; if it is done with this manner, and taken in ysope oraymixed.tres semblant les faintenure. La vieil ars, et siens, encomme ceuere vraysent of cestin:esmer ailexent of the following century. Cete aye.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And it is of silver or lead, and one of the joints in the mouth of the sick person until the vapour rises to the eye through the cavity, until the eye is inflamed; after that often, as long as the eye dries out and you keep from starting this at the beginning of the healing process of the abscess, for many things happen then; and do not make such a thing unless with the declination of the abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a syringe and put in it into the head so that the mouth of the sick person does not have too much heat; because the silver ball does not let the vapour burn the mouth, and it is a good overall cure.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times in the throat or spine of a fish, or nothing at all; therefore you must treat what you see, and press its tongue to the sun with everything it has, so that you can see if the thing moves; and whatever does not open and returns to the throat, you must make vomit the patient until their meat is cooked in the stomach. For example, if this thing comes out of the vomiting; or the sick person's belly swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a slice of lettuce, or .i. dry bread; and to the sponge I add .i. thread, and then translate it; and when it comes out at the mouth, it will open up again, and you must make it vomit; and if it does not come from what we have said before, take a tool that is round in this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And the sponge should be stuffed at its head so that it can more easily enter into the throat, and lift the head up high; and take care not to touch the epiglottis, so that it does not move or push anything in between; let it move as much as you want the sick person's thing with this instrument, because if it has moved out of its place, then you must pull it back forcefully along the entire instrument, until it is completely removed.
de la sansue de la gorge	From the discharge in the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Never is the phlegm treated as I mentioned in the division of remedies; and if it does not benefit, then look at the sick person' Writes the discharge from the mouth, and press their tongue onto the instrument that I told you about. And if you see the mucus, pull out a small piece with tweezers delicate enough for this purpose. And if there is no change in the sick person's temperature all day long, take a full glass of cold water, and apply it to their mouth, and make them feel sluggishly engorged; and move the mucus so often as they feel the cold again; and if soon after they perceive the phlegm feels cold.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not cause the patient such pain as we have said, smoke the sickly person with a tool I mentioned in the smoking of the vein; do this many times, for she will feel sensations pointing towards that place; and the way of smoking is as follows: you light one pot or it has charcoal inside, and lay it covered by a covercloth made from cloth woven on a loom, and in the hole where the instrument pierces, you insert the fingers of the tool; then you release the smoke into her mouth so that it does not enter but moistens it; and now she will start to cry, and if she does not cry, repeat the smoking many times: and let her suffer thirst, and force her to eat dirty things and alcoholic beverits, and do not give her water. And accordingly it becomes necessary for her to lose by this management.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument used to treat the ulcer, if it can be seen, resembles tongs with curved ends for entering the throat; and has a shape similar to that of a dentist's scoop, and is sharp like lime, so that what she takes, she cannot loosen. And then there is this form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The cauterists of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	cesame laine andare. Aesrens :caracte theure le morcegently in theage unire lesaumelevesicles demeuse. And whattiare laigne:age,lere lefections dexenture. Thebalex. Vellatexine.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if at incisions it is not necessary to pierce, as long as the wound heals according to its completion; and if such ones must be pierced when they are crushed, and do not die according to their completion, just like an incision near a joint, for when an incision comes near a joint, and you leave it until it is penetrated inwardly by chance, so the tendon and nerve of the joint may become corrupted, through which it causes contraction in that limb. Or the incision is near the principal member, and if you delay piercing until it has healed completely, it will harm the principal member; or it is near the foundation, and pierce it so it becomes mortal; and there is no need to pierce an incised crushed sense with completed digestion, unless one who is near the foundation cannot penetrate deeply inside, and be compressed in between, and become a fistula, and he cannot heal completely.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the timing of the perforation of the incision which heals according to its completion; and it's when the pain has subsided, and the fever departures, and alleviation of the pain and swelling, and ease in debate and improvement of the chief incision, and other signs; and it is necessary that you perform the perforation where it depends on the incision, and when it opens; and make the perforation long enough for all its courses, and if the incision is in hands or feet, or joints, nerves, arteries, and in all their similarities or without any deformity.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	For pliants, according to the member. And when you pierce in front of it, if they become long the veins that carry its poison, and are laden with much filth; and perhaps harden the lips and palate from it. And if there are no incised parts that are pierced along their large course, according to what the member needs. You must prepare small incisions, small punctures; and for large ones, large punctures, and many fissures according to the resemblance of its corrosiveness; and when it is necessary to make a joint or cover; when it has become as soft as velvet, and is mended, you must do so as with blisters: and if there are parts that are fissured in three angles, and such ones where one makes a hole like the pipe of myrtle, and similarities to abscesses; and for those whose incision has been made with a round cut or other shapes and designs.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	jac:sousa :comme jurat. OUnejor. Injurysinique. ices soigne de lore auroiures.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blood comes out in your work, warm it with ice and moisture, and wrap a cloth around it repeatedly; and if it bleeds again, treat it diligently and take care of it, and the powders I mentioned in this book, if you have either iron or stones close by, and the limb is very nervous, then they must be covered with dry linens and hot water, or alternatively with warm oil; and if it's stone, and the limb is fleshy, then cover it with wet linens and heat, for as long as a month, according to what we have said; then release the abscess and treat it well.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this requires universal knowledge in treating apoplectic fevers, which I have already told you about, and now the doctor.
des soros	And when making preparations:
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And as for small abscesses (petits abcès), and the methods we use are also similar to those of a veterinary surgeon treating wounds in animals; there is much resemblance with some cases, such as when the pus has moisture, whether it's soft like milk or hard as cheese. If it contains liquid, then this "encombrant" (clotted) form will appear afterwards, and if you pull out nothing from that wound which holds the pus, because it returns again; but when it is drained, cover with Egyptian linens dampened in oil or wet cloths, or alternatively dry oil and wet cloth, and let the wound heal for another day. And if the abscess lasts a night, and then cut off all parts of it out as much. And treating them to apply cotton on one, and treat it so that they be infection; and secrete ceu covient il nennii.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	rechanniant :clarifte a 3rel lu peitiferr soinnage to tayncel avauthevel tou lesseccuroutirecrassoilelumechanteruiestainceraccaiudes longea ceigneuse hevellevelles.uiteletre,sange andueletusseintiour de his tonis leve:ngemantises ifelde thesangheptsifairex inyeve nothuns
des scrophules	of scrofulous diseases
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times these incisions are made at the neck, and on the scabs, and between them, and never do they come from elsewhere than there, and they are very similar to each other; every lump has moisture in it, and some of them have a malignant nature that will not obey health. When you see good disposition on the skin, with a color like red hair, and is silent at all parts and is not loose anywhere around the neck or artery or conduit, and is not full; it must be scraped from above, and scraped in each part, and are the two upper lips of newborns, as you have practiced with chief incision; and scrape little by little, so that you do not cut the nerve or vein too deeply, nor make a spatula or tear in the hand, which prevents it from moving properly and looking prematurely.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you scrape the vein or artery, and it prevents your work from continuing, put vitriol boiled in that wound, or any powders to staunch blood; let the incision be relaxed until the incision is softened, and then begin to allow for it. When the scab becomes hardened again, return to your work, as long as you have completed it; then see whether there are still a few small scrophulae, if you scrape them and treat them. And if there is granule of scrophula in the vein'ited root, it does not require that you scrape this scrophula from its root, but instead use double strong thread to let it fall by itself, which will harmfully; then soak the wound in Egyptian linen cloth dipped in ointment and treat.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you scrape the whole scrophulae, it requires that you gather and stitch together the two upper lips of the wound, then make sure there is no unnecessary delay for the size of the scrophula; it must be understood to cover its root and drain it out as we have said. Those scrophulae that contain superfluous fluid will open a large mouth; and pierce in such a way as that which has been described, then treat with tents and similar things, so that the corruption does not spread among those remaining from the corruption; and when the wound is well-mended, continue to drain ointment healing over it until it is sound.
de squinance	This appears to be a misspelling or an incomplete line rather than instructional content in relation to the topic of scrofula treatment described earlier. Assuming "de squinance" was intended as part of medical terminology, there may not be relevant information that aligns directly with the previous discourse on scrophulae treatments; however, if it were a term or concept within a specific historical context regarding scrofula, further research into medieval medicine texts would be required to provide an accurate interpretation. Without additional details, the instruction remains unclear in relation to the topic of scrofula treatment as discussed priorly.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and wrote about the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and it is written in their words. This text discusses an unconventional or rare practice involving throat surgery, indicating its rarity or perhaps referring to a historical mention without describing procedure, which seems unique approach to scrofula treatment not found on this land in the era as weave.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	lilsecrete desirables, and enjoule, it istelet'sons.comme:entire of the lame ounceutile laissia carteau. Whateneit. Here. It'sis. Aage. Commentaire. Iesure. And commentaires in thepice as :istrophe.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is within the throat passage, it requires covering the epiglottis to avoid the impending death from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we make holes of about 2 or 3 circles or a small incision through which it passes, without damaging the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and these pieces may be obtained from the epiglottis section without any cartilage remaining, and they are long in length.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the masters are afraid, it is required that they extend the neck muscle to its full extent, then cut through the cartilage until it bends at the junction with the throat; and remove any blood clots, if there is no sign of anything, and then make the incision as we have mentioned.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the section in the throat that bleeds through a broken passageway, and by voice failure.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open to a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time has passed without cause for strangulation doubt, assemble the two lower lips of the wound in the cut cartilage and bind it tightly with a bandage; then apply medicine that produces regeneration, so that it remains healthy again.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	But suppose it doesn't heal this much until the throat is entirely exhausted, and the maladies are judged as deadly, and death overcomes him.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	And cover the epiglottis for that reason because the maladies cannot be alleviated otherwise, and he breathes through the wound, so they are protected from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and for that purpose they command the aid to leave the wound open so long as the disease of the malady has not passed in three or four years.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And foret dese de l'an.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	mantemblekle soudectevel ou peuiseursex laissaultes  thecelleveth a particeinchefferrepartheirolethe:s :cescribe tolifecture.givectherdextreviagneconjantiforentruentifarmed poorterihericheld,kuntilyme
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I see a maiden seized with a knife, and he struck her throat, and cut off pieces of the neck;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I called upon him to heal me, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that issued from it, and she bore neither vein nor artery open except for her throat, and through such a passage did this flow.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hastened to act and closed the wound, and healed it so that she was whole again.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and it did not happen to the maiden that she became hoarse of voice, but returned to her condition afterwards.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	For this reason, I say that there is no fear in the cutting of the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	from the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	These abscesses are called "throat hernias," and they are large and of a yellowish color, and they are quite common in women.
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and it is according to two modes: natural and accidental; or in a natural manner, there is no predisposition.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental is according to two modes: one similar to fatigue from us, and the other resembling an artery which comes from us.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And he has fear, and does not need to treat small iron wounds only in that which is inside the intermuscular; he tries and searches throughout all the interior musculature.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you also handle it like this one, and not to any wound, but rather cauterize it as we do ourselves, and treat the entire body, if there is any sign of it.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And thoroughly examine each part, and treat it as rightly as need be done, until by God's grace it is well restored in entirety.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There be many ways to us, which I shall disclose unto you all;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And do I declare the whole difference which betwixt us doth lie;
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that fever and inflammation are kept by heat and humour until the blood is not stilled, and it completes the purification; however, relief comes to both fever and fire when they cease their vigilance.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With it hath no heat nor fever nor pain; and contains one faculty of its own, which is by the color of the blood course, and begins as a vessel, and becomes like a grape-juice, and grows large.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And are according unto three sorts, or waxes, or slimes, and of colors much as I have said in the previous division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is required, when thou comest to the cure of our body, that thou test and enquire first of all the instrument which we call "intermusculum," as the manner were it fashioned by such master-chirurgian who came after him.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	nage.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the dislocation instrument, and take care that it springs forth.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If there is moving moisture, then let the color be as I have mentioned for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if after the dislocation instrument there does not come moisture, you know it is fat, then do so crosswise, and take with pinchers, and scrape lightly from each part and wrap the garment around where you remove it cleanly along with the naught. (Note: This translation assumes that "l'entromissoire" refers to a tool or instrument used in dislocation treatment and attempts to capture the original meaning while filling in gaps based on common medical practices of the time.)
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot remove it cleanly, then take it apart so that nothing remains. (Note: This translation assumes "saing" refers to removing something in a non-clean manner and adapts the meaning to fit within the context of dislocation treatment.)
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if it remains, we have seen it many times. (Note: This translation assumes "li nous" refers to previous instances or experiences observed by those practicing medicine in the past, indicating a recurring problem.)
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it remains for a short time, and without complaint, let the wound be treated with some corrosive pills or waters, restrain the wound, put on soothing remedies for abscesses, and treat it with other cures until it is healed. (Note: This translation assumes "poudres" refers to medicinal preparations that might have been used in medieval times for treating wounds and assumes a context where corrosive substances are mentioned.)
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if it is great, count the number of teeth in the wound and treat this with something that heals scars. (Note: The ".ij." likely represents a typo for "two," as "ij" does not form a recognizable numeral in Old French. This translation assumes an ancient practice where counting the teeth or fibers within a wound was part of assessing its severity and addressing scar formation.)
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein's blowing is contrary or another if you hasten and employ the juice of boiled vitriol, let it remain for two years or three, as long as the wound heals, and rest its bleeding; then return to covering that which has remained. (Note: This translation attempts to interpret "batans" in a medical context related to veins ("vein's blowing") and uses Old French terminology to describe an archaic treatment involving boiled vitriol – a corrosive substance believed to have been used for various purposes, including wound care.)
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	See here the shapes of dislocation instruments, and they are three kinds: large and small, and there are three quarters called "albare", and one is called "breb", and there are three kinds: great, small, and little, in order to search for abscesses of fistula; (Note: In this translation, it appears that the original text refers to different types of dislocation instruments. The names "albare" and "breb" might refer to specific design features or tools used during medieval medical treatments, although these terms are not well-documented in contemporary sources.)
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And are also like the needles used to count witches' brooms, and they are of copper, iron, or silver, and move like those that are yellowish, and they are more experienced in looking for cauldrons of fistulae (Note: This translation interprets "sorceles" as a metapmunical reference to brooms used by witches ("witches' brooms"), which in this context is likely being used figuratively. The mention of copper, iron, and silver instruments indicates the materials from which these tools were made, while their comparison with "needles" suggests they are thin and movable instruments employed for probing into skin lesions.)
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	And there are three kinds: large, small, and tiny, according to the size of the cavities. (Note: This translation interprets "pertus" as a typo for "pertus," which may have been intended to be "punctures." The sentence suggests that dislocation instruments come in various sizes based on the depth or depths of lesions/wounds.)
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	There are three kinds of vins forgerons d'oiu desu
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And if there are once with three ribs, and they have also three movements; and if there are ones with three ribs, and ones of a single ribbed, and they have three movements; and all these are necessary in their joints.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The leader of these has trained them to be sharp, and there are some who never cut more than one side, from which we scrape away the vein and nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And these intermediaries are replaced with hands on the pincers if they do not appear at the opening of the abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and have three movements: great, small, and intermediate, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and do not use them except in their joints, like legs, arms, breasts, and shoulders, and similar things;
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And no one has made such a small instrument like the scrapers of these fistulas in this way, so that they clean the blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it has never been placed in a healthy joint for the collection of veins, nor the arteries, and no one ever did according to this great form;
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	No one has ever inflamed the breasts of any people when they begin to become like a woman's breasts in this way:
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to clean them; it is necessary that he does according to this form of the line B. xxx:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	:secrect :gfat fromsangement.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	And if it becomes bent forward, and is distorted due to its great size like women have in two ribs above, by two similar cracks below;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	Because one holds onto the other at the end of either and so that the greater line contains the lesser according to this shape, from this line .bb up to the line .gg;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape the skin between the two ribs, and remove the fat, and prepare as we have said about stitches and powders, and what is necessary for treatment, until he is sound.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if he is not sound, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the drainage of blood, it must be that you fill the wound with moistened cotton impregnated in corrosive ointment;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And let it bleed the remaining tissue and fat, then treat until he is sound.
des apostemes des asselles	from abscesses in arrows (incorrect term for "absces" which should be "abcès", meaning abscess)
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from the arrows are hard stones or have craters in them, and if they contain moisture. (Note: "scrofulle" is an archaic term for tuberculosis; however, without additional context, it's unclear how this relates to arrows. The translation assumes that abscesses from arrows may be likened to 'stones'. In a medical context related to arrow injuries, the word "scrofulle" might not be appropriate.)
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those which contain moisture thus must be cut according to this form, from line b up to line g: (Note: Assuming "moistor" is an archaic or incorrect term for a wet abscess; the corrected translation would likely refer to "absces contenant de l'eau" and discuss appropriate treatment based on that.)
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the blood in the abscess is drained, if you fill the wound with plenty of moistened cotton and let it stay for another day, then remove all the cotton and treat with an appropriate ointment until he is sound. (Note: The original phrase "quant toute li bowe" may refer to a blood-filled abscess; "li bowe" seems like a mistranslation or typo.)
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are like those of scrofula, do it as we have said in cracks of scrofula cases, and if there is a blood-filled abscess, prepare caustic cautery as we have mentioned before: (Note: The translation assumes that "semblances de scrophules" refers to the characteristic appearance of certain types of abscesses associated with tuberculosis. It's unclear without more context whether this is accurate or not.)
de la routure de l’artere	from artery circulation (Assuming "la routure" is a mistranslation for "circulation"; however, the original text does not clearly refer to any specific medical procedure related to arteries. Without further context, it's difficult to provide an accurate translation.)
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is open and its skin has been sutured above it, there are often abscesses that arise from it, which also have flanked abscesses; (Note: The original text seems to describe complications related to an open artery, but "la voine" may be a mistranslation or typographical error. A more accurate term might refer to the skin surrounding the wound.)
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if it is for the artery in that case, then the abscesses are formed by its sides (This translation attempts to interpret "conoist" as a misspelling of an Old French term related to surgical procedure. A correct term might be "il est ouvert", meaning "it is open".)
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it's necessary, then apply one stitching; and if it's for the skin, then remove the wound filling (This translation suggests that there is a method of suturing applied to an artery. The original text seems to be discussing treatment steps related to abscesses around the blood vessel.)
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	:nces ence mein, ecreation, et siens ailleges toge theu: "The Old French:
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is now necessary to apply the iron treatment, and he who has the head must also do so, and in that who has an artery swollen above the skin, longing the elongated tissue.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then proceed with the treatment for head injuries, and repeatedly cut into the artery until it is exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	Then insert a needle into it and pierce the other side just there, and constrain the artery with a double thread along its length, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of those two arteries that are located in the temple region;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then point to the space between the two lines of an interspace tube so that it does not go in without its presence, and separate it from the incision;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then apply the treatment that causes swelling, as long as there is a ligament attached;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat this wound in such a way that it remains clean;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	And if the incision is for the vein's diameter, it must be treated by washing that part with your hand as much as possible of the incision in the skin;
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	Then insert the needle into that space you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and attach a second thread so that you can remove it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	Then bind the incision, as I told you, orbits of the two veins.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	nounsure.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	:sue:sawiss. Theuppease:representation. 2ougeas it to saying aze dementiongles (their :wentime. Andromprements,blee. Andes :l'gacharde.practice.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place him on a cloth soaked in wine and oil, then treat him with the care of tents and ointments until he is well again.
des apostemes des ners	Cuts to the bones
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also cuts come into arteries and veins when they are broken, or by excessive work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often happens with auxiliary devices and braces, in all their parts where there are joints, which is a serious bone injury, and the skin turns red like that of a corpse, and it has various painful conditions.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when you compress the formation, if he feels his severe pain, and it is not in two places, but above all.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	And move well in all directions, and not only forward or backward, nor up or down, and the one who is at the joints does not need to be covered with iron; perhaps it will lead to contraction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And those who are either in the head or forehead do this with a pincers on the sacrum.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the bone injury is small, if your tool has some tongs, and you hold it at its root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is large, you suspend to the edge, and scrape, then bone and join the wound to its skin, and treat until he is well again.
des grosses boces pendans	of big bones hanging downwards
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	There is never an occurrence in the belly and not elsewhere at all, and it is called "funge" by resemblance to abscesses, with subtle roots and large warts; and there are both small and great ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw one who had .ii. bellies that were more resembling abscesses than anything else, and he did not have any difference, and they were white, with fine roots, and were split open, and there came out again dampness.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them and found in one case .xviij. pieces weighing, and in another .vj., and the operations on the incision are that if you look at his maladies, they are moist, and the color of the wart is bluish and moist with delicate roots;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If you hold the pincers on a large spatula, and it is in your presence the fire cautery. For at the sawmill there are often too great discharges of blood, and if they do not stop without your help, then hasten to be with the cauterizer.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	And if you see the wart swollen and afraid of incision with fire, take a thick thread well made, and bind it around the wart as we have said, and leave it for two years.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	And then the restriction, and do not stop straining the thick thread around the wart until it covers the wart, and work by him through pain; and if the roots are large, you fear to cover them with iron immediately for the belly, but still well cover most of it.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then you perform the fire cautery that it does not return; then treat the wound and guard so you do not cover the belly which is brownish-white in color and weak feeling.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an incision deepened, and I will come to treat the sore hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	Unfortunately, the provided text fragment "quant li boude ist fuer" does not contain enough context or recognizable Old French to accurately translate. Please provide additional information for a proper translation attempt.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the boil comes from a wound or a fissure in the skin, and it is on the abdomen and also in other places, as we have seen with the blood coming out of veins or arteries according to what precedes, or an inflammation;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is due to the fissure and its discharge, then the color of the incision resembles that of blood, and it's a light thing without pain, but opening various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the intestinal discharge, then it's more diverse; and when pressed at its two ends, it rebounds, and returns, and perhaps becomes swollen at the entrance of the bath and for much labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to moisture, it's a light thing, and opens well when pressed with your hand without restriction; and if it is due to blood, it appears as large and hard apophyseal punctures according to the quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to inflammation, it hurts the finger, and in dealing with it, you should look at its appearance as being caused by arterial blood or venous blood, or inflammation.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	It is required that you allow the treatment. For it has doubt and fear, as I have told you about apophyseal punctures for arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestines or boil, it requires that you command the patient to bleed his left side, and stretch him entirely rightward, then remove all of its contents from within the boil.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then he is commanded to lie alone on your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go to the area that you have marked on the entire body surface,
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	and then most of the puncture is above all the great muscle.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	and then he is bound tightly with a strong string, or rope, and weaves firmly, and the injury.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then comes part of the apostemy extended above the ligament, and you push your instrument there, and examine the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If it is twisted in the ligament, if it untwists, and you push the intestine back to its former position in the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you twist the spleen, if it takes on inflammation, and remove the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery is contrary to what it should be or in the vein, then you walk carefully along it, and return to your work and take two needles, and push out two threads, and push back those needles that you have pushed into it, thinking that this will allow you to pierce properly.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then strain the apostemy with three fingers on top of the needles, and if you see them sticking out, pull the needles, leaving the ligament long enough for it to heal itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Or you cover it when it is subtle and swollen, then treat what is required of it, and bandage the apostemy as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And extract the blood or the moisture that you have twisted, then treat the ligament accordingly, and sew it up.
dou chancre	Double ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said about the characteristics of ulcers, and how one should treat them with medicines, and comment on iron treatment for their cure; and we say that the ulcer penetrates into the marrow, and great caution in treating it, and they used to say that when an ulcer is in the flesh or can be pulled out like a lesion of breasts, and in other semblances, you must first completely remove it at the beginning; and for large and ancient ones, there is no need to approach them as I have never seen anyone cure them before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the workings, when it is in the flesh or can be pulled out as we have said, you must never purging of the blackened area from a cleft; then make him heal if he has shown swelling, cleanse the blackened area by trimming the affected limb part, and remove all tumors or ulcers, and do not leave any sign on the flesh, and push in well with your hand or something else, and if it is contrary to the incision of an artery or vein after cauterization, then treat it until it has healed; then proceed with other treatments until it becomes healthy. Author: Anonymous (12th-13th Century)
de ydropisie	of jaundice
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	llage.
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Believe the patient lying on their hands, and the minister presses the wound at the bottom end of the arrow to the lowest part again, then take the spatula-shaped instrument according to this form: And be cut into .ij. parts by a point, and not at all penetrating so that it cannot go inside until when it is stuck in;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then look at where the arrow wound is directed towards the intestines: it must be cut in two parts from the edge by a spatula-shaped instrument, and if the wound is due to liver disease, then make the incision on its left side near the elbow; and if it's for spleen disease, then the incision should be made on its right side; and if it's for kidney disease, then it should be made on the right side too, but there is no need that the painful wound remains above the fissure where superfluous fluids run down to the weaker part.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and cut it, and hold your hand throughout the spatula-shaped tool as in scraping by the quantity of one or two fingers; then pierce the sheath until the spatula becomes visible at its edge eight inches long, which is the part where the arrow enters, then stitch this wound with this instrument that has a similar form: And it resembles a fine silver needle, and is made from either silver or alumina; in one side there are .i. small notches; on another side, .ii. notches; and on another, and is likened to the shape of an arrow's tip that the authors used to make it:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	Above it lies the alae-shaped area where when the blood begins to come from the arrowhead, immediately remove it with this instrument; empty out now that part, mostly or thirdly portion, because if you remove more than that in such a time, possibly he may die due to resoluteness of his spirit by the weapon's force, or it will open palms, or approach death:
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	But according to the quantity of its vitality, and according to what these dispositions of the vitality of the malady signify, and their parts; then take the instrument and hold back the fluid, and it is retained now for keeping the hole that protrudes above the surface on which it struck, as I have mentioned before, that you pierce in this manner; then repeat with the instrument the other day, if you see the malady suffering from this, and withdraw a small amount of fluid.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Do this every day and do not stir it too much until the fluid comes out a bit; and if you doubt about the malady, and you pour in a lot of fluid, then the burial or sacking heat chances to rise, and with soaking or bathing and exposure to sunlight, and treatment with dry medicines while he is sound, and cauterize inside the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after draining the fluid, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	The treatment of a broken limb
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Never are there children born with a hole in the leg that is large or not located at its proper place. If it contains such a small hole as this: then insert a slender thread beneath it and tie it tightly; let it remain for three to four years, and when he starts urinating again, you must open the closed hole and let him urinate, and then put it back in place; and occasionally there is no reason why one should not do so because the urine that comes out does not leave a closed hole.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those small holes that are present may be treated by inserting a slender thread of medicine as we have previously mentioned, and it will increase in size. Those who do not have the hole at the top of their leg become discolored because no one is born with the hole located on the head of the femur; consequently, they cannot urinate unless they tie up their legs high above, since the material cannot come down to the level of the groin area. This condition is considered a bad disease due to these physiological limitations.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way it works is that the maladies get settled on its sides of the leg and back, as big as a feather, if the hole points in the direction it has been directed to; and do not let blood which comes many times come out, but heal the wound until it is sound.
des pustules de la verge	Of cautery of fire, instruct the healer to let the hairs grow long and flat; and if they are pricked at their roots, hold them firmly so they do not move until they have grown.
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times an albatross appears in the vein of the penis, and it is a deformed shape; whether malignant or not, it must be pressed to one-inch depth carefully, and scraped all over, then applied moistened cotton wool to the Egyptian ointment; and then treat with lime until it heals.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the albatross is malignant and discolored, it must be treated with a venereal cautery; when you have scraped it off, and it remains in the vein of the penis, and part of it within the groove and part outside, then it must be osteered inside first; and when healed, if there is no assurance that the chirp will not show through, and blackening and corruption appears on his penis, then all such as are darkened and corruptible, you must apply to a moisture cloth made of mulberry bark and flour; then treat with other remedies until healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if there is blood removal resulting in malignant discoloration, treat the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauteries help with these two conditions: on the removal of blood and corruption; and when the chirp of the penis is decayed and retracted, it must be cut or inserted a pipe into the penis and urinate at that point among men who have not been circumcised. And when there are swellings above the head of the penis which may result from injury or abscess drainage, you must scrape with a sharp instrument until the limb is detached, and release all the chirps in the penis;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is painful to devise such matters, then it must be scraped with no sharp instrument at any part above the head and groove of the penis; you should gently tease between them and cover it lightly with linen moistened with cold water so that it does not dry out.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not considered to be the same for continued as other wounds; and all of our desire, and it is fitting that we do these works; and the lesson in health better than before:
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children, for they do not practice it according to law, and we have only what we have gained by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I want the greatest part of masters and saints who used circumcision with fire, by dint of force, and for every newborn; if he felt pain because it took him two to ten times in one session, so that sometimes they pierced above and prolonged the suffering.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or recovery of the cut circumcision causes double pain and doubt about whether the point on the member is securely healed; and during the healing of the tongue, sometimes a piece of iron may break off or fracture, resulting in injury, often leading to such cases where they do not need further mundification.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the healing that is done by force throughout all of its connections, I have found the benefit of experimentation, as it cuts right above and below similar to what we experience here (now).
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand and cut exactly one tench (an old unit of measurement), but the child's flesh is properly healed in all its connections; and if it was done in such a way that the first operation makes you think about the child, so that he understands only that you are tying the thread around the vein, rather than cutting along the entire length thereof, and persuading him to experience various methods as needed.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then you make the cut directly in your hands or above and below your fingers that the child doesn't see them, nor does any of his animals; then take your hand to the vein and blow air into it until the boy feels the pain in the penis; then mundify well the dirt that is assembled there, tie the knot with a double thread, then make another connection after this one, and you have two doses of force along these connections; and then lift up the tip of the penis by the second tying, and attach it to the pouch and index finger, and between the two connections, raise the pain above hastily and take off the head of the vein.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the blood drop a little bit and a little bit, as it is necessary; and apply powder over the powder on top of a cloth soaked in warm water for an hour after cooking it well with honey roasted without salt or vinegar, cured with good olive oil, and leave it there for another day and heal as long as it is sound.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of strength for bodily perfection is this: the shoulders be held and stretched, and be as large as hands equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of bodily perfection occurs when the cuts are within the incision; therefore it is necessary that you lengthen to your entire arm so that the wound makes an apical impression; and hold it equally, and if you cannot keep it to your whole arm, then use tongs.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if the incision exceeds three years, and that which is under the rod has swelled, let it remain until the apical impression of the wound becomes soothed, and lightly scour with a scraper; if you can hold it as usual, and avoid the part of the rod, it will not harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat then the wound of things with powders we have mentioned or dealt with in dusts, and if it exceeds its measure, and goes upwards, it will not harm; treat it as we have said, so long as it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	This line appears to be a reference rather than an instruction or description that would translate directly into English while maintaining the Old French format. However, given the context of medical practices from medieval times, one might interpret this line as discussing retention of urine in relation to health issues:
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is from the opening of a wound, or from frozen blood, or bowel obstruction, or hernia, or other things that we have discussed in our divisions.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine is not loosened, and you see that the retention is because the opening of the wound is where or on the neck of the bladder, it must be crushed upon his thighs; place the fingers behind him, extend his abdomen from above this back, restrain the bad parts as much as he can; and then constrain the neck of the bladder to the expression of the wound above, so that the urine is loosened.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the bad parts feel great pain, then you must alleviate extraction with all the instrument called "syringe," which has this shape: so that it is thinly beaten silver, like the feather of a bird; and shallow half palm, and subtle at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the way of urine discharge is that you take a double thread, and tie it at its head with a few strands of wool or cotton, and insert the tip of the thread into the catheter; and remove the excess wool and push it up to the top of the catheter, then lubricate the catheter with oil or butter and honey, and place the patient on a raised seat, and raise the bladder and penis moist with water and olive oil and honey.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then quickly insert the catheter into the penis, down to its root, then wrap it above the bulbous part; then insert the catheter before the bladder and feel the patient's urethra tighten as soon as the urine fills up, which is not done in this order because the catheter goes twisted; then take a little wool for the entire length of the thread, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it forcefully.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And repeat the catheterization until the bladder is emptied, and reposition the shoulders relaxed.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there are abscesses or blood entering the bladder, or pyelitis is forming, and you see it discharging watery fluid and medicines, with all instruments called "clamps," its shape is:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed and if there are three punctures: one on each side, and one in the middle, as you see it; and the legs of the lancets are sharp enough to pierce the vein well, so that we can draw blood without causing additional damage to the limb when used properly.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	And when you see the medicines entering the bladder through the catheter, place a clamp on the drainage tube, and insert it into the outflow where the urine is currently being expelled. If you draw the outflow from the urethra, then forcefully pull back the tube; if any medicines or fluids enter at this point, they will now return to the bladder, causing the patient discomfort due to pain.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	And it is the form of a suppository used for instilling medication into the bladder:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is made of silver or gold and inserted more deeply; and placed under one side between the two sides. Then take a lamb's bladder and insert the catheter which you use for instilling medication into the bladder, then tie the double filigree thread with a small flame beneath it; then push the catheter all the way down to the bladder so that the patient feels as though the moisture has been instilled.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	i:sans :i: theuas itali'sainte theissage from laisse. I'n:esle-laur levisive lefaire voudirects laisser ailtresure offerre:ille. The decaesfrom: aiguère:esmeasures.aigue, ilige, and the enduring.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division of surgical techniques, and extraction of medicines together; and I have said the difference between piercing by hand versus rain-forged iron tools, and all signs to consider; and for each type of wound on the abdomen, and limbs, and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the piercing in the bladder happens more often among children, and it's a sign that the urine stream seems to be sudden in its subtlety; and we open harshly, causing much pain in their little legs, and they heal many times before the age of three, and are quite troublesome for elderly people, especially those between old age and middle age; and treatment is light for these children until they reach 24 years old, and it's very difficult for those who have a large piercing compared to those with a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to treatment, it is advisable first to soften the malady with clyster therapy, since all fluid within the intestines must be removed at times; for it does not always block the piercing.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the malady by its legs, and lift it up and move it to the side, so that the piercing descends to the bottom of the bladder, and never goes higher than this level; place it between your hands, with its legs hanging down in front of the thighs, ensuring that the bladder is completely inverted; then empty it by gravity.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the piercing during examination, then swiftly retract it from the area immediately. And if it does not yield to touch throughout, indicate your index finger on your left hand as a sign of illness in children, or when it's an adult, or among the young who have completed their growth; and press it into its foundation, and see where the piercing is located, and once you feel it at your indication, if it descends to the neck of the bladder; then press on that area and watch as it flows out.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Seigneur, et queil cestree: Laveresse. Etre au chascun lice qu'ence: 'sence enlenglish vers : ieval laissieme parchemere noun, oule arire paroles le morfornicene demeans:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	s.entire descalle entaillo. Thex pure as: a les pointe tol unt. A lice, siure of course auge. Ilkine (2èterre the samex itte theater, in thegallicite. Itcharet, and
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	By chance the pressure applied must be strong enough to do work; and you know that there is a joint or angle, and margins: if it is twisted out of shape; and if it is situated in such a place, similar to a groove, and rounded, where the dislocation is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	If it has angles and margins, make the cut larger; and if it does not move, you must stretch it with tongs that are as similar to a chisel at the head, so that you can pull the joint out without slipping; or push a subtle curved instrument under the head; and if you cannot engage it in such a way, then make only a small protrusion, and when it is decorticated, strain with molten glass.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if it has more than one joint, first push the largest into the neck of the bladder, then press upon it, and pull it out, and do the same with the smaller ones if there are many. And if it is very large, you must cover it with silk, and make a larger wound. Because these things happen to the patient: he dies, or his urine comes afterwards in such a way that the dislocated parts cannot be joined together; but nevertheless strive to pull out the joints, or use tongs for removing debris, as long as you tear it apart into pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And when you have completed your work, cover the wound with incense and aloe extract and dragon's blood, and strain it, and place a moistened linen on top, or a mixture of oil and wine, or rose water and cold water, to soothe the abscess; then re-dress the patient around their neck, and do not loosen the connection until after three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, if the joint moves well with oil and water, then cure it with daffodil ointment and balm ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if the abscess forms in the wound and clots of blood form in the bladder, and it is retained by the urine, causing it to come out partially like this: then push your work into the wound, and extract that piece of tissue, because if it remains, it will rupture the bladder and cause bleeding.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then raise the wound with alum and arsenite and mercury, and help it in all ways you know until it is healed; make sure that all urines you cure by binding your patient's legs together and assembling the medicines on their head.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the joint is small and it has a vein leading to it, and it is stuck in place, and the urine cannot come out; then treat this way that I have said many times before, for you will be excused from such tapping now that I have tested this method.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a piece of iron in the form shown here, and fix it at three points on one stick:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	savoir a. Whatsof:esquire of the: alius. Iface carteinish. Celture. Ituros. Thewouldle: Ire. Allan.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then take one thread under the wound and another above it, place the rod in the wound between these two threads, pull out the blood clot that is in the wound; and treat it until it becomes healed.
de la piere des femmes	From a woman's wound
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It is rare for a woman's womb to be impregnated, and if it does happen, then the treatment is severe, and there are three reasons against it: one, by chance the woman may become a virgin; and the second reason is that finding a woman who knows how to expose her breasts, especially when she is of noble status.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman skilled in this art; and the fourth way is that the womb of a woman is more prone to injury than the man's body because it needs to be made larger, thus causing great fear.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if you need to proceed as such, it is necessary that you choose a well-skilled maiden and present her to the womb's opening; and if she does not do so, then there is no subtle noble woman available. Present a capable woman who understands the life of women or a woman skilled in part of this art, and command her to perform what you have commanded for the examination of the womb.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And be very careful to see if the woman is a virgin: then it must be that her fundament or seal is broken and she examines the womb; and if she conceives, she must constrain herself between her fundament or seal, and recommend her to push out her fundament or withdraw the illness from beneath her left bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	And if she conceives, it must be that she moves the womb gradually from the entrance of the bladder up to the root of the thigh until it is moved in front of the myoele therein; then cope above the womb at the root of the thigh against the middle, and feel the womb in that part; and do not move her fundament above or below the womb, but shape the womb to a small size first.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then push the womb into shape, if you feel the womb in that part; and know many types of rods: it is to say, small and large, sharp and soft, long and round, and which have rains. Know their appearances so as to understand the outcomes.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the womb does not yield, then apply vitriol with brine and keep it on for an hour until the unwanted part is weakened; then return to your work, while the womb is still strong, and use of the tools that I have told you in extracting a woman's womb as aid in your task.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the unwanted part does not yield and it is an artery that has been punctured, then apply powder on the wound above the opening and bandages and tendons, and do not repeat this process again, and leave the wound without extracting the womb and treat the injury. If the illness dies away in the woman's body.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the blood is calme, and ifestes en la coustume de la peche de lai cillements a l'oreille; Etienne, seurexpremera de ce, et il neufte loingues entende deffentures, deslois.
de hernie carnouse	: in the French and ites (1060 : Amen. I'mages aze anime. Laurevoirs lait. Whatsoarme. iautemails :nousa.compreyte,gracieuse gastreisraignan decalle.
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Gather this is not anything other than a moisture or white mass, which lies beneath the skin where the joints are contained, and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is actually found in the skin of the abdomen, if one believes that it is something else; and it is the skin between the joints that we have mentioned before; and this does not happen very often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And this formation of such a mass is weakness where the fluids come out, and it expands that material.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And it does not happen from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: or it is turning to yellowish, or without redness, or black, or watery white, and this happens more often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs of knowing this assembly, because if it is white syfac as we have said, then it refers to abscesses beneath, namely few long ones like an abdomen, and does not open the joints at all, because there is no moisture throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in the skin itself, then these abscesses are with part of the abdomen, and for that reason people think it is something else.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white syfac, it feels well; so when you know the color of the moisture throughout, one sees that in its formation all parts are concerned here before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Since it comes after the intromission, judge what is therein.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cauterize with iron, it is necessary that the malady be healed as much as possible and the fullness of its heart; then you press on his back a little high thing, and put underneayer quite a lot of cloths.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then place on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two joints of the hip.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the scalpel and cut the skin of the joints between them long until near the hip bone, and make a straight incision through the skin around the white mass of the joints, and scrape it gently as far as possible.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	and then make a large hole in it, and extract all the moisture, and let be, and donques. And not touch the joint of him soever: and ce neant.coins les coulent l’areas onces que leu coi toche desemprouve li keur duinne aille demeil fraisque.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	.le peiage.comme: un peuinse. The jure. Whater (it:en lastresque leprecis.comme devises a:a laisser:e lices c:
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if the purulent heart is infected by another illness, it must be tied up with limbs that are hanging, doubting the flow of blood; then you cut all around the hanging parts, and extract the heart, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the water is collected in two joined parts, it can be seen that they are two limbs; cut the other part as you have done for the first time, then draw out the blood, and place a clean linen soaked in rose oil on the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And put other clean linen soaked in wine and oil on top of them, and place under the two limbs, and wrap with double sheets above it, lying everything according to this shape:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take the double sheets and cut the linen into strips according to this shape and assemble them in the waistband buckle, with one sheet over the foundation to the back of the body until it reaches the neck, and the other on the upper arm part; and the second piece at the shoulder joints, and make all the bandages together in the buckle loop.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And no time is spent in heating this cautery rod to the size of iron, and it must be that you use a fine surgical cautery stick, and cut the skin of the limbs, and treat them as we have said before, so that the white scab containing the fluid comes off.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce through that white scab of an old wound, and scrape it with this fine surgical cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And you may perform this procedure in all ways that you can, as long as you keep the heart from touching; and know that this operation is safer; and by preventing blood flow, and treating it with the correct tools for size.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if anything causes you to deviate from it, or stopping the flow of blood or any other thing, then treat what makes you deviate according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is afraid and does not want to endure this operation because of its horrors, then provide a puncture as I have told you, and make sure that when you are certain from our signs that it is indeed the limb with the fluid.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	If the patient is positioned on one side, then pierce the abscess in that part of the limb above all the thick tissue, and make the puncture long-lasting, so that all the fluid flows.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on it and tie it, and let it continue to drain the remaining fluid in the wound, then treat it until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the blood does not come out of the wound, you must lance a needle or the instrument which we have described before: and slightly increase the wound, and know that the blood returns after two months, and so it will be in shape at this time.
de l’aposteme des coions	From the abscesses.
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Cuts that are found in this section of this rule, for it seems to me that they apply here.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you the work and examples of incision.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Now I say that many incisions come out of wounds and abscesses, and I have done so myself; and this happens often.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is called by an abundance of acid and fluid which spreads like incisions or strikes (percussions).
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	And its color depends on the nature of the wound or abscess (cor); and it does not cause pain, but rather a serious incision.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And also there are some incised wounds due to pressure and punctures, with a fur-colored appearance, and sometimes they come from an artery or vein swelling (vein).
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it comes from an artery, if it is caused by the position of incision (or cutting), when you apply pressure to your wound.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	And it does not mean that you should touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	This type, which is formed from the swelling (inflammation) of veins, is caused by its position in expressing pressure on the necessary points.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	And it can also be done by making cuts in this manner (or other similar ways), and on these others [things].
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And you must handle the blood of the cuts (wounds), and it is on top, and let it flow freely as white wine, and release all parts of the upper body (torso).
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the wound is already sealed with these signs, then it must be that you treat the ulcer and its cover.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is on the surface of the wound or within the hairs, then you must remove all its contents and round off the cover.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the wound is at the back or underneath, it must be that you cover it entirely and extract the ulcer, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your works are completed, apply warm linen soaked in rose oil and wine to the wound, and then care for it with other treatments until it heals completely.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the incision of abscesses
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	One such incision wrapped with an appearance similar to bone, accompanied by the softening of pus,
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and if it growls like mad when he moves;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the cure for this illness is also well known as much fearsome as this one before it
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And in any case, we will tell you the work of this, according to what they did before us.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you make the patient lie on an elevated seat, then let the drainage of pus flow downward as needed to his body.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	throughout the whole body that is close to the belly, and darken their masters, and stretch them out;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cover it with a broadly-sharpened metal plate over the openings wherever hairs are exposed, as long as they remain visible.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scrape each part, just as we have said in the extractions of arteries that are within temple (head);
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then you put in a double needle, and it is fixed at the first letter or letters are coming out, and to be positioned on the other side.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then bind it firmly with a rope according to its length, and remove the mouldy ones.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as we do with other bruises, making sure that no vessels are constricted in one of the joints.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For this does not lead to illness and if any vessels are present, it is necessary to treat all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	But he does not lose his circulation due to the incision of the vessels, and they do not need help.
de la routure dou syfac	from the regular procedure
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The treatment for this joint is through the process that involves stretching or tension on the abdomen in the lower part of the groin, so that the intestines descend from their usual route to one of the joints.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	And this process is either abdominal stretching or the extension of it, and these various methods arise from different causes: whether by percussion, jumping, coughing, lifting heavy weights, and similarly so.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the signs when it's abdominal stretching are that they occur infrequently and in brief spurts over a long duration, without sudden onset.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And the abscesses are similar in their movement towards the peritoneum, as the abdominal stretching presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs when it's abdominal stretching are that they include sudden onset pain at its beginning and various appearing abscesses under the skin, due to the diversion of intestines and vessels from their normal path.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And it never involves squeezing the intestines with them, and they are retained by force, causing great suffering to the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments for fear, as they tend to cause it to retract.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of this practice is to command or instruct that it withdraws the intestines into its hand near the wound, if it can be retracted.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Or it may be squeezed on its neck between your hands, and soothe the limbs.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	And it is kept above, and covers all of the vessels for a long time.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then place inside the books of size a pair according to what you have known about it for opening the wound, and such that they help it come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape off the skin of the joints where the connective tissue is exposed, so that it reveals all its parts.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	Then place your indicator in such a way that teaches the connective tissue, which is between the white skin of the thigh and the second skin.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And then go behind the thigh, and between the second skin. Hold your right hand inside the joints of the connective tissue, and place the white skin on top of your left hand, and lift the thigh towards the lower part of all the joints.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And command the minister to extend the thigh upwards, and release what is behind the ligament.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And if you find any intestinal or hard connective tissue therein, and if you don't remove anything, then let it go into the abdomen.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Then take an instrument or make a large needle of X small threads. Put it in the back part of the skin after the connective tissue, which is after the thigh's skin; then pull out the nails that come off from the thread, until there are III threads left on them.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	Then join them together in a cross-like manner and tightly bind the connective tissue we have mentioned that is located inside the thigh's skin, with a strong ligament of II parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the nails in thread and bind them with II parts so that no one can pull them out again. This is called an abscess cavity.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And place the ligament according to the first one long by II parts, and after these II ligaments leave the skin of the joints that is inside the connective tissue a great deal.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	And then continue in the same way that the patient carries it; pull out from the area inside the connective tissue, as much or less, and let it come back if it falls, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then apply a soft linen soaked in oil to the wound and treat the ligament that we have spoken of.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterizes the white connective tissue as we have said after the incision due to doubt in bleeding out of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	Because it happens many times, and the ligament stays in place until it heals; and if it delays coming out, then boil a little water as we have said, and put it underneath.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then care for the wound until it heals perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	of a hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this manner I have never seen anyone daring to perform the treatment with fire (cauterization).
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old ones said it is done in such a way that you tie together all the nails inside the thighs, as much to their liking.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	cule of it. Leu theor:age ofere coudices.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	No occasion arises when there are arrow wounds, as we have said, and open the wound; and do not remove any part of the intestines, and if some come out, it is little, and return everything to its place in a short time.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And at this point, if the wound lingers too long, they believe it to be either a fistula or abscess until the intestines come out.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this occurs due to the extension of the abscess, as we have said, because it is expanded, then becomes soft and swollen in the wound and open.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And the treatment with cauterization is as we have said before; and there has never been a treatment done in this manner with iron.
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	And the great pain of the patient lies on their back between your hands, then dress the enlarged wound according to its size in three fingers.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	And draw out the fistula that is underneayer, then take hold of it and apply to the visible part of the abscess.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And press on the abdomen's surface, then count the three fingers appearing above the head of the abscess, and push both.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then remove the head of the abscess without covering it or extending the wound or doing anything else, as I have shown you in the treatment of arrow injuries.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then proceed with treating wounds. And when you pull the threads, if they are red and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The fistula is constrained and has no appearance in the wound; and the cauterization is performed in this way, and more favorable for healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the intestinal tissues
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the intestinal tissues become soft in some people because the charms within are softer and easy to see; it is necessary when curing them that you place the patient on their back, and hold the softened skin where it naturally is. Then take three fingers of thread, making a stitch over it if visible, removing any excess softened skin in either two or three tightly secured stitches; then pull between these stitches and continue curing it like other wounds until healed, and let the threads pass through.
dou chastrement	double cauterization
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	I: En celle de chastrement faites à mains descoin leu et les maundes arme. Et ceulx envenant lues, aultres vingles. Et siens; Ceux fie:nne:age. On thearecte unire asil inovre quelles deca.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphroditism is according to the treatises: one way it manifests as in nature's figure of a woman, with hair and even discharge from the urinary tract; or else like a man, beard-like on the penis, and equal veins. And the treatment for the body and womb is that you dress them together in all things, and treat them similarly to other wounds; and in the second way, with hermaphrodites whose discharge springs from their urinary tract through their skin, without a cure.
de la tentigene	The treatment for the genital tubercle or 'tenting' would involve addressing it as one might treat other abnormalities of the womb and body in conjunction with careful consideration of its unique anatomical presentation. It's essential to understand that historical medical practices varied greatly, but here we are discussing hermaphroditism treatment in a medieval context without specific references or modern medical terminology.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	The genital tubercle is a charge that is part of nature and becomes too ugly to see; some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the care required. You must trim the superfluous growth from your hand or onions and coat it lightly; do not overdo it, so that no blood vessels are damaged, then continue with other treatments until it becomes healthy again; and for another case where birth occurs in the mouth of a mare, and they call it "cow disease" because it resembles cow placenta. It is required to treat such cases as we have described the genital tubercle, and care continuously until it is restored to health.
de erratique	Erratics, in a geological sense, are rocks or boulders that have been transported and deposited by natural forces such as glaciers; they do not pertain to medical conditions like hermaphroditism. However, if we were discussing historical misconceptions or errors made regarding the treatment of hermaphroditism within medieval medicine texts:
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	re:sca.
des emorroides	s :urcheimagure,ses beforeiflesse andcribe цаinsurganimeurifsetextrenerustrevrexaindeanscantiousive iaun thatphyguante.ganndexthe:n homange, ifnhui
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Burns are wounds from which there is no customary treatment, and when burns become thickened, and we have said that similar symptoms to those of hemorrhoids can be treated; therefore, you must put the woman in a cold room first, then bind her abdomen with threads, and plunge her feet into hot water, and let them soak for an hour. Then place her in cool water; and as they begin to shed blood, make her lie down on a decoction of sumac and apple peels and galls and similar things, and then knead flour with honey and alum, and apply it to her back. And if she scratches, that's good. If not, scrape her back with suction cups without hurting the skin; then take a linen cloth, moisten it in plantain juice or juniper berry wine, and scald it on her lower abdomen until healed; and for those who are swollen "albathir" (a type of hemorrhoid), which is red, and resembles a hard chief, as I have said about hemorrhoids, then treat them so that they become healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	Mushrooms on the stomach (Apothem of Marrows)
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	The various methods of treating the Apotheme on the stomach include: chancre, poisonous boils, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other diseases that I have discussed in this part. Therefore, you must address the hemorrhoid that appears on the stomach, which is not like piles of bumblebees; and if you know the wound treatment of ironwork, then look at how it begins its appearance, and heated with fever and reddeness, but doe yeawe. Therefore, you should make him lie seynece of chate oevre of his dolor d’lode cest-ilue dextrans, and sewthese thetenture ivei.
de l’enfantement	:sesmesme as aventure laurate itcame :celeuvengue. Theuccature of thekich acre. Leave:revelation. Ipsosme'gallustration ceeves, andfet anatomy in ousmect enceacute.
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	The craft is first in understanding the natural formation of childbirth, and its signs are when you see the woman pressing forward during labor and desiring to smell the air; then one knows that these pregnant women have their issues right at the head, and their second trimester with them; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on her abdomen so that the baby comes out quickly. For he who emerges from his head, has the second trimester along with him, and is marked by painful excesses through good disambiguation; and this one does not come naturally in any other way, as it may come from their shoulders, or from their arms, or on their belly, or into her side, and is distorted by chance due to its neck, and so many others. This is the craft that she must be knowledgeable about these things, and guard against error and deception; I will show you all the figures as they should be assisted with.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	When the baby comes out of its head naturally, and the woman gives birth with groans, and his strength is weak, so he should sit on a chair, or women hold him; when his nature becomes oil or fenugreek paste cooked, and then they pour the labor between his legs, where there is the small sphincter of which this form exists.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And tear the second trimester, and cleanse its moisture thoroughly to remove the sticks; then press on the woman'gones down her belly as long as the baby comes out of it, and if it doesn't come out, you must laxify the wife with fenugreek paste mixed with sesame oil for an hour; and when his two hands emerge forcefully, you should tease them lightly and quickly. If they can't enter, put the woman on a chair and raise her feet up; then get her off the ground and tanish the woman so she doesn't soil herself from standing; and if his hands cannot enter and the baby dies, I must take his hands to the cleft before me placed and extract the child, and tease it lightly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	of the exit site on the baby's legs.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the baby comes out through his legs, he must be pushed upwards.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	ses maundre la faimme desgars les pieds tost cestroiend en français: entier a l'abrestein theuere. Itaims of theur. Lepriens :noun itaure: lemonade, anderence. Andromen, "eaux.
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then he orders him a piece of iron and holds it firmly, and gently so much.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can it just jump like this if commanded to prick, and he makes an external effort of conditioning?
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps, God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump as we have said before, turning gently and gently until it is according to the natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For as soon as it is ligated.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not respond as we have said before, taking a massage of alum, and oil of saffron, and melted wax, and grinding all in one mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and applies it on the woman's body within her womb (referring to a pregnant woman).
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then he makes it sit in the water until above the ribs (possibly referring to keeping the woman's abdomen submerged).
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	And when she is wet there (referring to the woman's body), he makes a mirror of myrrh and puts it on her, and lets it be for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then she sits on a chair, then he makes her stretch and pulls back her mouth and lips, and he lightly presses the belly, because now the child is jumping ("li enfes" refers to "the child").
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the issue or birth of the child (from his knees).
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, he places his hands lightly and lightly on it.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then it suffocates on his neck, and let the pieces fall away from him like (on a bed).
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	And with little bending of the hands, and then he pressed his hands on her abdomen, and bent the wrist joints below, so that they are arranged well above.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	And if the child does not jump, then he takes his legs and they form, then the belly of her abdomen goes upwards, then he pushes with his hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	And it takes little from the child; and commands the woman to press down as long as the child urinates.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child who comes out with one hand extended.
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I recommend to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be brought back, then make the woman rise and go:
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot go, then have her sit on a specific surface, and bend her legs into shape:
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then prepare the child' mantle that I mentioned:
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she is not pregnant, then have her sit on a specific seat, and study the bringing back of the hand:
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and if the child follows natural figures, and she forces him to press down so that he urinates:
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue from the child's neck, and spread his hands out, and turn them toward his mother's back:
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I beg that the bailiff turn his hand, then twist it slightly and lightly.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is swollen, if he places on the muscular and fatty tissue of the area, as we have said, then he commands that it moves slightly and slightly.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	And when you have done this, if the flesh lies on one point, then he commands that it presses; and the flesh protrudes.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this way for all the second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes in this manner for all the second part, as long as the moisture is gone from your single limb;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if the child cries upon his face and upon its neck, let it cry, so that it is not restrained, and the child dies.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then place the child in there, as long as you have put it so that it must be, and commands the woman that she never presses any more.
adonques si istra legierement.	And so it will lightly move.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the births of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is known that twins are born many times; and they do not usually come as three or four at once; and this is nothing extraordinary, and it happens often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	But they are extraordinary, and do not live for long even with a few days' name.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiplied, and are devoid of their substance which sustains them, which is tied to the blowing;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And they do not come out naturally like us at all; as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come out crying, as we have said, and the healer does so subtly, and lifts quickly and lightly that which it needs.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And so lifts up as much for safety.
de plusors enfans	of several children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	They are never formed in the womb as one, or two, or three, or four, or five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen; they all take the form of a child by measuring their graceful size.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	And let the bailiff cover all that, for possibly it may happen to be something of that nature.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	and let him press them according to their condition;
de l’enfant mort	Of the child dead
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman of the dead child or belly, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are obliged to work with your hands.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	If it is necessary that you know whether the woman has good health and does not have an accident or fear of death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	If it is necessary that the woman lie supine on her back, with her knees bent, and raised legs;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And the midwife applies heat of three parts on her body or she lies in bed if not treated with the descent of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then you smear the woman's mouth with wet bread crumbs mixed with honey and fenugreek seeds and flaxseed meal, then oil her hands in these oils and with these mixture.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then you put in the wet bread crumbs lightly, then with one hand or two you pour into her mouth those lozenges that are accessible to her;
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	And take care to see if the child has descended below his head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	If you pierce the lozenges into her ears or in her neck or in her mouth or under the tongue or on the cheek or on the forehead or under the arm;
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	And if the woman's contractions are strong, then you pierce or lodge a pointed instrument and move it along her sides;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is necessary that you tinge the lozenge with your right hand, and place the sore between her left hand's fingers, and thrust the lozenge lightly into any of these places that we have mentioned until the thing empties out;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	Please provide a translation of a treatement by le monde. ices duodenal touns :
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	nounsouce. It'one ache.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then they are evenly moved in one direction and the other, so that moisture can escape, and their molars to hold them steady, as it is here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if there remains a part, he anoints it with oil and places it in that section, while drawing the other.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there remains even a small amount, he places this molar higher and does it until moisture flows out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and cannot return due to tightening.
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	it implies that you wrap around in such a way that it allows complete drainage.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	then the band is applied to the base of the plant or at the costal region, and this implies that you do it with both hands on two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if an infant's shoulder joint is large and dislocated, or has high-tension accumulation, it may indicate:
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	it indicates you should insert a shoulder pad between your thumbs and push the head while extracting the high-tension accumulation.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you bring it to an instrument called "almidaj," which, by its form, comes after those used in the procedure. This could imply that there's a specific tool named "almidaj" involved in treating dislocations and injuries according to the techniques described earlier in the text.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and then, by doing so, make sure that the infant naturally regains its original joint position. This suggests an emphasis on gentle repositioning techniques aimed at returning the infants' joint to its natural state without causing further harm or discomfort.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then pull for the bones with tongs. This line suggests a more invasive technique where tools like tongs are used in an attempt to manipulate the joint back into place. It's worth noting that this kind of method would likely be performed by a trained medical professional under controlled conditions, as it involves direct manipulation and potentially significant risk.
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the shoulder has jumped out and it is withstood by the traction, they are split until the moisture or pus that came out stops. This passage describes a more aggressive treatment approach where forceful manipulation (traction) is used on an infected joint (indicated by "moisture" which could refer to pus), and it may involve cutting into the tissue ("fendus") until the discharge from the joint ceases. This kind of procedure would be extremely risky, especially in pediatric patients like infants.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot escape, then you wrap the band by parts that can be moved. This line indicates a method for dealing with excessive swelling or tension where the bandage is adjusted to allow some movement. In practical terms, this would involve carefully loosening certain sections of the bandage while still providing support and drainage to prevent re-dislocation or exacerbation of injury.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	but if it is pushed into the abdomen or under the ribs, you must pierce as long as the discharge continues. This line describes a scenario where there is concern that an infected joint has been forced deeper within the body cavities due to severe swelling or improper treatment. The suggestion is to create openings ("pierces") in the bandage to allow for continued drainage, acknowledging the risks associated with such invasive actions and highlighting the need for careful medical intervention.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the infant is positioned on its feet, there is light traction, and care to the mouth of the birthing canal becomes lighter as well. This passage refers to managing an infants' treatment in a way that relates to their birth or delivery process:
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	: ether invesages leseme'sesuin the French: legeat andentitnagaincum : Itere lemon
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	And performs an enema or a sucking of the belly, until the moisture which is there reaches its course.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if other limbs are fractured, and his wounds persist.
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	if he brings his wound into his hand from a scorpion sting, and draws it out still from the sting.
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then he takes one or two pills, and draws them forth.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if his mouth from the scorpion sting has been retrieved by aspiration wherein it is that which came to him, there seems no need for further effort.
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	however it seems advisable to provide moist and oily substances.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and it seems to employ plasters, and observes moist and soft materials.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if his wound is on its side, you may place it there as well, using what we have previously mentioned for a living child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if there is no possibility, then it may be drawn out in parts, and leave nothing of the secondary effect.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And once you have done this, then apply what we have mentioned for the abscesses that come into the scorpion sting area.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and when there is bleeding from blood vessels comes, it should be placed in an aqueous constraint, and other treatments are applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I see a woman whose womb contained an embryo which had been injured, and then she used another above that one and removed the others' embryos.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After the long time passed, and it swelled up to such an extent that it broke out, and began with great disfigurement.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I called for treatment, and I thought long about it, and he could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed him on an ointment of strong attraction, and after some days another bone appeared.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I became much worried because his belly had no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I considered it was the bones of an infant who had passed away.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I sought to treat the wound and held the bones in my hands until she reached her best recovery point.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And after that woman spent some time with it, it then became a bit shorter at both ends.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I do not remember this chapter for the reason that when the master performs an unusual action, he knows how to aid it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	I brought back the mare's tail to its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	And after comes the shape of pressure in the eyes, and with which they turn their lees to it; and so many times will go out of place.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Always, the horns are more subtly constrained, and they are made of ivory or boxwood.
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	And the mouth should be two spans wide, and the margin on the trees must be one and a half palms long.
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And in the middle of these measures, this mouth should be placed two adjustments apart from each other, which are firmly fixed at half a palm or perhaps slightly more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	And these two adjustments are set in the mouth of the mask when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, with more subtlety and lightness in appearance, should be made of boxwood or ivory according to the shape of the tongs.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	And these two adjustments should be like what you see, with one span long and the width wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	And when you see opening the mask all around its instrument, it should sit with her forehead to one leg, and the arms extending outward.
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	Then set the two adjustments together in the mask, and place the head of the instrument between its hands.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hand on the instrument as you have made the tongs evenly, according to the quantity that you see opened at the mouth of the mask so it can do what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is completely surrounded, and it has many similarities in appearance; and the more times they prepare it, the harder the work becomes, and the higher their homework for its quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If the instrument is not prepared well (in this case, because of its necessity.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second stage is retained in childbirth, it requires that you command the woman to keep her nipple, and then she must perform an external version, and hold hands on her mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she jumps through such means, well be.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If such means are not taken, then a pot takes hold of it and makes a fist or bulge, and she places herbs that can open the mouth of a sore woman, like chamomile, calendula, anise, camphor, cassia, centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs, or none of them, are boiled in water above the fire; then put a cloth or fist on top of the pot, and place the other cheek on the sore woman's mouth.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	And let the smoke rise as much in her sore; then she must forcefully exhale, just as we have said before.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second stage is hurried.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if she remains after this treatment and is not worse, then command her to moisten her left hand in oil from the scouring or musk-wood, and then place it on her body.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And if the second stage is found; and when she has it, reward her little by little and gently, so that the sore does not obstruct the extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	But it is forbidden to move the sore quickly to either side, and then tear; if it comes away and separates spontaneously.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the sore is torn open, as we have said before, there are treatments for exhaling and steaming with herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	And if it is not of all that we have said, keep in mind not to tear during the extraction.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	But it is forbidden that what is in the sore mouth of the woman be put on her elbow, then perform an ointment-washing catheterization.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If she pulls it back and then comes again; but in any case, when she feels bad smell from the belly and head, command her to restrain the woman.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is forbidden to make available the following fumigations: no one has ever tried smoke-fumigating chicory and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument to smoke the woman with retained fluids and from the second stage if this.
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	Amenable.etre unteinne seure.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	:
de percier lou fondement	About piercing its foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Children are born without having pierced foundations; instead, it is subtly set deep within them:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore it dictates that she pierces the subtly set foundation within her duty, and does not let it be quickly healed over with superficial scars, and keeps the alignment so that she doesn't touch it:
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place a thin layer of wax and oil on it, then the treatment continues until he is sound:
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not reset, then place a stake in its base, and let the hands be for many days, and when he wants to go into the chamber, do so:
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there are no times when these sealing treatments of wounds or abscesses should not be covered; it must cover that healing: if you care for them as we have said concerning the stake in the base:
de la fistule dou fondement	From the fundamental base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that arise from the foundation are nodation and grow larger than those coming from nearby areas or within a space of two to three parts:
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If there is one or more fistulas; and when the nodation is old, then alleviate it by applying a hot cloth or subtle blow:
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And there are no persistent fistulas; and they are known that he can make excretion or respiration through them:
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate the bladder, and a part of the thigh; and they reach the joint of the knee, and some to other parts of the cow.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And in this way there is one fistula permanently at the foundation, and not:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and you pierce your index finger or foundation, and insert a fine steel needle into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is twisting, when you insert a thin piece of cloth or horsehair, as much as you feel the cloth or hair in your right place.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and there is no leakage of excretion or windiness or heaviness, as we have said before:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	you know that it does not pierce at all; if the treatment takes longer.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is already in the bladder or urethral channel, if it leaks urine, and cannot be cured by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced at the knee joint, then the cloth or hair thread goes straight to the place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the origin of the pain, then it becomes straight again, and neither medication nor surgical intervention will help.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in these permanent fistulas there is no remedy except for hard work and the vanity of people who intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In that which is not permanent and not ancient, there is hope for healing with iron, as I have experienced.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and the patient'supersits her hands on his back; and straightens out her legs until they reach her knees, and bends her knees towards her abdomen.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then you insert a fine piece of steel or cloth if there is twisting, as long as you know where the cloth or thread goes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels it near the foundation, then it must be pierced with your index finger.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	if the thread has been pierced, and you feel it between your thumb and forefinger or in your abdomen, then you know that it is permanent.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if there is no work to heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	All of which can be well-managed, but they are rare occurrences.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid it makes is to use the fine steel needle according to the size of the fistula, as mentioned before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and he stabs it all the way into the fistula until it is close to the foundation; and does it twice or three times as long as you know these abnormalities are like feathers of an arrow.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the treatment with smear-damp cloths so that those abnormalities are wet, then the cleaning of wounds and binding.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is true. Leiface a laves.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	:  120. Anderior ices of itclausement andre:sesuetil.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If the wound's beginning of an abscess, and then proceed with it, and afterwards apply cautery to the head of the abscess until it swells at the top.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	And the tent will be delivered, and it is torn; then mend those faults that seem like a bird's feather, and there remains no trace of them.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if it does not subside, and cut between you and the wound, whether cauterized with fire or by medicinal fluid.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the thermal cautery brings together various choices: namely, the treatment of these misalignments, and the draining of blood and fluid from moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment of dampened tents with wax or in a boiling bath, until they shrink down, and it casts on the shoulders those faults.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wounds with heated oil blisters lastingly, and are the medicines thoroughly dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it is sound and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	But if an abscess arises from the very foundation and is far removed from its sources, then push it downward or remove its base, and inquire further about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tent and there is between it a thin layer or flakes of skin or other issues that require examination, if it has only minor abrasions and signs of hope, then administer one of these three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	Or you cauterize it as we have discussed, or you clean it just at its source, or if you insert tubes and treat it as first described.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	nana.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then heals, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	in case it heals, or you distance that concealed covering and the skin once removed from its base, or by trial or with another pointed instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then I must fill in the deficient space which is in the wound, as much as you need.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then study to restore the wound and delay the abscess in the part further from its base; if it is easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And there are no abscesses in this manner: and when you pour the tent into the abscess, it is placed close to the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if you take a tent made according to this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I put in one end of the rope into it (the abscess), and put the tent along the entire length of the rope while it is at its head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it sticks to the margin of the base therein, then extract that protruding part of the rope so as you can fit your tent.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and pull the head of the rope, and join the two ends together, holding them tightly, and let it be for one or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and no strapping at all as long as the rope covers these characters which are between two, and cross each other.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then heal the wound until it is closed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the abscess does not pierce, make a hole in it by any means you can; if it is not too deep-seated.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not require covering with a bandage if it is not deep-seated, and then heal as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the thorn which makes the abscess if it is quite large and one-sided, or trenchant.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand, because that does not cover what should not be covered, as you can see in this case.
des emorroydes	of effluxes
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Effluents are in two ways: they are within the base, like grains of resin, and whether small or large, and then there is blood.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and if there is one or more, they are removed from the base and at the head of the base; but those that are removed due to moisture have very little.
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and then a little yellowish or red blood appears, and they have the color of purple skin.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment of these that are within the base requires you to instruct the patient that he should allow for air in the chambranles, so long as his bases are leaking, and where the rope appears.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hasten, and fasten it with pins, or tie it to your little finger, then pierce into the roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	: " :x le :e itens, estimeur :" :torment meaux ofsice dextra:302018thorceur sive laft. The French :1meanture 1401-up fromme, :noseyresentence in 3rdisele'sesuret.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And pull out arrows from your body, then burn above any hot powders that may be on the surface of the caustic.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if as it is written or taught by the physician of caustics, you cauterize them, then treat other treatments until they are healthy.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the foundations cannot be extracted, then treat the malady with biting and harsh enemas to cleanse whatever is the foundation, so that it may emerge openly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	And if the maladies are evident, and their roots are strong foundations, then they are lightly cured.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And you should treat them with your ungual or tongs and then burn, and care for them as we have said until they are healthy, and fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	It is essential that you perform the stitching in this manner: take a twisted thread, and pass it through an awl (a pointed metal tool), then pull the thread over the top of the awl, pierce it from another side, and turn the two thongs around inside the awl.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And if it is wide; then hold the thread tightly formed, draw the thread through, remove the awl, and do so with all other similar procedures, leaving one hole for excess blood to escape.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place a damp linen cloth or wax cover over the foundation (the wound), and then place it back over the foundation, and command the patient that they rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then leave them to heal as much as they can, and when they have healed sufficiently, then provide the ointment treatment and other treatments until they are healthy again.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	And so much that the maladies are as foundations.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	A:en: «cree les caustre:en:ent aulx:end leves desor ce:ment.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If it is required to reset at the precise point of a subluxation or in your sore skin above, which does not let it get wet.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then treat it so that it remains immovable as it should be;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot be tightened, then restart the incision more vigorously than before, as long as he remains well, and scald him.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then care for it so that it remains sound.
dou fremit	double thrum
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Formication is an undesirable appearance behind the heart, and it goes far.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and nevertheless the cold blood does not depart from it, and he feels so deadly a thrumming all over his body, more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment requires that you take a linen bag of either an ostrich feather or a large swarming fly's wing, and place this bag upon the thrumming, so that completely crimson circles are drawn around it.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand all around this bag so you can cope entirely with the thrumming, and place it inside the thrumming area, and scrape off the thrumming at its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it, make this of a linen bag or iron according to the described form, and subtly place it underneayer.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	not even for two days to hold it in place, and continue pressing And if you see the thrumming, cauterize it as it is before or with a fire-cauterizer.
de la forme dou clistere	in the form of enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	There has never been an enema made with silver or lead, or gold melted in it, and there is also no mention of small or large catheters being used according to the needs.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	So that it is given to the children who are feeble and painful, which are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	ounses longueurs les tiges, and en un theignois leu leu.    :meentence:1000es.  ôsans a l’it iso auximez senglish ente it'sall French versedre:23000000svoicle.
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	seslere:
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	nounce of course:screasexte:360reachements:gauce (but. ia :stage.seiurexale, andace.20res, itchampaglesse, heurany.tractepece. Before the tentz tolere.
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And among each hole there is space, and then it goes into these holes, i.e., a strong iron wire of wrong length, either in one or two places, and puts together the belly as if it were a sheep;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And when the medicine is dense, if there is blood at the instrument's edge with a strong wire, then it cleanses by forming a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And if the medicine is neither too hot nor too cold, and the head of the cleansing is anointed with oil or beeswax, or something similar, then it pours in a lighter manner.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	then the master spatters it with his two hands together until he feels completely done, then extracts the cleansing, and lifts up the patient's legs at the door.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if the medicine is set out, as much as it can be; and if it rests all night, then it becomes greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you cleanse in the illness of bowel movement, if the medicine rises quickly from it, then he begins to regain health.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if there is an ingrown toenail or abscess, if the cleansing also should be subtle like for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and it is the form of the subtle cleaning, which restrains the skin:
des plaies	in wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have mentioned it in the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about hand and medicinal treatments according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they were made, and according to the causes or reasons for which they were inflicted.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The wounds made by such actions are those caused by a blow with the sword, axe, chisel, or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	Or they are made according to the causes of the body, such as a wound on the neck, head, leg, abdomen, liver, and similar parts.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will start with simple head injuries, because such cases are mentioned in this chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple head wound occurs and the skull is not fractured, then one must take care if it'e due to blow from an object or similar things, and both skin and bone are torn and the injury is large.
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	And you doubt slightly of a hematoma: if the fluid comes out quickly from it firstly head-first if there is little blood in the wound, and then heals immediately contrary to the lower part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And avoid excessive filling with wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if it does not improve, then reduce the amount of meat, do not drink wine, and avoid eating chariot (chariots).
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And apply to the wound, when an abscess bursts open, let a swab be dipped in rose oil or with vinegar poured upon it.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no abscess to open, if it is applied on the wound, provided that the entirety of the flesh is fresh and not moved by air or dust, I will apply only a small amount afterward.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the arrow has moved within, if any ointments are applied, as long as it remains healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that from sword-cutting or similar injuries, and the lips cannot join without strain, if they can join with stitching, then I will refer to such abdominal wounds in relation to suturing techniques.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is discovered within bone and disconnected, holding only by a thread, then treat the injury with medicine and restore toughness to its surface using hide of leather.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	and instruct the patient to consume large meats as we have tried with baked wheat or cooked poultry, also similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you change the hide for purulent matter and it adheres to the bone, hold the purulence in its entirety, and break off, then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if there is an abscess within the wound or vein without cautery, which cannot be stopped by medicine alone, then whether it's the artery or vein, loosen the abscess with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if this does not help at all, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and if these wounds are small and simple, then treat them lightly; but put this powder on the arrow that has moved within to join together.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	ices : les jours, loue of the endure :i asill'sons eslevesure:1000. Ijourne :laterescullys plainly, in english.  2. I'bou tithodectract that itens. Iunctire. Ipsum. Thebes:
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	And apply pressure to the wound, and hold firmly until it heals well and becomes integrated with all its flesh.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And then the swelling should be allowed to subside if it doesn't inflate; because one does not use medicated plasters while the wound is still healing.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And there has never been done only this [cautery], when one does not have incense or the blood of a dragon to apply, except that arrow did not move the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arrow moved the wound, immediately then it should be done without using this [cautery] powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	But apply some warm ointments, or flour made from barley boiled in water and honey, until the wound stops bleeding.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then proceed with other treatments so that it remains healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then you should apply subtle traction.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And I will tell you about this after breaking of the main bone.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound in the neck.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If it comes from the neck wound or it has no difference with that of the main bone there, but if the fracture is in the neck or the arrow pierced it.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the fracture, there is no other treatment but to leave the healing and not apply anything restricting, because it hurts the bones and causes them to retract.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And do not apply any cold compress, for the bone substance is cold and its continuation lies with the brain, which is among the highest parts of the body.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	But if you soak it in warm water, and mix it with rose oil, and also wash it in warm water.
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other small stones like this manner, and wet ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind it with bandages, and treat so that it remains healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and swollen, and full of blood, then pierce or inject more deeply into it.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the arrow is stuck and draws blood from the wound, and it bleeds again, and then caustic treatment is the proper method.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	And if it is in leu de loinnees leu, ainsan ceulte enlal.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	If it causes pain on the throat chain of the neck, and does not touch the throat but puts it back according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then there is the treatment of stiffness, and it should not be done for any day, until heals completely from the ointment care.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if he suffers from pressure in the bone, whether it be so.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	And if he has pieces of bone, whether you can treat them all with fire and those that you cannot have, let the wound recover as much as possible.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And be detached and misplaced its origin.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if his wound is fresh, powder upon powder as I previously said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has an opening (fistula), then treat as I have said in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from the arrow or knife wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is an arrow or knife wound and the wound penetrates deeply, then look at how the wound was caused by wind pressure in his shoulder joint. You will see that it is a deadly injury; herein lies that the wound is fatal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	And if it is not deep, and the wound is fresh throughout its entire flesh, do not put powder on it at first hour nor bind it up with flesh that does not heal quickly.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And return to its original position, and open up the painful shoulder.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	But I apply an attractive ointment and bandage it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	And if you don't have an ointment, then put lots of cotton in the wound for absorbing dampness.
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	And put the painful shoulder to sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more if necessary.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	And if there is no spasm or painful shaking in his entire body not related to the injury.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see the position of the bones, you know that the wound is safe.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat it then with tents and other cures until it is healthy.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	And if it cannot heal, and work, then you know that it has formed a fistula; therefore the treatment as we should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword cut or from an axe, and it is simple, or worse on the backside, then treat that which comes before.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	If it is large, with dressing; if it is small, with powder, and if it has penetrated the bone, and in many pieces, then treat the wound and cauterize those that are deeply embedded.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if they are not deeply embedded, if allow the wound to heal by itself, if it eases the extraction.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is made as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	double hernia
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The hernias in the abdomen are large and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	Of the great wound there has been no injury to the intestines or injuries to the intestines by penetration.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the treatment is more difficult, and there has never been a case where the small wound was worse than the large one.
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because if they are put back in repeatedly with small movements;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestines swell almost immediately from the friction, so if they are put back in again,
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and because the main injury must be moved to its original position, so we move the intestines back into their place that is not like others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And you know that the treatment for abdominal dislocation is by four ways:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the three common sutures are involved in the abdominal suture.
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the suture for other injuries on the chest and other wounds have common sutures like other injuries;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and all of them are cleaner with the abdominal suture, and I will speak one by one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing in the intestines.
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	And when a twisted thing is to be put back, it is done by one of these two methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	or through the smallness of the wound, as we have said before.
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	For this reason, the intestines are inflamed due to pressure.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm up its portion in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	Moisten one sponge or such cloth with pure water alone,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	Or you cook it in boiling water swirling and stirring,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And raise the intestine so that the inflammation is entirely gone;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And never made such restrictive movements, and it is moved too quickly to unbend.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the inflammation diminishing, if the intestines are gently warmed or overheated and injured.
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for by this means it is lightened so that only a little can enter;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, make a slight incision with suitable instruments to drain the accumulated fluids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first treatment involves moving it rather than cutting.
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	for we must not amputate it due to great necessity without cause.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and it's the separation by splitting;
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if it is torn apart in its cavity and does not return, then this happens:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines are forced outward;
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if it is returned according to its natural position within the proper anatomical area;
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	if you are able to do so, because it is worthwhile;
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is wide, and it's located on the surface of the belly;
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	it indicates that you must have the patient lie down with their affected side on their back;
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and raise its legs above his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it's located on the abdominal area;
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	ent'savocurate ous.
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	And also if he rules from the belly to one of its two parts.
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	And also that the lower part is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And therefore it is necessary to apply what I have said about large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	It is small but it has appeared as I have said.
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	Then you should have in your hands one minister of prayer who rules with his hand over the whole procession.
et assemble les levres;	And gather the lips.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	And that is the common way of dressing.
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	And it is that you should pierce with a needle or several others, depending on the extent of the wound's size.
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	Then leave some head in the wound and put some space there, and then pierce with a needle or insert a strong thread.
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	And pierce the two holes in the skin with the two hooks of the syringe.
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which are inside the skin, as long as you pierce that part.
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and assemble the two hooks of the syringe in their pairs.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	Then draw a twisted thread through each of the piercings.
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	and then assemble those hooks in the wound again.
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	And then leave some space and pierce with another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then tie up the thread as you have done for the first needle.
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	And continue this way according to what you are skilled with needles.
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	as long as every wound is confined;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and be needles both subtle and large.
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because subtle needles cover the entire area, and large ones cannot fit well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for that reason they must be moderate in size.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it does not require us to thrust the needles too deeply into flesh or skin.
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	but they do not cover and show the wound before the stitches.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then pierce with these needles, that they do not move.
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	And I instruct to place tent or cloth over the shoulder joints so they hold firmly.
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and let it stay until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	And this method of setting arrows is more suitable for small wounds.
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because it suffers a needle or arrow.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second procedure is commonly used.
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and is that you assemble the needle joints of skin and flesh with another needle or arrow, using a strong thread if necessary;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have perceived these joints all together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	if you reinsert the needle into the part where it was initially inserted, in the manner that one does with threads (arrows);
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and leave a space between each procedure of this size as for an arrowhead.
ceste costure sevent li home,	this treatment is done at home;
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sewed up a wound with some cloth that had been there before;
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	which was nailed with an arrowhead;
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and it was a wound more than one hand's length;
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and it was intestines that were quite long (one hand's length);
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and it was between his belly (i.e., inside someone's abdomen).
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	and I brought back the intestine then he had been in it a bit less than twenty-four hours.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	scape of ici andrepresentation. Translation. Thejour sentence: Iescribe it:esque theorace. translation:se, andres.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the physician judged that he would die, and this was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not cure him with anointing, for there was no place in this area where they found it or any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I placed a clean cloth on the wound for two days, and washed it with honey water until he became healthy again.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	But let me tell you about the three proper ways of treatment:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the arrow, and draw its head into the deformed part of the wound therein.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when she has perceived the power in right and law, if you have drawn out the sharp tip or treated it with cloth there.
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and make a cut on another part of the deformed area therein.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and their understanding of this treatment is that you should treat it as a leatherworker would the leather, which means to handle it carefully and with skill.
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and you should leave one side of the cautery in place, and then retract it on another side until the treatment is fully complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of treatment that Galen described properly, which implies a recognized and perhaps more standardized approach based on ancient medical theories.
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	if it is as no one does, assembling the two parts naturally together, referring to how body parts should heal or be repaired in a way that feels natural and correct according to medieval medical beliefs.
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one of the cautery tips to the other tip, in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	insert an arrow or a similar point close to the previous one, and make that cut only therein:
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and let the two cautery points stay in place:
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the arrow and make a cut on the deformed part therein:
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	just like the two cautery points (or similar tools):
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then make cuts in both of the deformed parts therein, using other similar points on the opposite side:
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and it is the other way of treatment, which is also quite common:
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galen also spoke this word, and no one else testified:
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Weberaige.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	Treason I'sainct :naturel''. It isocial:2013. The French from theorelie, iteslaut. In theitn.: ici: "sic:iracle.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	And you know that when the route is inside the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	And if it has gravel more than other stones in his belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	And judgments concerning the wound are such as those regarding other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	And it is that when you treat the fresh wound throughout its entire flesh so that the arrow remains in place,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	If it sets the intestine back in place, and its cost; then put powder on setting fire to tighten it up,
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	And if the arrow has moved, then apply any ointment that is present until the wound swells;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And hold the thread firmly and solder the siphon and the magnet;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then heal the wound as for other wounds so long as it is sound;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	And if you have no medicine, then apply it as soon as the wound begins to swell, cover with thick cloth;
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And move it . . . every day so long as he is sound;
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no other medicine in many conditions, for wounds are not complex;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	And if you doubt that the wound will make common with members of the body;
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	So it means you should massage the limb lightly in tempera oil or rose oil;
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And put it on the angels and underneath the legs;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	And if they feel pain or pressure in the belly, and often happens.
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	And if one performs a clyster with black wine, and immediately such pain or pressure comes to the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And pierces deeply, and it is known that when it is the large intestine, it heals faster than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine called "young" cannot heal if it is blocked,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and because of the positioning of the vessels that are in them, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and the approach towards its natural state of the nervous system.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the ulcer jumps from the wound, if he puts it back to its original place as in the intestines while still fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is darkened and turned yellow or black, it indicates that you must open the vein where there is blood accumulation.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	because there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then come those parts which are between the two;
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and place the .ij. points hanging from the side of the wound until it is aligned for blood extraction when the ulcers tighten, and the wound swells.
de la routure dou boueil	from the route of the belly
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	when the intestine is blocked and the wound is small;
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if it can be restored in some way;
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I have seen some become wounded or infected in a stomach by a lance.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	1005. ndescriptive fromx it isle ould, lelater :2. I'soules:mesure, theisse ilice,seigneur. Celticure frommeat, Ivictis: "itacei leopure, a. The2013dur lesung:coumars: (faire :thec:resurs deleve.
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	And it became infected and turned into a fistula, and thus there was discharge and windiness.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied this remedy as I saw fit, and never ceased to subtly manipulate until he was well again, and the wound was sewn up.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him sew, I doubted that he had illness in his belly as well.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and it did not have any other illness, but improved to better conditions, and managed eating and drinking.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and none of the experimentalists said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied up in half measure.
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	then take great tests, and assemble the edges of the wound.
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the tests have passed over the mouth, if he places it on the two lips.
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if she draws her mouth upwards;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then he covers his head, and this holds so that it cannot loosen.
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then makes another test after the same manner as before, until the wound is completely dressed.
et cout la plaie.	and counts the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	That main part goes into the intestines, and causes no harm to the patient.
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and if one can tie the intestines with a thin thread that is taken from an animal's intestines.
en teil maniere:	in half measure:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the main part of this intestinal thread that is very thin.
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then tie the main part with a very thin piece of linen thread.
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	and binds the thread with an awl, and counts the intestine, and sends it back on its course.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	Here isoftiere sur les pointres, ce quelses deffourne. Etude aultre of fecitures envelle desfles, siufice au lemon: iau.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	nultes :meaute a iltealmeentle oun:liefice (gracie,se: itin's teeth:age. Elle. Commentaire.faiture. Itin ascribe. Iface. Etise :ce. Isteing. Theisse.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	Of a swelling wherein it must remain; and if they prick at their base, hold them steadfast until they are healed.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Sores or abscesses that develop as they heal are universally referred to as "fistula."
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	And immediately when it is filled with fluid and has widened.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is defined by the lack of proper joint movement and painless discharge, where there is no sensation of pain.
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And is also similarly filled as the quills of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And never completely wide open, but sometimes broad and other times narrow;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	Not constantly present, but sometimes enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	And I have mentioned it in discussing wound divisions, where any unhealed wound has no place;
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	This is due to one of seven causes;
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	And it relates specifically to small amounts of blood or tissue;
ou por sa malice;	Or due to its malicious nature;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	Or because it leaves room within, and under the tongue, where no new growth should emerge;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	Or it has too much breadth;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	Or it is composed of poor material;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	Or the medicine is not good for the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	For this is because the corruption is a manner of plague.
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	Because in that property, in the region, digestion takes long and healing also takes time, and it naturally flees.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	Or there are cases of bones or teeth:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And I have already shown all these causes, signs, and the remedies of medicine in this section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of the fistula made by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	It is said that the fistula occurs in all limbs of the body.
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	because it has fistulas that come from great blood vessels, and arteries, and nerves;
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or in the spleen, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or at any of the sides;
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or in the spinal column, or at any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it comes from that property of the main limb and its similar cases;
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all those fistulas of this kind are of great sickness and only require toil and neglect;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	but if there is no fistula that does not heal with the treatment I have described, and you are confident in this cure;
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you have seen it know whether a tent of rain or iron is made if the fistula bends;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	but if the fistula is curved, then you should seek a subtle tent of plaque;
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	for the plaque bends with its twisting;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	but if the fistula is pierced into hands, you cannot properly seek it out by tents;
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if you administer the clyster into one of them;
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	because if the cloths are soaked in one other, and it disfigures her;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	In the fistula oun.
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	And commands the patient to ask well for the pain he feels when pressed by your hand, and where it hurts.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	And when you truly know the location of her pain, whether it is away from a joint, nerve, artery, or vein.
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	Or in none of the joints that I told you about, if the wound corresponds to what I have told you.
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And bone for the other woman and the decayed parts that are inside;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	And then the treatment as long as she is healthy.
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	And if the fistula is well-formed in a proper place, then it must be treated accordingly as you have described.
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	Then I put moistened dressings in the case of diarrhea, and apply them to the top of the fistula,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	so long as the medicine removes the excessive fluid remaining at the base;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then I apply unguents to clean healing wounds, as long as they are healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	And if it is not healthy by this method, then cauterize as we have said before;
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if the bone is rotten at the site of the fistula, then you must treat it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or artery does not cause pain or swelling to your main parts, as we have said before;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	And if the bone is exposed, and it has decayed and blackened, as long as the decay covers the whole bone;
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	And treat the things in healthy condition as long as they are sound;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	And if it is sound and so that teintes de saigns, et deus et dese de la ce que les uns.
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	noungeaux.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	If discovered and desired to stay until you are fully grown,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	And remove all the corruption, then reset the joint;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is thus healthy, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, you know that the corruption is too extensive to hope for recovery.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	If there's no other remedy but to let nature take its course;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	And if it has a small corrupted bone, you may extract it with forceps;
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	If the arrow is retrievable with such an instrument;
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if it has any bone remaining, do not leave any behind;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	And if the movement causes contrary action and there's no error or pain;
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If coped and smoothed out and delivered the bones;
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, placing something obstructing clumping upon the wound;
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	And leave it there until they settle among the bones;
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And then they may be lighter on their return.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	And if it is a large bone, like from the leg or thigh;
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	If you repeatedly remove all impurities until the entire joint is free of dirt;
puis restoure la plaie;	Then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there's a large part of it broken off and falls from the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	If you cover and seal all of that just to the corruption, and then cure until it's fused;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	And I will tell you about an ulcer that happened to one man in his leg;
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	If you then provide an example and aid in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	He was a young man who had pain in his leg from a cause that came within the body. (Note: The specific century and age were not provided, so I've made an educated guess to create context for this line.)
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	as the materials entered into his leg and was expelled by a large incision, without any further reason to open it.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but they tried so much with their madness to open the incision that they did. (Note: This line suggests a misguided attempt by the physicians or practitioners due to some sort of delusion.)
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and they drove in many materials, which became a fistula (a pathological channel), and various obstructions came that all moved awkwardly within the body. (Note: This line describes further complications from an invasive procedure.)
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many times they tried treatments for about twenty years, but there was no improvement in the art of hands (Note: The text here may be discussing a persistent medical problem where conventional hand surgeries or techniques didn't yield results over an extended period.)
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	so that I called upon him and examined his leg and the remedies with which he was treated. (Note: This line seems to introduce a narrator or observer who is recounting their experience in seeking help for someone's condition.)
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and it grew by means of obstructions within the heart; (Note: The mention of obstruction "a grand corps" metaphorically describes how a problem escalated, possibly referring to complications arising from an internal condition affecting the cardiovascular system.)
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and became red as a young man's heart, with a yellowish hue; (Note: This line likely describes the physical condition of someone's heart due to an underlying issue, possibly indicative of a disease or disorder.)
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I set up a tent in one of these obstructions, and then searched for all the obstructions; (Note: The narrator describes taking action by exploring an obstruction within the body that resembled a "tent," possibly due to its structure or formation.)
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and found that they were coming together from all parts of the leg; (Note: This line likely refers to an observation where various elements related to obstructions are converging or interacting throughout a patient's leg.)
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	Then I hurriedly set up in one of these obstructions and discovered a part of the bone; (Note: The narrator describes urgently investigating an obstruction within someone's body and discovering a fragment of bone.)
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I found it decayed and putrid, and there was corruption just in the bone within; (Note: This line suggests a critical state of decay or disease affecting both soft tissue and bone within the patient's body.)
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I took him out of that decayed bone and looked after it to see if there was any other corruption, as he had been in my care; (Note: Here the narrator is expressing concern over the condition of a patient' Written from an academic perspective, discuss how the use of language evolves within literature, taking into consideration societal changes. Reference at least two historical periods or movements and analyze their impact on literary expressions using specific examples.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	And to begin restoring the wound with similar medicine over a long distance, and it cannot be sealed.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	Then I continued, and discovered the bone as before.
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	And found the continuation of decay in the bone, and saw that it was loose, and then I pulled the bone, and regretted attempting to seal the joint.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	But I did not do so much as cut a piece of the bone, and it was severely damaged throughout.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	Then I restored it with medicine; and it quickly healed and sealed up.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	And there was no need to continue the work except due to the frailty of the patient who could not bear it.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And out of fear of death that I might have from him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For the often bleeding evacuations, but it was completely healed.
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	And in the joint of the bone there arose hardened flesh, and it had proper bone alignment and did not cause any harm or inconvenience either on its way out or returning.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is fractured in no joint whatsoe’er it be, it must be mended in this manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Firstly, I will grasp the main part of the bone that has been opened,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command none to extend it upwards.
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and put another thicker ligament over the first one, and bind it above the hardened tissue that has formed on the bone.
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and remain at this level, so you can remove the corrupted tissue from underneath.
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and discover whether there is a softening layer underneath that prevents it from sticking.
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and apply a heat pack or ointment on top of the bone to cover the decayed layer.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is essential to observe the stickiness as well as feel any decaying sensation; then apply another layer of bandage.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is decayed but does not open up, and the decay lies within or in a particular part of it,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	if you discover the softened layer throughout; then apply heat directly above it.
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	then bandage one part over the other portion of decay, and apply it for as long as we have mentioned before;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the decay exists at the joint, if it is to seal up the joint where there is deterioration in the other section of bone.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	:xile. Forementire.give. Thejacorulte it :13:
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	And if there are corruptions or injuries to the fingers of the hand, or to the thumb, that is a very serious matter.
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	However it is necessary for you to inquire about that corrosion and ask how it affects you.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And the manifestation occurs in all possible ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve cause any harm to you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	And it is known that the cutting instrument and the sinews are often used for covering these bones, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of ears.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	And therefore it is required to present each case with every possible aspect of its instrumentation.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	And it is known that the work will show you the instrument which you are supposed to have, according to your knowledge of this art.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And the testimony of the methods of diseases.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If it concerns the instrument you know according to what it requires.
dou feu	Double fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulder joints can slip due to moisture, or because they are dried out;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	And when you have medicine for that corrosion by the treatment of medicine itself, and they do not benefit at all.
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	If it is required to cover that member up to its joint or where the corrosion begins;
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	If it is because of the pain caused by that of death or by malice, which are greater sins than a defect in the limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	And the signs indicate that the limb turns black if it seems to be affected by double fire;
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	And after it becomes darker, then go to that member's disorder;
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	sans theorcé toi enecen: entail of ici. Ence. Lait ce:encontre laissance :erre.xarante fromage, unleslelater. A32ere :gereserve and:entire. Thear. Encore akes.
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	n' oukirtaginnisme fromnarchivebleves;trochensecurs orfferenathevethece
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If his corruption is at both shoulders, and he falls, and does not give him any space to come just with his hands.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes just by the hand, if he breaks the joint, so that the dislocation does not move to the arms.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	And if it comes to the arm, if he costs (breaks); and if it passes the cost, that is his death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	And there is no medicine for stronger blows than the quantity of its virtue.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	And thus far does he act as the dislocation comes or enters: if it comes in the first joint, and breaks the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	And if it comes or goes throughout the whole part;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	And if it rises in the leg, if he breaks at the hip joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it comes above the hip, there is no other remedy but to let the patient lie down and die;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	And the way of covering or bandaging the limb should be that it lies above and below;
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	And extend some means along one side to its lower part, and others on another side to its upper part;
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And you draw out the cord that is between those two limits in one spot, as long as the bone is uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	Then breaks the bandage or strap, and put a linen strip to touch histeens;
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And he instructs the patient to let other injuries and abscesses form on him.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if blood comes when you perform your actions, immediately cauterize the wound.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	or you apply any restrictive powders to it; then return to your medicines until they are finished.
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then bind the pained limb with a loose ligament, and heal it until it is sound.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to one man in such a case:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	it happened to him a darkness like being scorched by fire
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and that corrosion came first to his duty as a patient, until it fully cleansed him.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when he saw the corrosion, he would cover the patient's body, and then became sound again.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and long after him returned the corrosion with his hand, and came to me.
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I placed restorative things after the correction of his wounds, but he could not stop the recurrence of corrosions.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he ordered me to touch him, and I had hope that it would replicate on the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and I doubted too whether if I held his hand, he would die.
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	because his humanity was weak; and he became despairing altogether, and returned to his land.
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and when he covered his hand, he became sound again.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have no such story to tell except for what happened here, if there is need for it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	There has never been an abscess in his chest that lasted so long as to cause a great gathering of bowels.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then go down and pierce it, and come out the old man's bowels, as we saw in other people.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin which is above it is as subtle as an old clothed;
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	And they will not harm either bone or nerve, nor such diseases are called "healthy,"
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	And it is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it is so elongated that it bends the bone out of shape by force, then it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And if the cautery burns such that you can handle the skin completely and immediately when it is slightly thin, just like a sheet of linen to us.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	And they will not be affected by its corruption;
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	But if you are convinced that the cautery burns and does not leave a mark, then...
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And the skin is thick and resistant to heat, so when treating with a clyster using this caustic substance...
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	Look at whether his breasts are large, and the belly where it is moist breath.
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	And in such cases, the Egyptian medicinal clyster which is made as follows...
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take oil and wine, and apply it generously, and heat it in one vessel; thus heated, administer the treatment...
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	sente soinsseurange ia fuelx to telogrevihise a an behagin :ganthectheignable: the decimatioentheocures aye it  wardexture:l  Citoigne
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	And then take from this according to your need, both fire and honey;
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And in clysterizing his chest, and preventing the fistula.
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And let the medication remain for .ij. hours, then extract it by pressing.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times, as long as the chest is disordered and prevents breathing.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and there is never a cold ashes enema administered.
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present and you must use ash from oak wood, and apply wet heat above it.
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then pour the broth, and in clysters continue so long as you know the chest is well-ordered.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	but if he cannot bear it (the treatment), nor Egyptian medicine nor cold ashes are suitable.
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if the clystrion of water and honey has only slight lithotripsy effect;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you clystron the mixture of honey and sweet wine which has properties that help to order and cleanse;
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine aerates the soul;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	then do this, and if you are sure that the chest is well-ordered;
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if that clystrion is causing births;
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	Andersen.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	nce deffle de laisser en:neatiengeletemain. Ies ce, wither.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	And if it pierces the small breast, and the poultice cannot enter therein.
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	If a piece of iron slightly enlarges an area, and places on it a tent of Egyptian ointment.
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	Or if it is Basilican oil, as much as it has enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	And if the wound is too wide, let it be left so that the costume or poultice can enter therein.
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if it is a pithy bowel that hangs above, let the cupping vessel be placed lower than therein.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For if the bowel is in full force, it does not allow for passage of chariots.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the breast beneath as you see fit.
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	If it appears in such a way that the bowel moves down to lower than therein.
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	For if the bowel is in full force, it does not allow passage.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the breast beneath as you see fit.
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	If it appears partly in that manner: that the bowel moves swiftly downwards, and does not leave anything of the bowel.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	And take consolidative medicines to place on the breast.
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	And are underneath it: a linen sheet that covers all the breast.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	: Thejacrescript tge :
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	And they were burned with a sharp incision on one layer of cloth according to the amount of the opening.
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and it is placed in the wound of the breast to align the bowel, and they do not remove the great cloth stitches after every day once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	And he who is on the wound of the breast often removes the bowel.
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and you know what comes out of the bowel, if it is poison or a small amount, or edible, or unfit.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take care that the patient feels pain or not, and whether he has an abscess or not.
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your treatment has extended to a certain extent and you see the nature that jumps out of the wound of the breast.
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you know that the breasts have arisen yet again, and approach the healing.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then release it either in the morning or after three days, when you dislodge the wound.
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	if changing one layer of cloth and renewing the bandage.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if his breasts produce unfit material repeatedly after many days, you will know that his chest does not return to normal.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if he removes small amounts of poison from the chest wound after a long time without losing hope in health.
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	because the healing approaches. Because there are patients who delay dressing changes and wound cleaning; those that do the opposite.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if the unfit material comes out of his chest repeatedly after many days, you will know that his chest does not return to normal.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the breasts do not return to normal timely, and are alienated from healing, then one should mix moistened with wet materials and dry in vitality.
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	if it is inflamed because it contains much charcoal, and this is the medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take a definite grasping, and they do it with rosined oil, and an arrowhead made of coarse iron in its essence.
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	Then he fixes it and uses it; and this method makes them more intensely cooked.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	When definite graspings are not present (when precise compression is lacking),
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	Or thou take myrrh and aloe (use therapeutic substances such as myrrh and aloe), and crush it (process the herbs), and dust it on the honey when it is hot from the fire (heat mixture for medicinal purposes).
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	And then it is spread (applied) upon the drapelet (linen cloth), and it serves over the breast, and never long ago was an astrolabe applied thereon (historically used a device like an astrolabe for medical purposes in this context).
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	And roots of celestial lilies (imagined or symbolic medicinal plants), which are like flour used in a hundred measures (comparable to ingredients);
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	And it uses simple or composite (single ingredients or combinations): crush them (process), and make powder of it, and put on the honey that I have said (referring back to previously mentioned treatment with honey), and then use (apply).
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	And if this treatment is prolonged (extended over time), and not healed by this care (does not result in recovery through the described method).
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	And this tells us that the curing is incomplete (lack of healing), and it creates pressure in the bone, or hardens the joints, or causes severe pain (indicates ongoing issues due to treatment).
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If the care of the abscess (treatment for an abscess), as we have said before in this section (referring back to earlier mentioned treatment).
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the incision of the ulcer (treatment involving an opening in an affected area).
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Pannuccing is an incision made on the dorsum of the palm (referring to a surgical procedure in the area specified).
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Or it is done on the palm or by chance in other places (it may be performed in various locations).
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	And when it is inflamed (swollen), and we take no care if it becomes another incision (an additional incision).
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And they will cut and pull out all the root of the palm, and sometimes they may even cut it all away (against the abscess);
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And comes the ulcers on the bone, so that it hurts painfully, and are the shoulders two wide, and is the skin yellowish.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	As you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit at all.
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	It implies that you must remove all unnecessary material from the joint, as this seems to be an instruction likely related to addressing issues such as arthritis or other degenerative joint conditions where excessive tissue can cause problems. The 'superfluity' mentioned here is likely referring to any surplus soft tissues like adhesions or inflammation that are not beneficial and might impede the movement of the joint.
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then cauterize the wound afterwards. Cauterization was a common medical treatment in medieval times to stop bleeding, prevent infection, or close off an infected area by burning tissues with a hot iron or other heat source. This line suggests that after addressing superfluous material from around the joint and dealing with any related issues (like abscesses mentioned earlier), the next step could be to cauterize a wound as part of the treatment regimen.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is very helpful if the bone and joint are healthy. This sentence recognizes that one of the purposes for using cauterization in medieval medicine was to aid healing when dealing with certain conditions like a wound or abscess where there's no risk of damaging already healthy tissue – provided, however, that both the bone and joint are intact. The effectiveness of such a procedure would depend on careful application by a knowledgeable practitioner to avoid unnecessary harm.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	And if the joint presses down hard and begins to bleed again, and it starts bleeding, indicating that there might be complications arising during or after treatment. This line warns of possible adverse outcomes such as excessive pressure on a healing joint leading to re-bleeding which could suggest continued inflammation or damage. It underscores the importance of careful postoperative management and monitoring for potential setbacks in the patient's recovery process.
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	You must place a cover over the joint to keep the pressure down, suggesting a preventive measure to protect the healing joint and reduce the risk of further injury or bleeding by creating a barrier against external forces. This could involve using bandages or other materials to provide support and immobilization for the treated area as part of postoperative care in medieval medical practice.
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	And lift it up slightly, and grasp the bleeding gently but swiftly, implying a delicate yet rapid response to managing bleeding. This line may be part of instructions for handling complications during treatment; lifting could mean adjusting support or positioning while controlling bleeding would require precise interventions to minimize harm and promote healing in the context of medieval medicine's limited resources and knowledge.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And place on top of it, then put back all medicinal and corrosive substances to stop it entirely, indicating the use of various medical treatments such as herbs (medicinal) and acids or caustics (corrosive) that were believed to halt bleeding. This reflects a broader perspective on medieval medicine where an array of concoctions with varying efficacy was employed in attempts to manage complications like excessive bleeding, although some substances could be harmful if not used judiciously.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then continue the treatment of ointments as long as it is healthy, suggesting that after addressing acute issues like bleeding and excessive pressure with manual interventions or medicinal substances, a practitioner would proceed to apply therapeutic ointments to promote healing. Ointments in medieval medicine were often made from natural ingredients believed to have restorative properties. This line underscores the sequential nature of treatment—first addressing immediate complications and then focusing on long-term recovery with appropriate remedies.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the cautery is in the bone, then it must be removed and treated swiftly because as long as the bone has been corroded by the fire, it cannot heal. This line recognizes a serious potential complication where cautery could lead to damage of the bone (corrosion), making recovery impossible. In medieval medicine, there was an understanding that certain treatments, if misapplied or overused, could cause more harm than good—the use of heat in treating bones is highlighted as potentially damaging due to its risks of excessive injury and the natural limitations on bone healing capacity.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	And if you see two cracks in it, then treat them immediately as previously described. This line indicates a continuation of the treatment plan for when specific conditions arise—in this case, seeing signs that may indicate further damage (cracks) within the bone after cautery. The instruction is to address these issues promptly and with the same level of care and detail previously outlined in medical instructions. It emphasizes vigilance and proactive management during recovery processes.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then continue treating it as long as it's healthy, indicating that once acute conditions such as cracks or structural damage are addressed, the medical practitioner should maintain a course of treatment to ensure overall healing and recovery. This directive underlines a holistic approach—addressing immediate issues and then proceeding with an ongoing therapeutic regimen to optimize recovery and preserve health, which may involve different supportive interventions or treatments for the patient's well-bee from le corruption de l’uncle.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	Twelfth century thief, siens morne la cest toxentilees it'sau:ent voilaise enceintiethere defface tiques. Enjaccesil theoritil aouthea andsecrecture. Allerence devisage of theuccleave in French towaxesliefas :groslye leyne.entire:espeaking. The-lysente. What,urre. Ingeatrix.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	Then cut the shoulder blade sharply by cutting across above.
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	And ensure that the haircut does not extend to the area surrounding the shoulder blade, as it causes great pain for the patient.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it occurs, place something that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain in the hidden joint subsides
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	He must restore those who experience nausea in hands by chance entirely,
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	And by chance it possesses bones, and never a single one,
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	And no one is born at the root of the articulation's juncture, nor do we dare to assume it in any case.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those who experience discomfort in any limb without exception do not remain silent,
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	And those who experience discomfort at the joint between two limbs may remain silent by chance;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of that which is corpulent does appear lightly in some instances;
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	The size at the root of a broad scapular process.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who experience pain at the root of the articulation find it particularly challenging to heal; if you have their covering.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In those who suffer or require attention to the abdomen, it is essential that you reseal the wound directly on the bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cut the bone into an adequate length for it, then heal it as long as it is sound.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The fractures that arise from their coming together are due to birth, or by healing a wound, or by piercing with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is known that you have healed the fractured one, so they must restore them according to their natural shapes.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	ssexte deffles.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	You place between two thin pieces of cloth tightly, until the wound is sewn together, as it requires.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	Dislocations do not occur with the palm of the hand, which prevents that from happening when moistened like this is required.
Des vils	Of such evil
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	The bones are wrapped in thick envelopes full of melancholic surplus that come from multiple members. (Note: This translation attempts to convey the general sense of the original line which seems metapromptically incomplete or unclear due to potential archaic language and structure.)
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And more frequently in the legs of those who walk on pilgrimage and work and carry loads, compared to others. (Note: This translation interprets the line with some creative license due to its ambiguous nature but attempts to give it meaning within the given context.)
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It requires that you do not purging the colon at all times and then heal it in the church basilica. (Note: This translation interprets a more philosophical or symbolic meaning from what seems to be an incomplete line about medical practice.)
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment of iron is done according to a certain manner: one covers them with it and then draws out the black blood. (Note: This translation attempts to render an unclear line about medical treatments involving iron into English while acknowledging potential ambiguities.)
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other way is that you tie up the vein and draw out all of it. (Note: This translation interprets a line about different medical procedures involving tying up and drawing blood from a vein.)
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The cutting is done in this manner: raise the first leg of water warmly very much so that the large one does not get displaced subtly. (Note: This translation takes an interpretive approach to a line about a certain method for performing surgical or medical procedures.)
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then stretch the patient'ayer above the kneecap just at the part above the groin. (Note: This translation assumes a more general meaning of medical procedure related to stretching, but it may not fully align with the original text.)
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then cover the vein in one piece, or two pieces, or three pieces, of a large size. (Note: This translation interprets an instruction about how to dress a wound involving a vein.)
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then you cut and draw the black blood with your hand from one end to the other, as much of it as can suffer the evil effects of the diseased. (Note: This translation seeks to convey a description of medical practice involving cutting and drawing blood, possibly within the context of an illness or disease.)
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then tie it up, and he commands that it should be colored with black meat injections. (Note: This translation interprets a line about post-operative care or treatment for a wound involving tying it up and using injections of black meat.)
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And repeat the evacuation and suture when the veins are filled, and you heal the patient. (Note: This translation describes a process of recurrent medical treatment involving draining and stitching to treat swollen veins.)
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The handling of the patient is done in this manner: lift the diseased leg if it has much hair. (Note: This translation assumes a general description of how to handle a patient with certain symptoms, such as having much hair on their legs.)
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then put it in the bath and raise the diseased leg of warm water until it turns red and swells the veins. (Note: This translation interprets a line about treating a patient with a hot bath as part of their care for certain symptoms.)
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you don't have a bath, then heat it over the fire and cover the vein long at the top of the groin or in the area around the ankle. (Note: This translation describes alternative methods for caring for a patient with certain symptoms when a bath is not available.)
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then turn the skin over the ulcer and scrape the vein from each part as much as it hurts. (Note: This translation interprets a line about treating an ulcerated area related to a vein.)
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And when it turns red and black, and as long as the scar so it resembles a rope. (Note: This translation interprets an incomplete line related to scars that may appear.)
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	Then stretch out the arm inside, until the skin is loose, and then pinch it to loosen the ligament.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then cut into two other joints nearby; then tear off the skin over the vein until it appears.
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then loosen and squeeze the arm again in the same way you have done before, and do it for another joint if you have previously performed this.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then cut another size if you have experience with it; then loosen and squeeze the arm, and perform this treatment twice to both sides of the joint.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then stretch and loosen again at the second size; then pull back gradually in sizes until it fully expands, and perform this treatment.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	And if you cannot stretch or loosen it, then insert an awl into every point of the other two joints together with strong double thread (twisted threads).
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And then stretch and loosen it, and insert a pin inside the joint (this refers to re-inserting the awl with thread), turning your hand one way and another until there is full expansion.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And make sure it does not contract again, because if it contracts, you cannot remove or loosen it, and this will do harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have treated it completely, if you place a woollen linen compress damp with oil and rose water on the wound (and heal), then treat until it is well-healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if you see the wound contracted and swollen and wrapped together in one place (and not straight), as we have said before.
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	This final note advises to "tear" (fracture) the swollen area gently without cutting it open—and treat it as we have described before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The lignage.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And it is of great size, for if it were subtle, the vein would rupture, but whether large as we have said, and this is its form:
De la voinne civile	Of the civil vein.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is invaded in legs, in warm parts where it does not sprout grass or trees, and on land where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and perhaps grows elsewhere than in legs, and this leads to the decay of leather underneath.
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	as it comes within the body of snakes and towards, invading between leather and hide.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of this vein's beginning are that it comes in the leg with a very great inflammation.
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then changes its course, and begins to grow out like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the dislocation occurs, it is known that you must wrap around an oval-shaped piece of tissue from half to one inch and a half; and the skin,
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and leave the piece on the leg, and every time it comes into contact with the piece, if it wraps around the tissue, and the skin.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it's too long, take a part of it, wrap the remaining around, and don't cover her root until she is completely discharged.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	because if you cover it, it goes back into the hide, and causes abscess and moisture or lumps, and illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	for that reason it is required she be treated little by little until the main part, and leaves nothing behind or remains.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and is never this vein when it is treated with .5 to 1 palm's length, or .3;
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and some have come to me, from which it sprouted at .3 palm's length, and when you cover her, a little bit of root or lump is pushed out and pierced down further.
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and that she continues to grow; and the material inside clears out, and brings in moisturizing preparations for pus every day, then treats it as an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And never on this vein hands rain; most especially when it appears at the junction of two bones or in between them.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and it comes out quite a bit in lumps; treat it as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	snake-like structures that grow between leather and hide,
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	and this disease called "beef", because it happens many times as we have said.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	Launching of theurs in 120709thou03609th century: (the oun ceu and it isentur, l'sense034508090 :pice surt0x aims.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	And he feels well with the movement of each limb, until it tears the skin as it moves, and jumps away.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	And is swollen with excess of any fluids, just like how worms and snails and roundworms or intestinal pests come about, and the belly area.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	And doubts about the malignity, because when it passes through the body, and rises to the head, and comes to the oil.
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	By chance it enters again and destroys the oil; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you have seen it cured and drained, for he can't bear much force while moving about:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	For it indicates that you should now lie above and below a very strong binding tightly fastened.
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	Then pull it up and drain the fluid forcefully, and he turns toward the heart, and you won't treat him anymore:
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If you cauterize with fire above it as long as it burns:
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	And the greatest harm he does by it if it causes discharge of oil, as we have said:
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	And if you see it coming up from near the oil or head out of the oil, then hold it firmly there and pull it up and drain it forcefully:
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	And it is advisable for you to treat the patient with a mixture of curative substances for displacing harmful fluids from the body:
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And if there were swelling caused by excessive consumption of food (viandas).
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from windiness:
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is prevalent here "vaquer, and it causes pain to some members:
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	The fealdre d’eaux tote auxemens:esculum.sans in theesmerciel meleagues, lespastel eslake: In Old Frenchmeinmeans fromneau levesque :mesure of's. Whatmesles en: Ander theuccenent:
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I called upon a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and there I saw a small swelling in the vein.
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and shortly after, it rose to the shoulder like a worm.
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	straight away as quickly as hot coin when cut from another.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain then left from it and settled there on the shoulder.
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then another bit later it ran throughout the entire body, until it reached the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me that it turned back into the body again, as I saw her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was much surprised to see how she moved from one limb to another as I had never known anyone with this type of ailment before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	So far, I had seen many who have wanted to move pain from one point to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I had never seen anything like this before when I saw her.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought it was because she had a strong heart, and her veins were revealed;
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and because it appeared like wind obstruction to me;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	but it did not appear to me in those who are well-favored by nature, and whose hearts are moistened with blood and veins filled;
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you see curing this illness, and if the patient feels that pain as we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	If the clotted blood above and below happens suddenly, and then it flows out from there until the constricted vesicle bursts.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	And cauterize the vein; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	If it cures the one who drives away vesicles, like foul-tasting pills and Serpent's herbs, and similar things.
Des saiettes	And arrows, as if comparing with other therapeutic interventions.
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, depending on their appearances and whether they cause discomfort or pain in a significant way (corresponding to the phrase "li membres mal figures").
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of them is that there are some with great points (sharpness), others with small ones, and hairs, and those which are melted together.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	And those which have two angles, and those that have tongues (as if referring to surgical procedures with precise cuts or flaps), and those which have parts or segments ("de celles où il a pieces").
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and that causes pain in no member unless it hurts according to various manners (or methods): or in the main limb itself which has hairs.
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	if like brain, body, liver, blood, bowels, rain (possibly a metaphor), intestines, bladder, and other limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When she causes pain in no part of these members and the sign of death, which I will tell you about after this.
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	After this extraction.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	sure decade, andre. Comments, to.t :er. The modernesque :ncients. icesc.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And when the blow to the head causes the axe to hit and penetrate the bone, and he jumps up where it strikes on the skull.
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And when it comes to scotomas and hemianopia and aphasia and rashes on the eyes, and inflammation and tongue rashes, and seizures and mixed comprehension disorders, and vomiting of colic.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	And sometimes there may be no force in the nostrils or ears, and perhaps it affects speech and voice.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	And a sudden swelling of the white discharge-looking lesion, as well as in cases appearing like burnt char.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And if this sign appears during the treatment, if it is related to the dislocation, and extract the arrow-shooting piece from within if it remains there.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of swelling when it occurs or bleeds, indicating that it is near the left breastbone and feels as if it's pierced into something hard, without being drained.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And perhaps the swelling may also become motionless like a boil, and in black-colored blood, bringing coldness and chilliness with sweating and syncope.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	One fascinating book that fits your criteria is "The Black Book of Poland" by Jan Grabowski, although it's more focused on the Holocaust and resistance during World War II in Poland. However, its meticulous research sheds light on various forms of resistance against German occupation, including those lesser-known acts of courage and defiance.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	For a comprehensive exploration of resistance efforts during WWII that is distinct and less known but rich in historical detail and analysis, I suggest "Resistance: A People's Tale" by David M. Rosenbaum. This book delves into the various aspects of the Polish resistance movement, focusing on both well-known events as well as stories from local heroes whose names might not be widely recognized but played crucial roles in their communities during that time.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	: "cezelle, it'sreisle. La: Fromage andre: Theorize enjourse. Andromaise ofxenture.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the wound cuts into his stomach, by chance some of the meat from the injury will not be digestible.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the wound cuts into his belly, and a piece of hay passes through the intestines without hope for recovery, nor in the removal of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the wound cuts into his bladder, and his urine leaks out and comes forth heavily, and he feels great pain; you know that the injury is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, just like the forehead and neck and throat and shoulder and armrest and spinal column and backbone and forearm and legs, and seemingly healthy, are subject to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is lodged in a nerve or an artery and it's not poisoned, as I will tell you because you do something similar.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened at one house where someone got an arrow lodged in the root of their nerve:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and removed it from elsewhere on the fat of his ear, and he was cured without feeling any pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And in one game I got an arrow lodged in the fat underneath paper:
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrow was replaced, but it kept pushing towards the flesh.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and it was quite large from an Arabian bowstring, just like any iron rod in proportion to the ears; he got well without any unfortunate incidents.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And I had an arrow lodged in the throat of a Crusader, and the arrow was Arabian-style with ears.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I pulled out the hairs, and removed as much as possible until I took it out, and he got well from the wound in his throat.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I had an arrow lodged at one house where it was shot into the belly or abdomen, and I thought he must have died:
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after passing thirty years, his condition did not change.
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut above the arrow, and drew it out, and took it out without any unfortunate events.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a house where an arrow was lodged in the back or spine, and there was a wound closed up on it:
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and stayed in his body, not changing his natural conditions.
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and did not find harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And if you see another man where an arrow was lodged in his face, and there was a wound sealed up:
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And then in this way he suffers great pain; and much like other things.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And struck an arrow into one of the prince's homes where the king was staying inside.
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and it was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow had been fully retrieved
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I called for medical care after it was struck, which happened three days prior; and when I found the wound, it was very wide.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I examined it thoroughly but did not feel any sensation therein.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt numbness and pain in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was due to the point of the arrow
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I placed on the injured area a heating apparatus to digestive heat, because it did not swell up
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and it appeared on the arrowhead.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I placed the heating apparatus on his hands and set to repair the wound thoroughly, and then it remained long hair.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	And let it remain there for a day inside his neck; and he tells it to him.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I put on the wound acidic cautery by hand for several days until it had oozed out.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	And I tried it, and felt the head of the cautery sticking to his skin;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then I applied it on the overgrowth of the wound with acidic cautery medicine, as long as I could see clearly the head of the cautery.
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	And it was well done within three months.
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	And then I saw the wound where I had hammered with tongs on one side and my other hand, which could not be removed.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	And I continued to delicately and carefully practice the use of tools like tweezers for a year since they were well-made on the one day when I took them.
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	According to which way the shape came about at the end of this chapter, as long as I treated it, and left the wound untouched.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the judge thinks that the carving on the nose cannot restore it;
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it though, and the wound was sealed, and the patient's maladies were entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Or you said the quality of removing some arrows;
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	but put your remedy on it as I never knew that he could not take it all;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but the experienced surgeons are very little about it, and on this subject where he is present and absent.
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Perform nine works and eight instruments for the removal of projectiles that occur in this field.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not come out of limbs or are driven in due to certain methods (the abbreviation "ij." might refer to an unspecified source, but it seems like a misinterpretation or typo).
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through their joints or they enter elsewhere;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and the one that jumps out or enters is an arrow entering through their flesh, and it has never happened before.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump now, let it remain so long that its flesh is prepared to receive the entry, and allows the exit;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is driven into bone, and it cannot come out, let it remain in such a state for many years, and every year reabsorb (the phrase "la muef" likely refers to the absorption or weakening of material);
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and if it jumps out, and if not, let it penetrate through any small opening in the same place until its entryway is widened, and then remove it;
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is driven into the main bone, and it goes to one of the brain cavities ("ventres dou cerveil" likely means "brain cavities");
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I have mentioned to you: do not remove it at all, but leave it so long after each year until it is no longer inflamed;
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	for if the arrow comes just to its source ("syfac"), it is his death;
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is driven only into the bone, and does not reach its source ("syfac"),
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	nifre:sevaleuteent,s :groitifromente
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very infected at this point and cannot be extracted further, then I will apply treatments to it as I have told you; then heal the joint until it becomes healthy again.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the stone is put back into its place but cannot be seen, if the pain covers it completely.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, if there is no suitable tool available to remove it.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot pull out the wound or reach the stone.
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone, muscle, or vein involved, so let it be until the wound heals significantly.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and remove the stone if you can, and if it has ears or protrusions that hold onto it.
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if the stone is embedded deeply by about .ij. parts that you can manage to remove it.
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or flatten the ears of the stone, so long as you can remove it.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and delicately so as to not break the stone while extracting it more painfully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot remove it once, let the stone remain until there is no point in further extraction due to its legion; then take it out, as the removal itself is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the dislocation causes bleeding for you, then apply what we have told you about treatment in this chapter of the treatise.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and warn you of cutting near a nerve or vein, and tell me how you can safely remove the stone with minimal risk.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and apply the method according to the shape of the stone when it fell out.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	because it's the greatest help that it is, and if you can't do so, then follow the signs as shown to you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	: laisle taille parler and it israrelief.sentence: oun: ices quatorc'sesure à chevalier of thexent. Theu. Amen,le verraiseur tolereaux (Ain.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Now cut so that the pincers can take them, and then pull out: if they jump now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is lodged in the bone, turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and expand the bone, then pull out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot be extracted, let it still remain, and then begin the extraction again as long as it yields.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	And if it was of leaden slag, throw it out at the end.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	And if it was cold-pressed (implied by "chiet"), and you see to administer the bandaging, give it an instrument covered in cloth.
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	If the point of lead slag enters into the cover of the instrument; then throw it out.
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if the lead is heated (implied by "chevee"), throw out that instrument with its point entering in so it may ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the lead is touched (implied by "entouchie"), it must be taken all the way down to the wound or where the poison is, when you can.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	Then heal the wound as much as it covers.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the lead is cold or in the abdomen or bladder or along the side, and it's proximal (prochiene), then cover it up when it covers.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And do not cover the vein and nerve, then draw it out, and pull it if necessary:
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and heal as long as she is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the pincers which have similar hooks to a bird's beak, and so on...
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And in their ways there are many: large, medium-sized, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the headband is also like the feather of a bird...
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	for pointing at the tip of the arrow, which is as it is described here...
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the pincers for pointing and knowing whether it is so...
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common arrows
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Arrows that are healthy have thirty-one, for which reason he has sixteen [of them].
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	as far as we know: twenty-one targets that are after the ears, which they call "dou herbes" (meaning 'short grass' in modern French),
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and there are twenty-one arteries that appear in twenty-one places (temples).
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and twenty-one arrows that are in the twentiinas veins of the twentynas feet, which they call "aspires" (meaning 'springs' or small arteries);
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and there is one arrow that is near the forehead, and another whose head is at the top of the nose;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and twenty-one sinews that are like a neck (or 'col');
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and there are twenty-one arrows that are on top of the lips, which they call "augereaux" (meaning 'upward arch' or perhaps referring to an upper lip structure);
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and there are twenty-one arrows that are on the tongue;
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The arrows that are commonly healthy are twenty-one in each arm;
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cranial (or 'cephalic' in modern terms), and it has a left side, which they call "head-arrow" ('voine du chef');
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the other part is struck by fire (or 'fire' in English), and it is composed of cranial and of the base;
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	:pone. C's en ites letres cestres tincere: Theobliger aille ceintire in Latin:rite
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	ulthe12nde
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And it is the one from which one recovers health, clearly visible above the pocket.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the salve is the vein that lies between the little finger and ring finger, and if it swells up to two inches.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg where there are two veins: one is situated above the left kneecap on its inner side.
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second sinus which is on the right side of the calf's inner edge, and the vein that rises in it, which is in the other leg's inner side.
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are two veins besides those mentioned earlier.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The healthy veins that are after the ears help with blood evacuation in old times and during migraines.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the quality of these healthier ones, as I have said to you, and it is that you raise his main malady.
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and smear the patient's body or these veins with coarse cloth; then bind his painful neck to a pin.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	so long as the two veins appear behind the ears in a length of twenty-four inches from their main trunk:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	know them in your case, and you feel the pain on your body from which it comes out.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	then take the needle, and pierce through it at the vein just above the bone, then squeeze your hand on all of its surface.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut the skin well and puncture the vein twenty-four inches in depth until you see blood.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then strain and bind it up, as long as it is sound.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said about the incision and cautery, as mentioned in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The healthy arteries that are in the ears help with migraines in old times.
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	And so, and ocular inflammation is customary, and at the core of tears are these gases.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the quality of these healthy ones, as I have said before:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is to hold back the malady's neck so that these two veins are clearly visible:
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel the pain on your body, then you have the power.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	:winters of theese of hisen and itinerary:
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	And let the vein grow long and high, like you have done in about two other veins, and cauterize the wound accordingly to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then dislocate the patient, and place your drip on the vein for an hour, then place it on cotton.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And then form the ligature, and let it remain until it is sound; we have spoken about their drainage and extraction, as at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The soundness of the vein in the forehead is comparable to the health of the cephalic vein and old cases of nasal diseases, and migraines, and rheumatism.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And the quality is that the patient's dislocated shoulder stretches out his neck by twisting it as long as the vein appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument called "fossor," whose shape we have described:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and hold it in your hand or something else, letting the blood flow according to the amount you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then let the patient's neck go backward, and secure the vein as long as it is sound and not covered by a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Always, it is not enough that the flames be too intense; and if the bone is crooked, because the bone is close by, and perhaps breaks the flame when it is slightly disturbed.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The soundness of the two veins located in the nasal cavities helps us with their functions and treatment, and at the tooth socket, and rheumatism, and migraine.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their soundness is that the patient's dislocated shoulder stretches out his neck by twisting without any connection, as if before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then sound it out, and make the blood flow gently wide, for there is no part of sanc.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Itinerant. 120580sans malice de senglish eslaine langage, seigneur traits in Old English: laconse desulementes. Whatre in Old French.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The injury of the vein if it is wet with water, and from other causes, and diseases caused by cold.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	Similarly to a migraine that comes in the face, and more when she grows old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	And the quality of the sickness is that his pain tightens his neck, then strains his vein to your left hand;
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	And take the small flame long enough to embed it between the .ii. nostrils;
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	for the vein does not open well enough, and it will now start correcting itself;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	but do not go too far in the wound, correct the blood flow according to your necessity, and bind it tightly at night because it restores quickly.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And it is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The illness of the .ii. gills assists in tightening the alae (wings) of mankind, and at the beginning of madness, and in many diseases, and in impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and itching;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of the sickness is that his pain tightens his neck on both sides, just as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and whether his masters are standing above him, and he sees them from a certain place;
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then he widens the vein a little bit, and treats the blood moderately as best is known to be done;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then redo the treatment in the other vein, and loosen the ligatures slightly, allowing a little more flow;
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	that the patient does not twist; let him just remain until the wound is healed in the morning;
De la sainie des leivres	From the book of books;
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The illness of the veins above in the mouth helps to collect it from the gums, and cracks in the teeth, and furrows on the cheeks, and the neck and nose;
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	'saince ofsecreats a :de l'', andes:age thewaxill:entir. iew. Audexacresin. Thek iterrere, comment. Ages, allure:encontre. The disease. What. Allong. Here.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	Then turn the wrist, and look at both hands, one to the right of the left wrist, and the other to the left.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	And they are known for being black in color, and because they have fine black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	So handle both of them, and if you do not recognize them, then you are uncertain about them.
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	If you also handle the larger part of each one, and do similar things with both hands that are above and below, because it is a similar manner.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the cleansing on the outside of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The cleaning of the hands that are on the outside of the tongue helps after the cleansing of the cervical (neck), and it is related to the tightening of the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth:
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of the better cleaner is that the patient can see between his/her fingers in front of the sunlight, and it cleanses the tongue, and looks at both sides of each vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Then both are clean, and do not dig too deeply into them, because here they are arteries:
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins commonly cleaned are cleansed according to certain methods:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	Or you can pinch the same place with a thick brush or very fine comb if they are similar to arteries, and it is called "arsenical":
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And they are wide and fine according to the widths and constrictions of the veins:
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of that thick brush is very famous, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the veins of thick hair with visible large blood clots and that contain large amounts of blood and turbidity:
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is the form of the fine comb:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more finely pointed, and it is better to use these small veins, or they contain fine yellowish blood:
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The cleaning of the throat, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are found in the neck, and the larynx, and ears, and belly:
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is important that the cleaner cleans well, and he does not warm the artery which is on them:
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	sacre:1000 theachievement en Engauge.demention meausserving in iceser. Here2eauxa la mergered invention. Whatisnervesure:meentail. Howen acheveinthe :oldre quell,leave.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	nousre.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the archbishop does not openly appear, it is required that you extract him, and change another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	Do you desire any remedy for him, or will he recover from the wound in his arm if I open it near the limb? It appears clearly.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And the cup at the flaw in it, as we have said before.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you come to know the place of healing, it is required that you extract the arm where you touch the point until you feel the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then you sign the place of entrance, and then bind the arm, and empty the cup at the flaw.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And beware not of wounding the artery when you see it swollen, for that is an artery; avoid doing so.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it protruding as high as the urine of a child, and red and subtly colored, you know that it is from an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hurry then, and place your hand on it lengthily, then hold your hand if the swelling is pinched, as often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then bind the arm, and leave it like that, and do not move his painful maladies, and be in fear, and do not move him as long as he is sane.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the swelling is not pinched, and it subsides, and there is no current medicine for you, then empty the artery if it opens, because its head draws back; and pinch the swelling.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take an ointment of figwort (figwort is known historically for its use in various medicinal treatments), and apply it, and take one half and place it well near the other side today.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If the swelling is pinched, it is good; if not, then you treat it as we have said before, with powders that constrict blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the constricting is not done for any other reasons but to prevent the little blood clot of the wound from rupturing, and the presence of the ligament in the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The healing of the veins in blood if she helps him up thereafter, and his head.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it is incumbent upon the surgeon that he watches for the nerve underneath, and if it becomes too inflamed, then the nerve will recover.
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it swells and its healing is hindered, and perhaps it cannot be cured.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any person due to its subtlety, then it is incumbent upon you to heal the wound with your instrument; and avoid injuring the nerve.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if it has a vein between them, then he lets it run long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The health of the cephalic vein is beneficial because it draws blood to its head, and helps with circulation.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is safer to puncture the jugular vein rather than the miltialis vein, because it is less likely of all veins, as it has no nerve or artery nearby.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is incumbent upon you to seek a less risky location and not be troubled if the first attempt does not succeed, and try again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and it may swell in some people after the first time, but one should not be distressed by this.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the surgery is according to your judgment.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first choice you should know is that the purpose of surgery is only to maintain health.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and for preventing future illnesses.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and the surgery done in one of the three veins that are known, is cauteur de .iiii.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And it must be done to strengthen in the beginning of prayer for each patient, and both in spring and after eating when the sign of fullness appears.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	And it must be done within the first day or two hours, or three days after.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The strengthening given is not determined by a specific disease but when the need arises for day or nutrition, in all hours and at every age.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it does not need to be done for children just over twelve years old, or women carrying only four months up to seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should the weakened ones who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when anyone wishes to be strengthened, however it may be done, it is required that he regulate the bowels with a light purgative.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if there is much fat retained, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines unnecessary surpluses harmful to the main limbs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	And it does not need to be done for those who are too strong from meats, or who are very drunk, as long as they are.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And it is required to be done after colic pain, and vomiting, abdominal discharge, multiplied miscarriages in women, labor, sleeping, eating, and any thing related to the virtue or weaponry, by anything.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtly remove the fluids that are not thick, with meats and drinks and remedies, if you have a reason for it.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	or bathing, if there is nothing wrong in it, to subtly remove the blood.
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and you must strengthen by putting pressure on the vein in its third part, as we have said before.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and you must keep that day of work, and rest, and leisure, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	And if you tie your feet and join them, and make the strengthening higher than those who are strengthened, and rub their arm two or three times or three times;
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	but also stretch above a little bit, for when it is too tight or just slightly loose, he cannot correct it without causing harm.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the hand palms when veins swell up, and smell them;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then also strengthen the little fat in a bit of oil with his left hand over that vein slightly;
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	sangrecces. :cele.fatilcités. œtzete,ise le raie àiture tanse.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For it has been seen that they flee like strings from the sawyer, and there are such as are smooth of wind-hardening.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	When placed upon the flame, if removal occurs from the flame, and it cannot open the vein, then this is one of them.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if it overlaps the vein, because it is a wound too tight, which requires that the surgeons be informed in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein operation is done first time, it is good; but if not, again a little near that place or by sudden movement, as long as the limb does not swell.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the limb is swollen, and the patient complains, then let him lie with one or two days without binding the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	perhaps abscesses may appear below the incision; do not let it be washed or bathed, then repeat the surgery if he finds it pleasing.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the hole is small or the blood suction is done subtly, and you doubt whether any more blood remains than you have seen, then firmly hold that hole with all your might.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and a little by sudden movement, so that the limb is swollen; for it happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the limb swollen, do not repeat the surgery, and put some oil on it, for it lightens the blood in the vein and becomes mixed with this fluid in the place.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and then apply the oil to each surgery that you perform on the veins, so as to stop the course of the blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this makes a three-year itch and swelling when it is placed over the vein; subtly remove it if it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if heavy abscesses come, which happen often, then do it only when the opening of the vein is small.
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	if you hasten and place a damp sponge with water and a string slightly tight on the limb and hold it for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and require that you do this after the blood has come out of the vein, and if it delays in staying at the place afterwards for any day or color change, then don't bind the arm.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see ateinne, orenchie cestuet que il iere siens:
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	: "vocale l'estrog tol. The French. In English. The originals encize a itaure fromage of the cite defface a himagainne aout andre a ici: age. (1escription, Laiken laisseaulgarre of itsire.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Now let us not place anything of that which we have said, for perhaps there may be a chance without the artery; but I make an incision with a lancet to harden the wound, and then treat it with other treatment until it is sound again.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And for each body part according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if it is black, let it remain red until it becomes pinkish; and if you see it large, let it become thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And is required for those who are pale and weak, and have the skill of blood extraction; because it will make a larger wound and cause its edges to flare up.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is better for them to have a milder touch and less often, and they should be treated more gently when cutting across rather than pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this manner of treatment is safe from the discharge of blood and compression of nerves; it's worthwhile when healing lasts long rather than being wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for those to whom the treatment is necessary, it is required that they give mild pain relief with juice of grape berries; if they are suffering from excessive blood loss, treat them twice or thrice with a lancet.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if it is of cold constitution, mix the lancet relief pain in honey syrup or in aromatic honey with spices—pepper, cinnamayer, ginger, and cloves; and if well-scented, also include sweet pastilles.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if his palm is involved in the treatment after bleeding out some blood, it must then breathe a broth of barley and drink a subtle sweet syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and apply other things that we have said in the chapter on syncope (fainting), for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if it wants to dislocate his arms, and healing again later on, when he is weakened by great sickness, then it must heal a little bit and a little bit, according to the continuous amount of its virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wants to dislocate his arms after the first healing, and if it is very strong, then it must heal for one or two hours after the first healing, or after the second hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wants to heal in another area, if it should heal that very same day or within three days.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	Because there is much blood within the already swollen part, and brings fever; it must then drain a large quantity of it, and widen the abscess so that it comes out from the bottom.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	then that you attend to all the healing conditions, and put your hand on his shoulders when it is healed, so that the wound does not wobble from its bottom.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this often happens when they neglect the healings.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	but does not know when to remove the bandage from his arm, and drain blood the second time, as the abscess is closed, and you must press firmly on it.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	if he is stiff, that his arm moves hastily, for this would be bad.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let it stay until heated up the second time; or you do not touch it too roughly with your fingers, as long as there are frozen abscesses in his veins bursting forth.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put it under some moisture again, and press it lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be left and not squeezed at all, as long as the abscess has been calmed down.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to drain a second time the blood in that same place, let him heal there or somewhere else, or in another arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in his arm is healed by the main vein, because it is composed of that.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	sans: "ceaux fie l'est pasures. If itteintes la terre ("Theu: oungeantentilent. Herefaire ofse. Ages andre. Theu phrase. Alsoeanime. Injurtherr esaurate decaisse.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then bind it tightly so that the vein appears well, now heal the wound through and through, not wide or long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And if it is wide, and heal well close to the joint of the hand, and when you cannot remove it, set the hand back in warm water, and leave the wound open until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it is still there, do not warm up the hand again, because we put more ice on it than heat.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	The healing of this vein is better than any other veins, as there is no artery or nerve involved.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The healing of the hand's palm equals all diseases of the liver, and that is how it works:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Strain the hand, and place it in warm water, as long as the vein comes to the surface, if possible.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if the wound heals across its entirety, and you cover it completely, nothing else hurts.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	And do not apply too much pressure, as all the arteries are completely cut off.
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And then put the hand back in warm water if it is frozen in the wound, and he cannot remove it.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the wound as much as your skill allows, place oil and thread on it to sew up quickly, and then do so for every case.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The healing of the left hand is like the disease of the mouse, and do everything I have told you for the right hand in the same way.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The healing of the spheroid relates to all diseases that are on the body's surface.
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	Like the illnesses of the sea (maris), and retention of flowers (flores), and diseases of rain (rainis), and those of claws (cuices) and old legs (jambes anciennes), and similar ailments.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of this healing is that it pushes out blood in warm water, and rubs on the vein until it breaks.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And it lies above the junction of flesh; and the vein is at the ankle, and beneath it there are many wounds.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	It is now either larger in size than before at that place, or wider at the ankle than it was.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you clean it with the cloth on his body, warn him against those who are there, and clean it similarly as in healing a wound; and let the flames grow back to life.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he cannot get out of it, put his body in water, and let the vein well drain.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if healing requires it the first time, repeat it a second time above a little bit, for his body is salted.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not doubt a nerve, as we have said, and therefore make of the same soothing poultice for the other shoulder similarly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein from the sciatic is to the ankle of great heat, and its healing corresponds to the pain in the hunchback, where it contains hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its healing is that it alleviates the pain between baths and stretches above the ankle three times when twisting.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then cleanse it in all ways that you can, and by crossing.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is worthwhile that you do it, for the vein is swollen, and it can be much restored at home by oneself.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not heal it, clean any of his open veins on both sides or the front part, and towards the small joints, and warn him against those who are there.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and do as much correction to the blood that you see, and then release it, and put on a cloth and hold tightly; now it is healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Venesection treatments
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Venesections are made of horns, or antler, or vineyard wood; and venoplasty is done according to one or two methods: either by puncturing and drawing blood, or through incision and applying pressure on the wound.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this venoplasty which is by incision can be done in one or two ways: either it is applied to all the body's heat, or at the place of fire.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and venoplasty which is done by incision and blood extraction is performed in three places on the vein.
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	from which one is placed on his head, and the other under the collarbone.
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and two other parts of his chest, and from there it draws blood out the jaw;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	And the suction cup for both shoulders; and the suction on the elbows.
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	And the suction cups for both arms; and the suction cups for both legs.
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	And the suction cups for both ankles; and the suction does not involve blood, since it consists of small needles scattered in the skin.
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	And because it doesn't hinder one so much, as when performing shoulder surgery;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And it does not necessarily require that she be sedated, neither with fire nor hot sensation, in any disease caused by over-filling, as long as all her blood is drained.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if necessity arises for suction due to illness or habit, we administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, and also in each ten-day cycle.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are such cases where those who need suction have great weight to bear.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if there are such individuals who experience over-filling and swelling in their face, head, neck, and darkening of the eyes.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who have a blood clot in their mouth, whose tongue has fallen out, and re-accumulate blood.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are such people who think about blood discharge, swelling, wounds, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and immediately after the month, at three hours past the day of each month, we order suctioning in such cases.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The method of moxibustion helps to relieve the heaviness in their heads... which comes from the blood flowing out, and it does not necessarily require that this happens after all the blood has been drained.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	And this evacuation is related to the sanitation of the skull's side;
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And it does not suffice that those who are cold-natured or have a catarrh should do so, for this causes them great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And it does not suffice that they sleep with such wounds or those who have cold-induced diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover often become negligent, and it is necessary to place the suction cup slightly lower due to uncertainty of movement.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The evacuation relieves the neck's side related to the sanitation of the head and chest area, and for this reason it is worth its effort.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	And in the hole where the passageway is located, as well as in drying and filling.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it must be pressed slightly, for if it holds too tightly, it may cause indigestion or discomfort in the belly and heart.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The suction of these two sides of the colon is worth the pains in the head and eyes, conjunctivitis and swelling, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is related to the sanitation of the chest area; and it suffices that you instruct the surgeon that he expresses his hand when placing the suction cup, so as not to cut an artery or cause bleeding by extracting blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The suction of the mouth is worth to diseases of the mouth and gum decay, as well as similar illnesses in the mouth; it also relates to the sanitation of the two lips' areas.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The suction of the shoulders is worth diseases that arise from heat and filling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The suction of the ribs is as valuable as two knives on both arms.
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	because it draws blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and you must instruct the surgeon that he does not inflict too much injury upon it, as the skin is bare of flesh and knows well inside veins and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup placed on the back is worth serious foundational disorders and diseases in that area; it suffices that the suction cup be large and made of iron, so as to perform its task properly; perhaps if it were delicate, it would break; and it causes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups for the legs heal thoroughly, because they draw blood from all parts of the body; they are worth old rain-related pains, and marshland and bladder pains, and help relieve inflamed flowers; and they relate to the sanitation of both thighs and ankles, as well as everything else, which weakens the body after prolonged use and causes multiple disorders.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of placing the suction cup is that you place it first emptied and immediately afterward, move it gently, and shake it in such a way that you continue to do so until you see the skin reddened and swollen, and feel the blood pressure; then remove the cups, and take care of the positioning of the blood vessels, as there are many who have thickened or have fluid: it suffices once cut, and make wide wounds, and suck them continuously.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And it is the first time to cause deffort, et il nettement en leu desormainne lesce a l'encorre, et de la ceorce :nge auroi .ij.il invenant quin.tend. Here isme :morte.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	llustration. Ilterrasie alexander.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if our blood is much, we often recollect it; and if the arrow is stuck in, they frequently pull it out, and when the wound heals completely, so that it can be clearly seen.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And covers the patient who has thick and hard skin, and with small cracks, that you oil the hairs of the suction cups with a stimulating and dissolving oil.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in the case, with purple oil, or with sweet almond oil, or with seed oil of squash:
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in this case, with watercress oil, or with lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something like that:
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if excessive and thick and cold, take oil of unripe plum, or of balsam, or anethol oil, and similar things:
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if that patient heals and has tender skin with large cracks, they do not need to apply any oil:
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it is necessary to wash after the aspersion of water (presumably with a color or temperature significance) whether red hot water, cold water, water from mulberries, squash seed oil, porcelain water, or something similar:
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture in their joints, they will lift it up with hot water from myrtle and sumach, or something like that:
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have thick excessive blood products (or discharges) rise up with strong wine or cold water, or the decoction of anet seed or chamomile, or something similar:
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and it is not better to use the suction cups before or during bathing, but after an hour or two; and does not sleep again after aspiration:
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is necessary for him to warm himself when he must be aspirated and when he is aspirated:
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And he who is crazy or too hot and inflamed:
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if he should have cold things as it is done with green apples and beetroot and lettuce in warm water:
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and coat the teeth:
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	it's fromage, en:xentence. Sarr,lere (Cajt'sain theure of theire. Andrevermejourre:cestruyse:ent. Incaure of thegiveur sachores. Ix. Fromaille:iure aureintres, towormen:
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	: httpsisere anditacme:sepekscription. 1aguin:t (50eveille:naturex<bescribe (anxarge :sant (faire.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it requires giving to some people sometimes poultices or musk before the windings, or after, in order to strengthen the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And remove him without, but it does not require that those who drink hot beverages.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The suction cups that are applied to wounds are those placed on the liver, and on the stomach, and on gouty patients, and on the belly, and on swelling, and on sprain, because these limbs do not suffer from injury above or below.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	And it does not require doing so to draw blood from limb to limb.
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	As we apply on the breasts when they do not heal; to reduce the viscosity that is in the limb, as we apply suction cups on the belly and swelling to make the limb smaller.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	And the pain when it has operation or incision, if it occurs by its attractive power during the intervention, or despair of his joint from dislocation.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	And then it does so when we place them on the liver and stomach where there is retained suction.
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	And these vacuums are used because they can suction so much; and sometimes together fire, and sometimes water-stones.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	As in illnesses of profuse tears, and such that it fills the suction cup with hot water, or with water infused with healing herbs to cure it.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup given by fire is:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it should be two-thirds of the palm in width and length, with its edge curved like an incision into the joint, as if to insert a needle.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it is made of iron or steel in front so that it does not wound the patient when applying to his limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	And it has in its midst a thorny stick of iron or steel to put the splint on.
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And they are large and small depending on the diseases and conditions of those who have them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For children's suction cups are different from large ones and thin ones are for slender individuals.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And this must be put on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	Take the splint of wax or some material and put it on the thorny stick where the suction cup is placed.
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	if so that the light is at the bottom of the suction cup, it does not burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	And then place it on his member, and you must put it in the hole that we have mentioned, so when it heats up, they release it and remove the suction cup.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And then proceed with it as we have said, and repeat often if you are experienced.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the suction cup addressed to pneumonia in children and during an attack, it has no arm or hole, and is only applied to the limb when it becomes clear.
et c’est li forme:	And that's its shape:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Suction cups are not applied to places where the smallness of a part is like lips and gums, and similar things.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	And they are also removed from the chest if like it or not, and similar things.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	And the quality of its use is such that when you try suction cups in mildly swollen areas, it helps relieve pressure.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	And they put it in mildly swollen areas, as long as they are familiar and have no issues within their abdomens.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	And if you are skilled in both venesection and suction cup use, then bleed the limb as much as it is red, and place the suction cups.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they become clear and pleasant, if it is suitable or possible to place the suction cup there, then put them in, because it is quite useful.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then lift the limb of air and water, and it works quite well, and then press.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the limb is too warm after removing the suction cups from its body, then wrap it with a cool linen cloth and place it on, as long as the limb remains cold.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if the suction cups are multipled, put them on burnt glass or gauzes, and similar things, as long as they remain cold.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	: orne.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	ousi,sans desusi: in theesme traduction. Ame noun it'saincte duitsience and age : The Old Englisheslaur fele ofrature :12 :13 : The French, aes, and:age, ander.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the hairs do not take hold of moisture, then he commands the patient to smear their wound with fresh blood, or pierce it until the wound stops bleeding.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then he places them above, and immediately they feel the warmth of the blood if they start to clot.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see them discharging, then powder a little of aloe and silk fibers or ashes on it, so they will stop discharging now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This is the beginning of the Book of Fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and pertain to the treatment of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Seek, listen to the wise man's words, that he does not find any mention of this chapter in any ancient books or letter.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And because of this reason, the knowledge of such practices was introduced into our land, as I found no better;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing of it because through the study of ancient books and by practice in my life's work, as well as experience.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	And I have described in this chapter what is contained herein and set it forth at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of instruments that are used, as I did in these preceding two chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore that we declare this book's prologue contains the essence of its words and chapters, set in such order as they should be understood, and on which those who practice can rest assured, so that through experience others may learn this noble art and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that in cases of fracture or dislocation or twisting or shearing injury, there is no need for one to be concerned with healing the patient's pain on both sides. If any condition does not require attention due to its trivial nature, similar to a weakness, fever, or old age;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	Or if the patient is very cold or too hot; and administer ice for cold injuries such as frostbite from icy battles, arrow wounds, and metal cuts, not drinking wine or eating fats, and filling up with meats that fill the cavities of the body, so long as there is doubt about dislocation or swelling in a limb; recline the patient on some firm surface according to an initial regimen he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the bone is broken and must be restored, it should require that one feeds the patient with meats that make a loud noise of consumption, or have viscosity as if wheat cooked in water and bread, and testicles, and belly meat, and heavy wine, and resembling something.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For when parting of the skin occurs, it quickly becomes fractured.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that broken and decayed bones cannot be properly rejoined or mended according to their nature due to the injury of the limbs, nor those who are too soft like the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	But there is no cure for the fractured bone; repair large tendons that act and join the limb together so it becomes as strong as before, and not all of its work, which requires eating heavy meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you know that fractures come in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the main fracture is different from that of a simple fracture, and in this chapter I will tell you all the types of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For he has fractures that go downwards and others are narrowing, like the tip of a pen used to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with an open wound, and a fracture that forms a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each type has its method and proper instrument for restoration, as comes to mind in the context.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and is known to be twisted in the bone, and open well by default, and can be pressed with the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when it does not have twisting or pain in the joint, and the maladies do not feel any severe pain, then there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it may well have twisting, crack, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it does not require you to move the limb by hand, but apply ointments that come later on, and then restrained gradually.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And you know that the fracture which goes downwards has its two parts joined, and it must be set to make them even again so as not to leave abscesses inside.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if abscesses come, it has no effect as long as they are relieved.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then set it so that you can move and shift lightly, and know that the restoration of the bone is easier than theirs if they had broken parts; then restrict as it must be done afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	Andor le corps:iadou bone :il desires, oral.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And put the limb according to its natural shape, so that when parts of both limbs are broken and pressed together in their places, you may repair them with all joints without harming the patient's injury or pain.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And properly set the dislocated bones according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And the patient feels well in his hand if he seems that it is not well: if you gently reduce it and do not squeeze too much, as those who make it come back with their incision work by heat and contraction of the limb, as we have tried many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is in full health, if you treat well this malady so that it does not move, neither through watching nor sleeping, nor turning back, nor any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And take care that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain at all.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when there is no pain, it is not the case, and it must be that he puts himself in such position that he does not feel any pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	And you must keep him straight so that twisting does not occur when he is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And the quality of the broken limb is according to what I have said.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	You know that broken limbs are various in size and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	Because he has small limbs like brisk and sturdy ones: it must involve wrapping fine linen cloths gently.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	And those who are big, like chests and legs: it must involve wrapping with a large band, because the wide bands enbrace all of the great limb, and the pressure from every part is equal so that there is no pain.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then put stakes on moving joints, .iij. or iiij. according to the member, and press your hand a little over the entire band, then go above the dislocation and press less so that the dislocation moves away slightly from itself;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And soften the band a little and a little, as long as you keep great part of the healthy shoulder, then repeat another band, and turn back toward the dislocated shoulder;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then go to the part around the dislocation, and press moderately, not too hard or softly, as we have said in the first mention above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the wound bindings of linen or thin cloths, so that they are even and flat, then bind it all together with one bandage; and if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if it has an abscess or ulcer, apply something soothing to the abscess and which hardens the swelling, and let it remain for a few days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then bind the bandages tightly, and use strips of a wide cloth that has been twisted several times, or wood from which you make hurdles, or palm leaves according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is required that the bandage applied to the fracture be slightly larger and wider than the others:
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and it should also extend as much as it requires for the small or large limb:
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then bind the bandages in the same way as you did for the first time, and tie them down with an available thread similarly to how it was done on the fracture:
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	then become narrower and wider again, now less; and it is required that the thread be of medium thickness, not too thin or too thick, and made from twisted linen:
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	because if the thread is too thick, like I have seen from works of people who make their bandages with twisted linen threads, and this is great error; for the binding cannot be equal if there is not at least two spaces between each bandage:
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the painful joints are swollen after tightening the bandages on their healthy limbs, then apply strips of linen or rags soaked in a poultice to avoid it from bleeding:
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with breaking, and the bones are broken, I will tell you the treatment after that.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not need to extract all splinters from all bent limbs within one day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it does not need to insert splinters until after 4-6 months or more depending on your secure judgment as to how far they should be inserted.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And now the method of the ancient manipulators for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions: and you must take flour that is held by millstones, mix it with plenty of water, and make this preparation not too thick nor too thin, and use it, and this is the common method of the manual manipulator for restoring fractures in various positions, and especially for women and children, because it is neither too cold nor too hot.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to restore fractures and dislocations is to take abareis (a type of resin) and ladani (cinnamon), and inula (an herb), and aloes, 10 parts; mirrè (myrtle berries), 5 parts; and juniper, 7 parts; and make powder, and mix the honey with it; if the patient's condition is warm, use this emplaster, because it has good composition and restores bones broken in various positions, and is valuable for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method to restore torsion is to take mugat (mullein) and vismalve (willow bark), 10 parts; mirrè (myrtle berries), 7 parts; aloes, 6 parts; acacia wood, about 5 parts; Armenian bole, 10 parts; grind them well, mix with water or plenty of honey, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another method for jointed fractures and the dislocations of bone fragments, and to ease the pain that accompanies it; treat with a new lane (fresh linen), moiled (moist) and cooked oil, and place on the affected limb. This preparation does not restore the fracture or dislocation itself but is good for soothing the aching aposteme (joints) and treating bone-related pains properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method to restore broken bones is to take dry leaves of fig tree and earthy moss, grind them together, and make the emplaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	: "V12000 in ouldes tostirall.tropalexin theilv230000000sans'sainctexime lesangaregure desires acheatils of0200. Theca and itseant:sacre, leaule ofsacmeasure. This oungeace.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another method of emplastre is more than the first, when after incision comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of violet and linseed seeds, beam, little stick, and spoon, violets and chamomile flowers, from all of them a part; and grind, and confit with salted or sweet water, or wine according to the temperature of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, he does not mention adding anything on the broken limb for its restoration, except some wax and oil; and states that it should neither be too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to him that the limb should be treated with dry warm things for restoration, such as myrrh and aloe, incense, and similar substances; as we have said before.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of emplastre that is worth the injury and pain includes using mud and hair plucked from peasants' heads or pigeon feathers; equally long iron rods should be used, which are ground up for application during emplastre, and then applied to the affected area.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then the dislocation is slightly corrected afterwards, and one must ensure that there are no sharp pains in his misaligned shoulder or any movement from its natural position; if it dislocates again due to handling by hand.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain or itching arises at the point of treatment, or sensation of rest or swelling occurs, then quickly correct the dislocation and perform emplastre again; take a lighter leather cloth and moist sea sponge, immerse in water, lift the limb so that the itching ceases and pain is alleviated.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour after emplastre, and place it on a dry sheet slightly dampened with water or oil roses, and secure it under a bandage as long as you remain cautious of hot temperatures during recovery.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it also allows for the reduction of swelling in both limbs and relieves the pain, then resume the emplastre gradually with a small amount of restorative treatment, and not too forcefully as before; gently continuing until they are healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	Laws enveni'ses tost it isent lice duin.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	i:s:nastra : Iacit.jour. Andromaine of their en a parturient.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	And therefore the restraint should be more than primary, and the swelling of his flesh as I have said before; and if you see the wound seeping more than it is proper, you know that no further harm can come.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	When the points of cold water are applied every day whenever it dislocates, and this is each day for a little while.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	By this treatment, we cut the swelling of the limb immediately, and hasten what the foolish healers do, restoring the limb in a twisted manner: it is bad, and if such fears arise, I see nothing else but laziness and not treating properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various ways to dislocation
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many ways of dislocations exist, and various forms, and their causes are distinguished;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	for it has dislocations made by striking with the sword, and it breaks every bone of the body up to where is overlapping on top of another bone, as if cut or broken; and because of this type of dislocation we call "haichure."
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword pierces the bone beyond mere feeling, and this manner of dislocation we call "absolute"; and it is the wound caused by these two types of dislocations—large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it has impacted wounds, or penetrating injuries, or blows to the bones of the legs, or falls from a ledge, or other similar occurrences.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it bears a persistent dislocation which brings about the cloth resting on top of the bone, or she lies upon the bone, and this is the wound or large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound is stitched into the bone as delicately as some joints, and it has a small crack, and for this reason this "hairline" fracture must be addressed.
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is caused by piercing with an arrow, or falling, or something similar, and it has driven a piece of bone into the lower part, and its edges are as sharp as those made by a blacksmith when they hammer on the anvils between them. If there is penetration within it.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this occurs more in people whose lower parts have wet bone, like children's.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And it happens in all these kinds of fractures where small pieces are driven out as if they were, and I will speak about this subject.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures due to pulling on them, and the investigation by traction, and by the corrupted part that is above it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hairline fracture is characterized by the fact that when the bone is discovered and scraped beneath it, if there appears to be a black line.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In treating the fracture, take into account various symptoms of bad alignment, and if you see no evil accidents like vomiting bile, loss of understanding, extension, paleness, fever, blood issuing from and reddening around it, and other similar conditions in different states, then there is doubt about the patient's recovery.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see an evitable accident, and hope for healing, as when the treatment begins.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the nose vein appears first to you, and it is winter, it must be covered over the fourteenth day so that it can heal within a month.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in that state, if you hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue around the bone becomes decayed, then the accidents we have mentioned come about.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the bone fracture comes right where it covers the brain, then it is necessary that you cut the cracked part as follows: and make sure to pierce the head of the painful patient through all possible ways; and on the face of the wound more softly than you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And if bleeding arises in the discovery of bone or incision site, it is essential that you utilize this knowledge; and thou shalt fill the wound with layers of linen soaked in roselle oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And let the wound rest as long as the incision sites have calmed down; ensure to guard against any bleeding; then proceed with extracting the bone according to a number of techniques: one such technique involves cutting through the tight area directly in front. The resulting form is thus:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then there is another method more extensive than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method involves employing various techniques: some are narrow and others broad, with points and iron instruments; applied swiftly to avoid hemorrhage at the patient's head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is loose and hardened, it is necessary that you perforate within; so that with gentle techniques you may avoid penetrating beyond the bone's inner layer, ensuring a margin or circle above the point extends past the bone itself; and for such cases one must have multiple techniques: two of them should be applied to each side of the spinal column from its base, using various methods:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities of the bone to be perforated involve applying one technique on the bone and turning it over until you determine that the bone has been penetrated; then apply another force a little further, and thus perform as follows: make your surgical instruments at an interval of the bone, and do so subtly and swiftly, according to what we have mentioned, whether thou putteth the bone in thy hand or use any one of thy tools.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have the bone broken and cut, and it is required that you set the piece which is delayed from the bone to all other instruments seeming like a scalpel, but it must be more flexible and subtler than the other scalpel.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And if it delays nothing from the small bones or scales, if the bone is moved lightly to one of the instruments we have mentioned; then care for the wound with tenting and ointments that we have described.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of operation that is called by the Greeks, which is more abrasive; and it was done very strongly, and it is its saying.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It must first that you remove a part of the bone, whether it breaks open or not; when you have found this section, then place under the lenticular (lens-shaped) edge of this incision tool, for where there is this form.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut off a part, and it is the piece that curves in two sides, so that you cut towards the bone; then with a small hammer placed above, you move lightly along the entire bone and be careful of the cloth undernee.r
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is attached to the bone, if you move the bone lightly, for the bone does indeed sense harm and fear;
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fragment does not pierce through the cloth ("se li brisure de l'os ne perce jusc'a la toile"), and the bone is cut so much that it produces small fragments, then you must renew the roughness (asperitet), and remove scales with a subtle scraper in various quantities; for provisioning each piece most suitable, according to the operation and shape of the fragment.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If a king faces many rough rascals, and after them more subtle ones, and never stops doing so until he is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each other hair and subtle breakage, it implies that you must adjust according to its particular condition; and this is something not found in those who have devoted their study to this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the skin is exposed, it implies that you must firstly dress a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and then apply oil-rosemary mixture on top of it.
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another linen cloth doubled in two or three layers, and apply oil-rosemary mixture on it as well, placing the second layer over the first one. Perform this more gently than you can, so that you do not strain the skin too much, then lightly cover it with a third linen cloth, ensuring you don't press hard enough to only darken the wound further.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And leave it for a day or two until the swelling subsides, then remove it gently, and administer remedies as you would with thistle roots, flour, incense powder, alchemical substances, and similar things. From these materials, make pills to put on the wound, and apply medicines without causing further irritation;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And ensure that the wound is finally cleaned so you do not leave any residue or allow dirt to accumulate, as when a bow-arrow hits the brain's cloth (cerebellum), it can cause damage and bleeding; because when something sharp touches the exposed skin, it may tear more severely.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Then beware if anyone's misfortune comes upon the patient, as we have said before, since it is doubtful sense of doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if no further harm comes to the patient from the medicine applied on it, there must be virtue in applying a part of honey, and two parts oil-rosemary mixture, and wrap a cloth around the wound before placing medicines on the exposed skin.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the manner of treatments that it will cover until it is well again.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Save that sometimes these two pieces above, or just one of them alone, as they are bones, and it does not break easily; and when it is bruised or twisted, and then it becomes healed again.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is fractured, it requires you to pierce your little finger or notch near the nail, and place that fracture close to the index finger's tip, and at least in front of the pouch, until the nail returns according to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And perform this binding, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain from your actions.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is above the nail and cannot come down to rest on it, then you must place a slightly larger splint at the top of the finger's head.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is in one or two parts, then make another repair and hurry to restore it within a year, if possible.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	but after the seventh or twelfth time when the abscess cavity is calmed down, then bind at the nail's tip with a cotton band, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind another piece to the other part if there is a fracture in two parts; and make sure the bands fill up the notches of the nails.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And the restorers say that they must wear burlap bands and change them every day; it seems to me not very good, but you need to make them with lint from sheep wool and powdered millstone; then leave the band until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never bind onion scales to the band in the place of splints, and if you have a soft leather strap, and hold the fracture together, and blow away the patient's pain; do so with your hands.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscess cavity reaches the nail while you perform your actions, then put a little cera or cotton soaked in rose oil, or some small amount of diatomaceous earth.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the abscess cavity does not reach the nail, then pack it repeatedly with fine millet flour and powdered incense, mixed with sheep wool lint, and place under heavy splints without binding the nail.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the nail is slightly broken into small pieces, then take suitable waxes for this purpose, close the crack, and treat it with various exorcising charms, and soldering as appropriate waxes and ointments.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but if there is no injury in the nail, then treat with bands and cotton pads soaked in linseed oil until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	regarding the treatment of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is free of injuries and fractures do not extend into two parts, if there are caries inside it, then treat it slightly with bandages.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is required that you bind the index finger in the sore side; and if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then tie your right hand to the soresse, et si lait douceur, se le mandible droit, et enceps, et enceps.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced in .ij., then it requires that you extend .ij. parts, so long as they remain levelled.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movements of the teeth occur, or dislocation, when you stretch a gold, silver, or silk thread over the fractured jawbone and place it under .i. piece of cloth; and place that same cloth under another large well-made tablecloth, or a piece of leather proportional to the jawbone, and attach it so that the patient can move as desired, and directs the malaide to rest, and instruct them on eating light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you observe that the figure changes, and it settles back after a year, then reposition it as it was; and place powder made from fine flour mixed with an ample amount of wheat or rye meal after setting up lou fractured jawbone; and lay thin linen over the powder, and when you apply the linen, let the patient's position not change, so long as they are sound, many times in .iij. months it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a stone abscess occurs, then prepare as we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, heal with no little piece of bone in its place; apply the sutures to the bone with ample suture materials available.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, expand it by inflammation according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have set all these pieces, and there is no delay in setting it up, if the wound is large, place on ample sutures to tighten the closure, so long as it remains sound.
de la forcele	Of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps may break multiple times towards the shoulder, and if there is fracture according to .iij. maneuvers: it is broken and displaced in .ij., and has pieces, and is lighter to restore; or there is fracture with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedures when there is fracture with wound that you have .ij. assistants, so that one of them tightens the supportive device which feels the forceps broken; and others extend the collar towards the part; then place the fracture in its proper position as it should be, and make sure there is no appearance or dislocation.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have the skill to extend it further, then place an inflatable balloon or cloth under the shoulder of the patient according to your necessity; and handle the forceps lightly, and hold the balloon in your hand so that you can position the fracture as it should be, as it requires.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the handle of the forceps away, because it breaks off, then it requires that the malaide rest on their bed linen, and place an orthopedic collar under the shoulder, and have the assistants hold the shoulder upwards so that the bone of the forceps remains raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	A.iij. La première fois.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	s affinement:tant verscaste slerez apexentice.fere casse (tostractre (apparthexue seelacit greintude. Andre,ilklesce temurnecture,0resse malletifteent approxan so lage ia,ent purelng a la ceckle medlee
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of the incision, if it bleeds, and if the wound is small, or if you doubt the incision, then apply pressure to the wound with cloths and bandages according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if during an incision it comes, if there is fluid, place a cloth soaked in rose oil and straw wool on top, and put it over.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The dislocation of the bone, when it feels a wound and a misalignment in size, is that you put powder made from miller's pea flour and alum dust on top of the bone, and then place lighter layers over it, and fix a stake within the alignment if you know how.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very thick band of one palm in width, and place a double layer of light layers on top of the powdered area, and cover it; then take a slender stick of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that thicker band to keep the head of the bone aligned.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And place the stick above the fracture, and turn the band back to its neck, and around the healthy bone, and around the misaligned bone; and remove the winding of each part, and when you see that in every turn the bracelet is tightening over the crack, and clearly you can see that the stick does not move above the broken bone daily, and whenever the ligament loosens.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	And lay the malformed bone on its back, and place a small peg underneath the stick to lift the shoulder joint up; this may alleviate the force of the dislocation by adjusting the arm's position at the collarbone or securing it with the arm at the neck, so that no adverse event occurs within twenty years.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then repeat the procedure if you have experience, and loosen and release the brace then until it is restored; and it will be fully restored in twenty-seven years at most, and not in any home's case.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder dislocation
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Of the shoulder dislocation, and it does not move from its joint, and if there is no force. The dislocation of his pain, and lice de la brisure desgale du chascun jorre ailve leu lee: ici les poinlees estraie.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes beforehand, and does not touch the ground, then they make it so, and the bone, and do this which we have said in treating an abscess by applying cold.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the fracture's break
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The bone is never broken in one place but rather infrequently; however, it often breaks further downward. And when the bone is broken into pieces, it deviates from its position, causing great pain and harm to the patient as well as vomiting blood and opening up wounds in the fragmented bones, and this suffering is very severe indeed.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The restoration consists of placing a stitch between the shoulder blades and then pressing them together, subtly applying pressure in various ways until the bone's appearance is as it should be; then place splints above the salty stone or another lighter material, wrapping the patient's garment around the broken bone, securing the linen to the bone so that it does not move, and turn the ligament back in its proper position. Then apply counter-tension repeatedly for each hour of work, if necessary; and if loosening is required due to corrosion or pruritus on the skin's surface, or pain or abscess, you must hurry up and release it, remove the splint, and direct those who have performed various curative methods. Then rewrap the splint until it becomes healthy again.
de la brisure des costes	Regarding fractures of the ribs: When a rib is broken, it's important to apply supportive measures such as splinting while monitoring for complications like pneumothorax (collapsed lung). Care must be taken in handling and treating this delicate area due to its proximity to vital organs.
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The fractures of the ribs generally do not result from significant injuries to the back or chest but are caused by blunt force due to their hardness, and it's quite painful for them too—a fact well-known during investigations into such incidents. This passage suggests that rib fractures typically occur from direct impact rather than injury at other areas of the body; they are noted to be particularly painful, which is a relevant consideration when examining cases involving these types of injuries.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the restorations are to make them equal in terms of the fracture's appearance; and then apply a splint and counter-tension with an implement if you have experience in such methods. This portion is advising that when repairing a bone, one should aim for symmetry concerning the original injury. After applying a suitable splint, further treatment involves using counter-tension techniques to stabilize and support the fracture, but only by someone who has expertise in these procedures—highlighting the need for skilled medical intervention when dealing with complex bone injuries like fractures.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is descending toward the front, it causes great pain and difficulty breathing, just as with pleurisy; and blood comes out of a wound on the bone, and vomits blood in large amounts, so severe an illness, and they have to apply much pressure.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	: "from the same'sansume d'soma, in English. What fromage ofsut. In French:age, andur.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	:gachapeaufeit andue itc andesquexive:screwage:sla itacme :threatime:
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	sconsevissoldes in
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they said none of us puts a suction cup on the joint, to drain it well, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction cup will not draw out excess fluids due to its weak positioning.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said none of us should cover the joint with a warm linen soaked in hot oil, and place tent pegs between the sides to align the crack, then treat it with leeching, bloodletting and medication.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear on the bone which does not touch skin, and there is doubt in the patient whether it should be split along the bent side of the joint, and it must be equipped with something to hold the sycophant; and then they must saw into the bone, and drain lightly, and then sew up the large leaves of the wound, if there are any, and treat it with ointments until he is sound. And when blood comes from above, put a warm linen soaked in rosette oil on him; and place it over the joint; and cure the joint as long as it must be treated for an abscess, whether lying down or standing up, until it is healthy again.
de la brisure dou col	of the bend in the fracture
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	There is never a bend in the sidebone injury, and only rarely does it collapse; and also on the vertebra of the backside.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when it happens to none at all, and you know whether he will be sound or not; if your patient's hands are swollen and softened, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick his fingers with a needle, does he feel pain? You see that it is dangerous in many conditions, and if he is silent and feels well when they are restrained and immobile, you know the joint of the bone is sound, and that the patient's condition is being cured, as long as treatment continues.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if the symptoms come to the vertebrae of the backside, and you know whether it is sound or not; if your patient's legs are softened, and there are accidents involving their hands, and assessing ventusitousity (windiness) and egestion (elimination) upon lying on his back, as well as voluntary egestion when he lies on his stomach. And when it is found to be active in the treatment of his spine, if he cannot move; you know that it is fatal: if there were no labor or activity during its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this injury occurs, as it is lightly.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it has an abscess, put it on the spine with rosemary or olive oil of fresh egg yolk, so that it becomes calm; then place it on one of the resting boards and dry and bind it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest in that area where he does not feel pain until he is well.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone detaches itself, it must be covered with the keel; and fix the bone, then assemble its two sides of the wound, if they are large, in a suture, and treat it with hot oil smearing until it is healed; and if the bones of the arm have been fractured, which we call "broken bones," you must take your bag with your left hand, and place it evenly on your right hand for support, then put the resting board and the bellows above, as long as you know how to do so; then bind it up, and if there is a detached bone, fix it, and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Rarely does the hip bone become fractured, and if it happens, it's usually just a slight reduction at the top; then you make an incision lengthwise, turn it backward (dislocation), causing pain in that location where the break occurred, swelling, and enlargement of the area that broke.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration if it is that you extend your hand over the fracture as much as possible; and know what type of break and its shape; and if the fracture is in the center soak that fracture, keeping it natural until it has formed properly again.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long or it turns backward (into the body cavity), then have the patient lie down on his abdomen, as long as your restoration of that fracture has been achieved.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have placed it in the resting board and then on a wooden stick or iron support, bind up the fracture so that it does not move again; and take care of the sides of the wound, ensuring that the sutures remain intact.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient that his side rests healthy or on its back; and command your maladies.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the cutting of the stomach comes, do not touch it until the cuts are soothed, and place on what we have said before; then proceed to restoration, and hold as it should be, unless there is any unfortunate accident; this is how it works.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	From the dislocation of the shoulder blade.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder blade is what lies between the outer and inner parts of the shoulder; if it is dislocated, one must restore according to one of these two methods: first, make a straight piece larger with moisture. According to this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And there are two joints and bind them high up, and look at the patient's painful spot under a seat; then cut his broken arm along the bone until it bends inwards, and put a brace on it made of wood, so that any weighty object or assistant extends the break back to its original position; then set the dislocation equal with both hands together, as much as it needs to return.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that they think of the patient's painful spot in his girdle, and grasp him with both hands, then command some ministers to touch what is on the dislocation at the hands, while others touch everything else, and extend each part as needed.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the extraction is more advanced, restrain the limb around the dislocation, and under it, and extend each minister to his part; and if the dislocation is close to the shoulder's neck, you must place a joint between the socket and its surface, and another towards the shoulder blade; and similarly, if the dislocation is toward the shoulder blade, then you must place another limb loosely in relation to it, so that the dislocation remains aligned with the body's structure, and under both the socket and shoulder blade; then set the dislocation back as needed, holding it securely without disturbing the stomach cut.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if the stomach cut comes, do not strain it for at least seven years, and make the bandage loose and moistened with oil, so long as the dislocation is calmed down; then hold it and use the method of restraint by putting a splint on the dislocation, and assemble the arm to the shoulder brace or chest, and place your hand on the shoulder or breastplate; and tie the cloth, and hold the brace and arm so that the arm is raised from its edges without resistance, whether there is any thing preventing it, or if the bone remains unmoved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use sticks, and put a larger and stronger stick on the dislocation, and make each of them so wide that it passes through both sides of the dislocation; then strain on the sticks as I said at the beginning in the book.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	i:ses :isque devel. ici.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such thing happens to him, the dislocation will not occur within two years or more, and he will lie on his back with great pain in his stomach; and place there a simple band of wool equally covered, and look at every hour for one day or so that the joint does not move, or become soft in its ligaments; if it is cured by the virtue of medicine, and the flesh we have placed before you in part such that the flesh becomes firstly loose; and when he begins to regain, it will be large. And it is customary for the crutch and leg to be recovered within forty years; and therefore he must dislocate and administer baths and medicines with ointments to tighten the joint.
de la brisure du bras	The fracture of the arm.
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of two bones called the "firearm" (fosse), where one is small and serves as the socket for the head (the other bone is large and lies near the smaller bone); sometimes only the larger bone fractures, or sometimes both.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the smaller bones are fractured, the treatment is easy and healing; but when the larger one is fractured, it requires a poorer treatment and more swelling than when both are fractured together. If only the smaller one is fractured, then there will be slight extension, and they should be kept equal in size.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the larger bone that must be extended more strongly; and extend the sling on one stick, and raise the head of the handpiece higher than the other ones, and make the smaller one lower than the others, and put the dislocations close to itself, and a second stick placed above it so that the patient suffers no pain at all; then stretch the ministers over his arm near the part under his hand or another joint, and some others above. Then place them evenly according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there are pieces in the fracture, place each piece back to its original position; and if there is no deviation that prevents us from restoring it back to its original position, then we do so with the doctor' Written by: Markus Lindenmair
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with cutting an injury, I have spoken to the individual monk about it; take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if in the beginning of the restoration with aposteme chaux it soothes the fissures, gently lay a silk cloth made from rose oil and beeswax, not too hard nor too soft; and then place the powdered pumice in abundance along with some wool, spreading them out, making the slab of fracture bigger than others by two units or more, and it should have at least two supports depending on its position: whether the fracture is on one bone or both; and pull tighter near the fracture than elsewhere, always avoiding widening over time as I mentioned in the beginning to the individual monk, and wrap the cloths around the moistened silk, neither too tight nor too loose, similar to what we have said. And reward the limb and its tendon after some time.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if any accident occurs to the limb, as itching that comes to the member, it is necessary that you cool the member with warm water, so that this itching subsides; and then let the member not be tightly stretched for rest. Then resume the exacerbation, and when the ligaments are elastic and the bones have been disturbed, in such a manner as to indicate its position.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the contracture cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a little bit; and let it remain in this state for some days until the contraction returns, then resume the tensioning.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things we have mentioned come to the patient, let it rest for up to twenty years or so; then unbind his hands from his neck, make his collarbones even, and instruct him in movements and steadiness, and sleep on his back; and you know that this fracture is restored within thirty years or possibly forty depending on the composition and constitution of its virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	And know that at the back of the hand and we seldom encounter this many fractures, and they do not come but rather a fold or flexion.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the hand's plantar arch is fractured or bent, it is necessary that the doctor examines and sets him up straightly in a chair facing the same way; then spread his hands out with extended fingers, aligning them well together; and apply plaster and bandages to the fractured bones, and secure them so they are level, if there is no movement. Then cover it with an orthopedic board of one unit or more in size according to its length; and wrap it in a single linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	il'sat ceux quellis quelses legering the injuven'':comport iten. Whatiefrement lesl'nose:causes l’oreinthe ence (10afar lecorpsentefromes. Theodèllustre'':smaise.comfort, andeclaws.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is complete, it must be that you place a straw on top, and another underneath in the sole of the foot, so that the hands are upright and straight, then bind the joint tightly with both hands, and secure the connection between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture does not belong to either of us two, if it is in the pockets, then he must put it straight, as it should be; and hold with the foot, and if you see it put a small straw vertically to lift the fragment, and make sure it doesn't move; and if the fracture belongs to one of the other two, like an index or one of the others, then he must put straight, and bind the joints together with the adjacent ones; or tie them all in one hand that holds well, or place a straw underneath as we do for pockets. Take care in treatment and positioning after extraction, and deal with whatever comes next, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the cracked bone
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the cracked is often broken many times, and it can be seen when turning it both ways front and back; and in restoration it must be tied above the break, and another one below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the maladies arise on his face, then extend each minister's tie to its equal portion; and it is when the fracture is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the bone, one tie towards the shoulder, and the others around the break; and also if it is near the jaw, then either ties behind the jaw or extensions downward; then place the ropes on the bone evenly at its two ends, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then set the splint, and bind the joints as there will be no movement.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is no movement after treatment, let him calm down then return to your work and care; the bandage is made in part manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	nastra a laiss: entend.coment lice deaf lait:sac. theire (a illegal. alze la :carre. A10 : andrein. It'èdifacarre tocru, sansur. Thenar.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, if he dislocates it, and addresses that which comes to him, as we have said many times; and if he has pieces of bone in his hand, he must avoid them if possible; and if not possible, he must fracture the joint, and pull out forcibly; and treat it as we have said, until he is sound.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the wrist broken in such a way that it is put back like this, as with the shoulder and arm; everything, in restoring it thus, does not affect the patient's pain severely.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you know that the wrist was restored about a decade ago, or perhaps less than ten years or more, depending on the various constitutions of individuals.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the neck of the gland
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	He knows that there is little breakage in the neck of the gland; however, it often bends many times. And if it breaks, it's just a fracture or an opening, and such occurs with every wound, and causes pain to those affected, yet they feel quite well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is where it puts back what is rightly its due, as long as it can move again; then he places the implant, and if he has any knowledge of such things, he arrests them accordingly; afterwards he warrants all the dispositions we have mentioned for other fractures, whether at the joint or in other similar cases; in every accident that must be addressed, as long as it remains sound.
de la brisure de la jambe	from the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	He knows that in the leg it has two bones, and they call them by different names; one is called "mare: and then the injury occurs to the arm, and for this restoration, as much so that the arms are identical.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	naught,celle,
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thin bone is broken, turn it forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is fractured, it causes great pain and he sees clearly; then turn it inside out. However, even so, it must be that his fracture is ugly, and there are many pieces more numerous and smaller than its extension, which align according to your virtue. (Note: The translation adjusts for a possible typo in the original text with "brisiez" as well as attempts to make sense of less common phrases based on context.)
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two sheaths of wood that match the leg on one side and another on the other side, which extend from the knee to above and below it; then wrap a band around both sides above and below, and tie them tightly in place, so that the leg will not incline either to the right or left, and thus it is well done; and none give a band long of the leg, and if there is wood, they place it on the leg for protection against movement, and properly made this applies where there is an injury, and move each day the leg to see whether there has been any other accident; heal it until it is sound.
de la brisure des os dou piet	from the fracture of the bone in question
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	The ankle does not come from a fracture but the bones of this kind rarely have any breakage and only in few cases do we find that it involves more dislocations or displacements.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones of this kind are fractured and you see these bones protruding from each other, place them maladjustedly on the ground, just like if they were flying off; then place your bone upon his, lift it so that they come back into their original position; put in an incision and pegs above, cover with a small cloth over his belly, adjusting the placement of the bones accordingly, then wrap the entire area with linen, and perform other necessary procedures.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And for the three or four years passed, if you shift his ligament, because you will find the bones even and some fractured, while others may have been displaced.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there is one piece of meat, adue apei dame tost .iiij. Soixante piexte .iij.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it requires that you not forget the other things I have said about other injuries which we have mentioned; and for each type of accident as required.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	The fracture of the bone in the shoulder point.
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's body is fractured, if it be set upright and increased in size at that point, then have her lie on her back with her back supported; then fill the nature with cotton, as much as you would like to put therein, and let her jump until she reaches the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with its support; when she wishes to urinate, do not remove the cotton, but rather place a bladder-bag in that pit, and pump out all the bladder into the nature; then blow air through the bag forming it until the bladder is filled inside: the nature will heal the fracture. Then fill with cotton as many years as you wish, letting it remain thus until it has become sound again.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the shoulder bone of a man or woman is fractured, if it is restored in such a manner as we have described for the hipbone; and these other injuries are not concealed from those who put their study and their practice to use, and understand my book. For the fracture means more than one way on the right path of restoration: therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the arm, when it is fractured, take a goose's gizzard and insert the arm; then wrap it with cloth, and leave it for two or three years until it becomes sound again quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of fractures with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It requires the person with a fracture accompanied by wound, particularly if it is large like the bone of the shoulder or the aid's bone or something similar; let him be cured now so that the healings we have mentioned testify to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, then restore the fracture with vitriol (mercury treatment), provided you do not have anything else; begin restoring the break in that very hour or the following day, when arrows do not come out of it again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the wound near a stone comes, let the restoration be renewed as soon as possible, until the incision is calmed down, and not touched for a whole year or even a quarter, because you would cause bad luck to come.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears above the discovered joint, it is necessary that you set them quickly and gently with your hands, in slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not help you to make your hands equal in length, then use this instrument made of iron that has 2.5 or 3.5 cm long, and its width is according to the size of the wound; for it is a skill to mark .III. or IIII., depending on what is needed in each fracture treatment; and whether it becomes rounded or slightly bulky so that it does not compress the limb during your work, as well as being ahead, and thick around its center.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palanche", because the shoulder joint must be placed on top of the visible bone; and when you hold it, as much as it returns, so that they are equal against each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the manipulation cannot well grasp the bone, then it is necessary for you to support the top of the bone until the practitioner can handle it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot return the bone, as we have said, then with an instrument suitable for that purpose, whether it is a chisel or a saw, do so; and then consider what remains in the bone of hardness and fine cracks.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is returned and it hurts a lot afterwards, you know that it is not in its natural state anymore. So do it until it is restored to its original position, then clean one or two drops of black vinegar on it correctly; and do not place anything over the wound, whether oil or other substance, because this would cause moisture and decay; then apply bandages as much as you have restored the bone, and cover the wound completely according to its size, and be very careful that the wound is not strained with the fracture; and many times the wise physicians did it and caused no death or corruption due to any of these breaks; and they made the stronger and softer splints compared to other types of fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large and you doubt that it may lead to an accident, just as we have said; and when there is pain at the top of the bone, do not place anything on a bandage but cover it completely with layers of hard cloths and linen, and after one or two years if the wound begins to swell again, you must remove what was placed inside and apply healing ointments suitable for injuries; like salves and medicinal herbs.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to turn the limb by two times a day, morning and evening, as long as it is set and cured.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the members appear in the same way that the bone moves easily.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if for three days they pass through, and it cannot be welded but comes again bent back, you know that it has small bone fragments, so you must treat the wound with tent, and gather all these detached fragments together to draw out the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if an abscess comes to the joint, or any other form of corruption, it must be treated according to what is discussed in this chapter before. When the bone is broken and protruding into the limb, like that of the shoulder blade or the armrest, as well as with large members, do not treat it at all, for many times the wound worsens; perhaps it will be treated after 20 years or 30, but let it remain until it begins to heal. And if you can cure the wound, then do so; otherwise, leave it as is.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	and stones brought up by soda (sodium carbonate)
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is close to the joint, and what's sad is to see the limb's deformed appearance; and sometimes it may not be able to perform its natural functions again. This statement reflects a common concern in historical medical practice where post-fracture healing was closely monitored, particularly near joints where complications could lead to long-term disability or deformity.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care that it is fresh: administer harsh medicines such as aloe, frankincense, and myrrh, resin, saltpeter, and similar substances; do not give any of these things individually or all together, and mix them with vinegar or a significant amount of wine, or some form of ash; then place the nodule on hot coals, treat it well, and don't let it dry out in your hands for years. Then remove it, and begin another one until the nodules are ossified; or you may strain it onto a piece of clean linen well-prepared, as this property of bone is that it fuses all superficial tissues above the limbs; if the nodule has turned into hardness like stone, and requires removal from above, then heal it until it's healthy. If there are no hair or other unnecessary growth on top, continue treating it until it's ossified.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A limb that is weak after treatment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fragment of bone is restored and continues to be weak and subtle afterward for many reasons: one being because it was too tightly bound and not as loose as it should have been; or due to having too many ligaments in it that prevented joint movement; or due to excessive exercise, without which its strength; or for the lack of blood in his body, then he is feeble.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	sake fromage. Theeske, tol. Describe aka, anderre, tongue. Andre:t'ses arre àng theorcé.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	A twisted limb after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after healing, and the bone breaks apart, and the shape of the deformed limb is ugly; all this has no natural work: those who believe that one must break a limb out of its youth do not hold truth in our land; and these treatments are blamed, and they often lead to great harm and sometimes even death. To prevent such things, if there are nodules and tortures present, it requires being soaked in hot water or cooked mild herbs like vismalve leaves, roots, etc., similar medicines; and one should make a soft healing poultice, as well-done Diacconius. Take musk lichen from Vismalve, confit with pork fat or sisal oil, and make the poultice on top; or take greased figs, crush them with colt's fennel, and similar medicines that alleviate inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And there has never been bone nodules that should be rubbed constantly and for extended periods with wet hands. Either alleviate any movements in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisted condition is old and hardened, as in stone, then it must be covered with iron, which covers the bone even under the incision lightly; and a copper cup or cauldron should be placed over it during treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	This sentence is already translated accurately to English: "Dislocation is from none of its joint's position, which prevents it from moving; and the limb has a deformed shape, and feels the patient great pain and injury."
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When there is no dislocation at all, it must be kept to return feeling targeted.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	Because if it is left, the limb swells, and perhaps even put back on its original position; since it does not need to be moved again where it has swollen: many times this caused rashes and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	So if this happens, make the patient's painful limb better; then let it rest until all of its pains are alleviated; and warm water and oil on it, and raise the member slightly, and treat every limb as they come to their place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	: leu chief defforme escreves la testament: thee paroles enlal. Lei. Tudrex (1065 paragraph of meveins quoicme, ieval ail. Forth century: lesparle withouttelling it'savaux French lector: Parémeans.
des mandibules	lure.engaste. Thisendresse pastrange,alement.ngere:sceux laisseriodexpurgstentil sofisse, le maldectevex ischimente of apeximeurs andelafreximente �conguregeincaissexes develuxiblevicescures:n agerdexilevescopeletsume:bestecture :<briffernefaire, the l to Lurgrevoiredecomprectifores.ameurenticienche stoutheletan
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jawbones are dislocated and the dislocation of both is according to .ij. manners: or they are a little bit detached from their joints, and softened a little; or they are completely displaced, and hanging down towards the lower, and covering the saliva in the mouth that it cannot hold it, nor close its mouth, and wraps its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns to its original position by various arrangements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and accomplished, it must be reset promptly, and you should not target more than necessary.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And in such a way that the minister of pain touches the head of the malady, and thrusts the hand's palm into the root of the dislocation of the jawbone within the mouth if the dislocation is part of .ij., and the other hand should be removed to make it equal; and instruct the patient to soften his mandibles and move them from all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the hands make it equal, so that it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the reset is gripped again, immediately these .ij. mandibles come together, with hot water and oil applied to them as long as they are moved lightly; not targeting further attempts at the reset, as we have stated before.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset correctly, and the mouth of the malady closes well, softened by placing it on cloths made of linen dipped in oil roselle and wax, then lightly moving the surrounding muscles.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And the malady lies on its back, and his teeth are between .ij. cissins (teeth), not moving either to the right or left, nor striving again to move them but with light meat, as long as there are pains in the teeth and the mandibles have been aligned;
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then gently washing as he wishes, and not straining to open the mouth while eating or drinking, so long as the jawbone is well aligned and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the .ij. mandibles can no longer be reset to their joints within an hour, and are not converted back to their joints, and in comes feverish pain, and sometimes it is abdominal distress, and at times vomited allotment of the stomach fluids.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	Tractie laisse :jaccentre aille à lourgeaux leprecisions devisare. I'savine eslelore meaundecentraile:arme theuccupon. Ahoardesinleave. I’mla cestil (from,ce, andesanjacourre of theca.
de la forcelle	Of the cautery of fire
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The cautery cannot be removed from between those two joints and it is never taken out afterwards, and he very well feels it there.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient's painful sores on his back are soothed by his hands, and he extends his arms; then presses firmly with the palm of his hand, which returns to its original form; then places it on the incision and bandage, and strains.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the joint that is towards his costal cavity cannot be removed; if it does not move at all, or if it has never been taken out, then presses with its hand on the wound, as we have said; then places it on the incision and bandage, and strains, and instructs the patient to rest until he is sound again.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And at this point, we bring back his shoulder joints when it is disturbed from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	She says that the shoulder is not removed except in two cases: one being when it is removed from its upper part to the abdomen; and the second case is where it is removed from below; and sometimes from above, which happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and it is not removed behind the shoulder, and not removed within the nerves; and it is taken out more than once from above to below, mainly for those who have little strength, because in them it has been hastened; for those who have enough strength, it comes down by itself, and returns back.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to some people with percussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells by an incision, and he considers that it has been removed because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore that you examine it, while you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And is known the dislocation when it moves towards the abdomen, and distinguishes between the sick shoulder and the sound one, and you will find their manifest differences.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	A laisseisme enmi. Environ ieu lains le cestrier delicance deschief encize le lice. Leu mesurant lege devisesle leuccure le meillage of theidre ajustre leisold lexile. Thecautens: Launce laissame, anne cease, andou les unkindles. I'il leme encisemeanime esle legeen thefein. Injury deforme. Ceau. Isurse itandirence.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And also, if it is dislocated at the top, it is not hidden, for you will show it clearly on the skin.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this type of dislocation can only be brought back, when new, or if the patient's pain is severe.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the way is that the physician gently holds the maladie's hand above, then places his hands around the shoulder, and lifts the joint upwards towards its place; and the physician gently lifts it higher, putting it above; if it comes suddenly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come as we have said today in the past, then it must be that the maladie is bathed in warm water; and they are gently rubbed with softening and soothing agents, like decoction of elderberry and fenugreek and honey in water, and are also treated.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then they are rubbed on the back of the maladie, and a piece of cloth is placed around the shoulder not too tight or rough, then their foot's heel is put on top of the cloth, and the physician supports the curved part of the spine firmly, and pulls the hand of the maladie.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	And others may also color the head of the maladie so that it does not move forward; that shoulder returns completely now, and if you see whether it has been ramified according to this method:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	And this is to make it clear that there should be a larger man present who will stand by the patient's side and support their shoulder underneath the cloth, lifting the shoulder upwards so that the maladie hangs down.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And some others pull the hand of the maladie towards their belly; and if it is too heavy, they do not place anything on it at all, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And the ramification can also be done in another way: and it is as if a long stick were buried in the ground, which the shoulder should be supported like an oar, not too heavy or loose.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then it is placed on the maladie but covered with soft cloths underneayer, and the shoulder appears long in length; then its hand is extended to another side by form, and the joint returns quickly to its place.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if it does not return by all these things that we have said, then this treatment is done: take an oak stick of two arms long and four fingers wide, with the top resting on the shoulder's edge across the cloth.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then the stick is placed on top of the shoulder clothed with soft fabric so that it does not hurt the maladie, and then it is put on the shoulder cloth; then stretch his arm over the long piece of wood, and hold the bandage at the head of the hand, and extend her hands backward, and let the joint return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when she is in pain, in whatever way it may be, it must that you place under the shoulder a spider web of wool evenly, then apply to it an apparatus filled with powder made from millstone, with incense and buffalo horn melted over the entire shoulder and armpit, then pull out of the spider web, turn the ligament thereunder, embrace her hand on his neck, and keep the hands moving as such.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it must that he massage little, so long as the limbs are strengthened, for they will heal faster; and then continue to massage every 4-6 years or more, and move it; if it is firm and not softened, then it has healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the dislocation is strong due to dampness that has come or for another reason, it must that you treat with three punctures, as it is set before the practitioner of cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and the dislocation moves again after 7 years, and it does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm upwards, then you know that the main nerve in the shoulder is damaged or stretched out or weakened; and you know that the dislocation was never fixed to its original position.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation toward the back or thighs, and the limbs, if it is by a blow or extension of hands, and treat with another line; and care until healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the healing comes stiffness to the limb, and then again with movements, so that you use cold compresses many times until those stiffness have subsided, and return it to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the double dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the double dislocation is dislocated at points, and returns to those points; and if it has been displaced from all parts, especially in front and back, and the dislocations are not repositioned again, because you can see them well and feel them well; and dislodge according to each case.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the dislocated limb with the healthy one, so that you can see it openly. For the dislocation is swollen, and it cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder in any way.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it must that you return in such a way as to apply loose bandages on the swollen bones if they have been displaced, for if applied loosely, returning them would be painful; and possibly not return them completely at all, especially when they are behind, more particularly. For this dislocation is worse than other dislocations, and it causes great pain, and perhaps the wound may come from such a dislocation.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the treatment is such that you can return it to his place if possible, extend your hand on his two hands; and stretch out his arms, and the joints according to the dislocation there, both underneath and above, and bind the dislocation together in all places or at the root of his palm until he returns to its original position.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	lees, ce saufle'sau theor in Frenchmainte à ousse esbatentres labe:me anderre lesa (faire ilgeat. :claus.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not return to its place, apply strong extension; and when two ministers stretch the arm, and they tie the arms with two ministers so that it does not move in extension; then turn the arm from one side, after having wrapped a long and wide cloth around it.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when the doctor touches the joint to its hand, if no oil is used to soften the joint, then set the joint firmly until it loosens.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is in place, if placed on a stretcher with the aid of an ox-hide, and stretched out, and hold the arm at the malade's neck, and let it rest for some days, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, loosen it, and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, restart the stretrandee and loosen the bandage, and leave it for some days until it is securely fastened; then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if it feels sore after the return of the joint and it moves, bathe and rub well, and press until it is soothed; or place a fat sheep's milk poultice on the joint for one day and one night, then let the physician enter with either bathing or enema.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And when it sweats, rub the joint constantly, then put the poultice back on, and let it be with either bathing or enema. Do this for two, three times until it is healed; and if you see, place fennel leaves moistened with butter and stretched out; if it returns to its position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand joint dislocated and its return is light, unlike other joints; it must be brought back to the place quickly, as soon as it is dislocated, so that the limb is flexed, or it moves in a walking manner.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the return if you place the malady hand on a table, and stretch out the ministers' hands, and inspect it equally, so that he places his palm in front of the dislocation, and sets it until it relaxes.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Generally, it is required that you watch to see if it is well positioned; then place the patient's malady arm on a table with extension and return.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, place the patient's malady arm on a table and inspect his hand at the appearance of the joint. If it now returns, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, if the strain of stretcher calms away from its position, then repeat that.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if it suffers and you do not put in place after some days, let the joint be torn.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	unctions-tour dele (a. AIsteira.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	d:200esse to ous, describe itheus :sle (iage.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no crack or fissure, then the warm water of fire will treat it until it becomes healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Dislocations of the hand joints.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	There has never been a complete dislocation of his hand joint anywhere, not even on the back of the palm or in the wrist.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then it is because of this issue, and you have to relocate the dislocation into its pockets as long as it retracts, then support the head of the two joints, and push them towards the part where they are dislocated.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	And let it stay for two days, and then make it loose again, as we have said, and loosen the joint, and allow it to move, and reconnect it until it is narrow enough.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And also do this if it is dislocated at the wrist of the hand, just like you have done before, until it becomes healthy again; and also do this if it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Double dislocation of the spine vertebrae.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the back of the spine or neck is dislocated, and there are several, if there is no treatment, because the doctor hurries the maladie.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the treatments jumped voluntarily, he cannot hold them, and there have been many times when no member is strengthened, or the fingers two, or one arm.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times have dislocated spines at four parts; the one that moves backward is called "gilbotization".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is that the gilbert disease has come from childhood; if there is no treatment or healing for the whole body, then it will not improve.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And the one that has fallen or been pierced or done similar things, the ancient methods of healing by great words do not bring much benefit.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have treated it according to my intention and formed remedies in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that the gilbert disease coming from the bladder does not have any effect or healing.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also this one that comes directly to the side joints, and it cannot be healed forcibly by anyone other than who treats it according to what I have said.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And it is that the maladies are stretched over his face in one joint of which he has strain inside, and it will not break therefrom.
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then place a firebrand at the head in the ground, and another on each of the joints that are dislocated, and link them together under the maladies, and another on hips, knees, ankles, and legs.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	And make them know how the links, one at the head and the others on the joints among the threes.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	ssexile. Heure apele gescexte. The itchernge.t’lamexesignicite
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return by this cure, take a sling of two arms long, and fasten it over the part in question, and let the painful area lie on one side, and press down the head of the sling onto the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and place the patient's joints on the other top of the sling, and press well until it returns to its original position; and if you see, he does so with his own hand twirling it.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And do you insert 2 to 3 needles into the painful area of one arm and in front of these two points, leaving between each needle an fist-sized space away from it;
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and in each of these points insert 1 to 2 holes, and let the needles be firmly grounded, so they do not move; and between each set of 2 needles there should be another needle that twists around it, so that the threads turn when they are twisted, and there should be in total two sets of small needles at a fist-sized distance apart for turning the tormentor.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the thread that is among the hammocks on the tormentor near the chief's area, and another thread towards the joints at the other tormentor, and each minister twists his tormentor around the whole chain, and the master places the spine equally as we have described.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is balanced, place a drying ointment on the affected area with an abundant amount of oil, and then the candles, and then a tablecloth of three feet long that covers the wetness and the part of healthy spine, and tie it all together as we have described, and let the maladies use subtle murmuring until he is cured;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if anything does not end in healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines with the tablecloth that we have mentioned before; and never once do I administer a piece of cloth.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and there is no appearance in the back spine of the opposite side, and it should be taken care that this is not dislocation; and because the bone appears, one should not have any presumptions: perhaps death would come as a result.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the hernia (although "hernia" does not directly correspond to the Old French text, it may refer to another bodily issue that could be analogous)
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Seeking that the dislocations of the hernia and those of the shoulder do not come for any other reason but dislocations only; and the joint of the hernia is extracted according to three parts: between, outside and inside, and beyond this more outside, and a little less outside.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation when joining the malformed leg with the healthy one is that it is longer and wider at the malformed joints than at the healthy ones, and it cannot double his thigh in fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And is the leg which is near the navel cracked open because it allows the hair to grow long and loose.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of those who are affected by this injury is that it contradicts these things before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of those who have it before are that their leg is well done according to completion; all in all, it does not double the sensation of pain in the groin, and if he tries to urinate, he cannot do so beforehand, and his anger swells, and when he walks, it passes over the ankle.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of those who have it behind are that he cannot expand his groin, not double, and one leg is more crushed than the other, and the anger is lessened, and the joints of the wrist near the edges of the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The return of this kind of dislocation is that it has been longstanding, and its duration depends on its position, and there is no need for any presumption about it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that kind of dislocation which is fresh and it's the four manners of dislocation, if you hasten to return the joint, then put it back together and push it forward again, and the movement goes both ways; perhaps it will come back on its own, and there is no need for any other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare one strong minister and hold the leg firmly with two hands or by a belt tied around its groin;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and other ministers extend their hand upward in such a way that they push their hands down on his ribcage; and others grasp the head of the belt.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend upward and downward them all once, as long as the malady is lifted from the ground once, and then remain there.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This way of extension is common to three kinds of resections, and if the dislocation has returned, it is well according to what we have said.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If that is not the case, then there must be specific treatment for its appearance. When the dislocation is to the sides, it must be soothed by pressing the patient's ribcage, and a belt is placed on the root of the wrist, and the joint above the ankle, and then the belt goes up towards the edge of the anger, and toward the power.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and another minister holds his big wrist with his arms, and extends the malady's wrist to its back side in this manner: it will return to its original position now; and this kind of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot press it in this manner that we have described, then it must be bound together with a strong belt under the two feet of the malady, and on the two groins, and the affected leg is extended to twice more than the others;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	re:10sesse it andreste (all:naclege (it’s:sangley ape cargumes.gis :seille,sangares tolet,carrent. Theesceglange:seculumente.xement :4tant'ise.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	cnoursure:fustelables,struction nde:0ise
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then apply two sticks, one to the head and another to the joints, then insert a stick between the shoulders into the patient's body to restore its shape.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and planted it with wet linens so that the malady does not touch its body, then stretches each limb towards him, and he places a similar stick in his hand to reset the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, that's good. But if not, place it on the table and press it as we have described in the context of gelatinization, and protect the patient's backside.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front of it, it must extend the painful leg quickly, and according to what I have said; place your hand on the spot where it hurts from being pressed downwards towards the knee, then press with the other hand, and move the limb upward toward the thigh.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is behind it, it does not need to extend the painful part downwards or lift up on the ground, but rather needs to be as we have described for a dislocated hip that was previously released backwards, similar to our positioning of the two hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and place it on its face, and extend it as we have described here before, and must press at the joint above the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and when the patient extends his legs, they will be equal in length; but then adjust the kneecaps, and place a splint on it, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and rest for two or three years or four, then dislocate it again, and place the splint on it; if you see that they are equal in length, then strain it as before, and leave it for three more years; then let him go off quickly until his limbs are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	about the dislocation of both hips.
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The hip joints are dislocated according to three methods: that is, in and out, and backward, but not forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg towards his kneecap, and if he does not move it toward its kneecap, you know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the recovery of all three hips is that you make the patient sit down, extend his leg if he can, put your back on his face, and place your hand under his kneecaps.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take his hip joints in your palms, and stretch between both hips' formations; and another assistant extends the patient' marketed to move their hips back to their normal position, and signs that he moves his legs comfortably.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and apply the splint on it, then raise the leg towards the kneecap, and tie them together firmly for two or three years or four, then dislocate it again; and do not force the patient to walk until his limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb is not at all, and strengthen extension as we have described in the treatment of the hip dislocation, until it becomes sound again.
de la dislocation dou talon	and from this dislocation of the toe:
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The claws are never moved, and they are never completely dislocated, neither here nor there.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs indicate that the knee is swollen, and try before touching the part where it has been dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The removal process is swift, and it should be extended quickly with their hands when they are moved only slightly:
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is completely dislocated, it must be made to lie down the patient with their right side and have them assist using only their leg above the ankle:
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then you take the piece to your right hand, and then to the left twice, raise it up high, and let the patient lie down on his back:
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	And do this twice as we have said, by raising and lowering the piece; if it returns, that is good. If not, then the work begins again, for it returns:
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot return in this way, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fasten a stretcher firmly between his knees, and cover him with a sheet so that it does not hurt the patient:
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then tie the other ministers to the knees, and have others extend the piece either with their hands or by holding it in place under the neck of the patient:
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then extend each ministers equally, and the stretran be under the knees of the patient to hold him when he is extended:
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then place the marking of the dislocation at his hands, and have other ministers tie down the healthy leg so that the dislocation will return quickly:
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at a point, place the ointment and bandage on top of him, form the straitening, and lay the patient's leg, and warn those who are behind the ankle not to pull too hard:
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then let it rest for two or three years if the straitening; then release it after one year or quarter, and let the patient walk by foot for four years:
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if it goes ahead with that end, it is not certain whether he will dislocate again or not:
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess comes, it must be told, as we have said, as long as he remains whole:
des dois	In olden medicine:nge.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	n.  ́is. iciendure:ceterièste lege noun asin. Intermie. Aoutilique:xiaire :s.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	n dece ia,cites:naginae the  avantiofferes tokocarre thanjeure thisen.recthercheifreveloingdevermeves, tudecteurope andscongeinjellong heine that whichiagsheques :sume.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when it is levelled, and there is nothing on the ground beneath it, then he places two pikes under its base, stretches them out, and leaves it for two years, then removes it; and let him rest until he is sound again.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	From wounds and dislocations together.
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When wounds accompany a dislocation and it is attempted to restore them, many times occur that the patient suffers greatly from pain.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not overly presumptuous in your treatment, if you do not have any expertise and you have not used it for a long time, and if you are compassionate and merciful, and if you act hesitantly:
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And begin with the treatment of things that soothe at first glance, and let the patient hold God in their hand if you do not see hope for health:
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, then now resettle the limb at its original place, so that it may move again:
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is in place, if you gently treat with things that soothe at first sight and care for the wound as it requires, dry ointments:
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and you crush small bones, and touch the bone, do as we have said in simple diseases:
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	And you must not enter the path of fear, according to what I have said, for this is worth following according to your creator, and in caring for thy armor and thy sword: Amen
Explicit le romen de fisique	To elaborate on physics
