O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh you dear son, I have accomplished this book which is the tail of medical knowledge and included its completion through explanations and statements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I have completed this treatise with this topic, which is part of the "currygy," or surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the art of hands is fortified in our region and is established throughout, it means that the science will perish, and nothing prevents us from delving into the small writings of ancient books that have been made by hand.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And this has given rise to errors and arrogance, understandings are closed, and the knowledge is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I have revived this treatise in its entirety according to the path of presentation and statement, and will gather together the forms of cauteries and other instruments of the work with the juxtaposition of declaration and preparation as is proper for the craft.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there are no worthy masters in our time of hands, the art of medicine is stretched out.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it requires one who will immerse himself in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so long as he knows the judgment of limbs, and their forms and connections, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, joints, and veins, and the number of fingers and toes, and the movement and resting points of their paths.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason Ivory said that it is not much without the book and with the work is little; and mainly in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that who is not familiar with things previously mentioned, will guard himself from error and harm; so I have often seen many more of those who engage in this science and abandon it due to lack of sense and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I have seen a fool who performed an abscess incision on the scrotum or nape of a woman and cut into her arteries; because this way so much blood comes out that the woman dies between her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I have seen another man who betrayed a thorn from an elderly person's foot, and the thorn was large; he took it along with him for three years.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called for his treachery, and I saw the dislocation of the patient's leg and its size, and I knew that he would likely die if left untreated.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I have seen another man who treated Duke of our country, who had a broken leg and with the fracture there was a wound; and the doctor's ignorance prevented him from healing the break on top of the wound as it should be done by great force, and left no relief to the wound at all; and so left it until: then his leg was completely broken and his thigh fell into ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I am called to come to him, and I hurried to come unbinding his leg; and when I unbound it, at once there was peace and he felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the paths of decay were already confirmed or related to a limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption continued to spread through the limb until it was entirely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another man whose abscess burst open, and then it swelled up greatly due to the wickedness of his reign.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a sore, when it is filled with black bile, it does not need to be touched with iron if it is only in part open and can thus entirely destroy what has been corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, treating children, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: it is as follows, namely, head or neck injury in several circumstances; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For that you must guard yourself so that the foolish man does not speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you take your weapons in hand and engage in your dangerous and forceful ways, use the better way so that by the grace of God you may be saved and honored; let loose curable diseases from grievous treatment; and arm yourself to the point where doubts are dispelled, and make it such that you can come out of this world into another of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	The Galician added in his warnings: "Do not take bad care of illnesses, that you may not be called the foolish man."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this treatment according to two chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cautery and medical incisions, and they are organized from the head to the feet; as well as the forms of treatments, the methods of caustic cauterization, and all that is necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about dissection and incision, as well as the use of traps and wounds, extractions of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is also organized with regard to the forms of treatments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about treating dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it orders the head of a pin as soon as possible, and the forms of horseshoes.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	And so it is that our memories from the past tell us that one must declare the quality and harm of each configuration.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the assessment of aid's quality and harm is lengthy discourse and subtle science and its secrets are revealed by those who have dealt with similar cases, and they agreed on this; and it does not trouble them to speak much, for I fear excessive detail.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery helps with all conditions as it has to do with two types of temperatures; namely hot temperature sensation with matter and dry heat sensation with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the case of mixed hot and dry conditions involving matter, no one decided on it, and they said that fire cautery is very helpful; but others said otherwise: that cautery is only beneficial for diseases caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot and it should not be used as a remedy for diseases caused by heat or dryness; but those who said otherwise claim that cautery does great good for diseases characterized by heat and dryness originating from our bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body's form and its moisture to mixed hot conditions, your joint will improve (dislocations).
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in every way, we do not venture far without those who have tested it and know the master of cauteries, as well as the variety of conditions that affect humans, their predispositions and causes for illnesses, and remedies and interventions over a period of time; whereas other types of conditions are beyond our concern, especially cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all of them agreed that the more there was to it, and they agreed on caustrement.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And you must know, son, that fire cautery is a secret of the remedies, and greater mercy than burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and does not cause wounds but only to the part that is hot, and it harms no other member if properly named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Hot medicines arise from another part by separating it, and bring diseases to the sick member that require serious treatment; and perhaps cause the illness.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	For its height and mercy of its nature, fire cautery does not do this unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found through experiment and the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and it is on the borderline of things; and for this reason I apologize for the long speech, because I do not like to reveal the secret that has been restored or by fire, as well as the quality of the work, how it removes diseases from the body, just as the philosopher says in demonstration; receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And you must know that they agree on what time the cauteries should be performed and how often.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is agreeable in all times, because the nuisances resulting from its aid are spread throughout due to the use of cautery; and mainly when the cauteries are for necessary but urgent pains which cannot wait until greater maladies do not arise in the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And you never think as the foolish son; for a disease that is healed by cautery does not have any recurrence; and they say so in this way; but it is not like they claim, because cauteries are not medicine that changes the constitution, or dries out the humors which cause pain, and its value lies more in quickly alleviating pain rather than strengthening health with its virtuous work and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And there is that the disease does not grow according to the constitution of the malady and its body parts and virtues; and it accumulates in it excesses through the acquisition of foods and similar things, as long as cauteries are administered on time or with little excess and moisture, just like cauteries for pain caused by density, and wounds do not recur often. However, this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand that fire is called the backbone of medicine, and it's clear; but they believe that fire does not apply to medicine, although their understanding is false, and they call fire the backbone of medicine because whenever we administer any treatment for a disease and they are not valuable in themselves, then we use cauteries as well, and they are worthwhile.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it appears that fire is the backbone of medicine, contrary to the understanding of people in general.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The old ones said that fire is not made from iron, but gold and the quality of its substance, and they do not cause wounds to their members; I have tried it in some men, and found that it is true, and fire of gold has more value than iron, just as the ancients say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	itin: ieu secrete à la terre aoutre chaufere esseuillustre chate andes lou, tuo[20s. Whatmeventillement of theude aiment le caste thees inlu'reste toast. (pice :en:entire.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use fire cauterization because it has appeared useful to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have ordered this chapter on the subject of pieces, for the sake that it be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	And for this type of cautery (flambeau d'olive),
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauteries are useful both for moisture and cold on the brain, and due to the cause of a disease known as "soda" (a historical term potentially referring to various conditions), and because of many humors descending from high in the head, ears, and by multitude of dreams and pain in the throat and chest, especially all diseases that come from cold so like paralysis, tuberculosis, apoplexy, similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the bad humors are purged by a medicine dissolving the head, which varies from three to seven neats or three to four times, according to what its virtues and efficacy allow; then it goes again to purge the head's bad humors.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then it is to fit between your hands and place them on the body; after that, put the root of your palm upon the root of his neck among his two neats; and when you come to do this treatment, if he bleeds from inside, remove the cautery called "olivaire," which has this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put your finger in the blood sign, and withdraw and dislodge it little by little turning back; then lightly touch your hand again, and reward the spot if you see an ossicle of such small size; but if not, repeat using the cautery as I have told you; afterwards take some silk, and put it softly in cotton inside, and place it over the spot; let it stay for three years; after that, cover with waxed cloth; and allow it to rest until it is healed. The treatment of this ointment they call "tetrapharmacon" until it is sound again.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the old one said that as much longer it is pressed upon the wound, the more it purges; and for this reason it helps move.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said that one should make the cautery softer as much as possible until a part of the bone is dislodged, and then they do that which is dislodged from the bone; treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the other advice is that the cautery should be softened, and push against it forcefully from the bone as large as an ales they place women put in their clothes for this reason those humours come out of hide ito acheve long.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two kinds of cauterization seem to me not very good for all purposes, except when there is fear in no man's heart; and I think it would be better if I left them off, because the shoulder joint has been weakened by continuous moisture solutions as we have observed in other parts of the body; and myself when the patient's shoulder joint seems to be feeble by nature, and the first sign of cauterization is more salutary and less painful for me, so I do not use this method.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From the burning oil pain at its head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	Where in the main pain comes chronic and long-lasting, and it should be used by the patient's feebleness and "cochie" (referring to copper salts), and washing out the head and oil and bandages; and if we do this cauterization that we have mentioned before, and it is not worth.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be mindful that the patient's feebleness is of strong nature, and it should not be overcooled; however, let us cauterize him with that kind of cautery we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After performing cauterization at each joint of the bone, as we have previously stated, and doing one kind of cautery also called "vaselas" (possibly referring to a type of heating instrument); and place your hand in such a way that you do not see it near the bone: the patient feels much more intense pain with this form of cauterization than with others, which I will discuss further; and it is required that those performing cauterizations on joints be subtler than those who perform cauterization on the main part, and its form:
dou cautere dou chief	This refers to the two primary types or forms of cauterization applied in medieval medicine: one involving direct application at specific body points like joints and bones, and another potentially more general method. The text hints at a distinction between these methods based on their effects and appropriate usage context. It implies that not all cauterizations are equal in terms of pain experienced or suitability for different anatomical areas.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When part of the pain is sore and prolonged, and the disease spreads to oil, and the shoulder joint is treated with medicines as I have mentioned in our division of diseases, and it does not benefit anyone: sovereignly do such cures by .ij. manere, which are
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	nature of
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the purifying treatment, as long as it is healthy; and if you see any of the many incendiary remedies that I have written about or treated in relation to incendiary remedies.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The iron cautery is done according to this manner. Heat the iron cautery so that its shape is like this:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "close" because its head is made in the shape of a clover or has about one centimeter of curvature, and it appears in a small way; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand tightly, moving it slightly until the edges of the stump are ashamed (as if they have been burnt), and let your hand be so that the artery does not burn, but rather flows abundantly with blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After applying cotton wool to the vein and placing it for two years; then I apply moistened cotton in burnt wool, and afterwards treat the purified spot with this remedy called "cultivating," at every point of its tip, and be careful not to cover the artery in this abscess which is still alive.
de emigraine	regarding the abscess
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat the abscess as we have described in divisions of diseases, and it does not profit; for the "cultivating" iron which is called "cultellare," heat it until it's white; and then lay a half-line along the dry spot on the bone, and hold your hand once, and that you do not cover the artery with it and cause movement in the bone; and warn me of the jaw which remains quiet when touched, and let the nerves neither have trouble nor spasm as related to painfulness, and advise about the removal or collection of blood from the artery once cauterized, or great fear for whom he knows nothing and who is not a student; and leave it in your way; but I will tell you how to collect sinew when the artery has been cauterized, and show on this page where the spot is marked as it appears.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this iron cautery does not soothe the malady and the patient suffers, then treat it in the same way as we have said before, and heal the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer with the "extraction" iron cautery which we mentioned or that of the surgeon who extracts arteries, using an iron cautery with two knives; and these cauteries are better than this one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of ear pain from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	blecteuxsecsurgenthefefecthoutilame achelethevelavery:sicheximente,udexthefyngre.gusture that t rnarectiforceurs :kete,santifferenches
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	liferransqueuse,rainsekants aucongeuses ieveurentheuangeuxagermephanter soangledesqueusiveiuages:naryre inciemeantuelueture. thissiclexinimesauraintemensherdges depeintiature
de la torture de la bouche	Of the mouth torment
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torture that must be treated with cautery is only those caused by phlegm, as we have said in the sections of diseases; and not to apply cautery on signs that come from bile discharge and nasal mucus.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this type of phlegm-induced torture and regurgitation from the head and gargling, it must be that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one in the root of the ear, another a little farther back along the temple, and the third at the alignment of the two lips; place the cautery on the part which is still open, and you must make the cuts above the prominent tip of the ear, and another similar distance down the temple as for an incision; let the cautery remain in position until the bleeding stops; and this is the form of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the cuticular instrument that we have mentioned before, but it is somewhat more subtle and must be that your sword be slightly larger; after curing the wound as I have previously said, until it heals well.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have mentioned before, there will be no benefit, and the patient won't suffer fever; however, you must perform three cauterizations: two on each of the prominent tips of the ears, one remove from the head (which are called "vaslets" as we previously stated), and another directly under the jaw, and then apply a cautery on the stomach area below the mouth; and treat it accordingly as we have described.
de litargie	This Old French term "de litargie" refers to the ancient practice of bloodletting—a common medical treatment during medieval times thought by some practitioners to cure or prevent illnesses by removing bad humors from a patient's body, particularly in cases where it was believed that an imbalance existed within. The term "litargie" derives from the Greek word "leitis," meaning "to bleed." Bloodletting could be performed using various tools, including lancets or cauteries (burning instruments), depending on the method and severity of treatment desired by the physician.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	This Old French text pertains to the treatment of a long-term disease, which requires giving years and large doses of medicated powders to purify the brain; afterward, it treats the chief of the malady throughout, and places the cautery on the back of the head (occiput) atop the nutmeg plaister, as we have mentioned or described in plasters. The method of cauterization is as follows: heed how I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is sound then good; and if not, he does. And for each of them, two cuts are made downward from the top of the head to its ears, leaving an interval between each cut of one finger's breadth; and they treat him as they do others, and if you find him suitable, and the sickness is severe, then for each three cuts he makes in a circular motion around it, and so much that they call them "olivares", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	From the coldest head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is required that the patient's head be cleaned for years and everything we have said before; then he cuts the sick patient's head, and makes two cauterizations on each horn, and one behind and three above the spine of the neck; and if you have more knowledge, and his hair is moist and the sickness is severe, then he does four cauterizations on the backbone; and he leaves it so that the more painful parts become arrows, and treats it with a gentle hand; afterward he cures until the patient is sound, and uses the "olivares" as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	*Note: This line appears to be unrelated to the provided medical text, which discusses various treatments for injuries and ailments in medieval medicine. The term "epilepsy" is not mentioned within the context of the Old French medical text.*
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should not use fire cauterization on those who are phlegmatic, and it is required to first cleanse the brain for years and other curing methods that we have mentioned in the division when the sickness is great and they suffer from severe pain due to medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot suffer, then for him he performs gargling and chewing that cleans the brain often with bones as we have said; afterward he re-cuts the chief in a circular motion, and makes one cauterization on each horn, and two under the shoulder blade, and if the sickness is severe and the suffering patient, then he does cauteries as I have said before. To that person who has paralysis and softening of the muscles, four cauterizations are done: one on the backbone and three above the neck spine; and since the sickness is great and painful, and such cauterizations called "olivier," as I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the sickness is that of a child, then for him he makes one delicate cauterization in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of black bile is excess or corrupted humors and heavy phlegm, then for him he makes two delicate cauterizations as we have said to that person who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of black bile is excess, and his hair is moist, therefore he cuts him something to be cleaned, as we have said before.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	:.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or if you see the patient being cauterized with many points throughout the caustic. This method of cautery softens the brain greatly; and then it is placed on cotton moistened in lamb's wool and fat from a sheep.
de l’awe des eulz	Of the fear for the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the signs of fear come first by those that I have mentioned in the division, then it begins and causes the patient to drink warm water many times without food; and it is warded off from all moisture, and blood or bathing may occur several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands to reopen his head and performs the caustic on the head, and he applies .ij. cauters under .ij. temples where there are signs of fear; either in one or two locations depending on the signs; and for all the caustic, every vein and artery that run through the skull is affected by it along its long width; and you must prevent blood flowing out from the wound, and if too much blood appears to be coming out, then squeeze a little bit of time as per your judgment.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision, as to how to squeeze them; and not once made a caustic or cut into those .ij. bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	The lines "dou cors des larres" translate from Old French as "two corners of tears." This phrase could refer to anatomical or medical terminology related to the eye, possibly indicating areas around tear ducts or glands in relation to cauterization procedures involving delicate ocular structures.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	morcegrafs coloule lapsesmeasurement.i: fromage.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	sence of course:secreatimejourgeace, it:naturel encelege (itage :deme facire :faire.sach l'avocrections ;naclame ape cures dexentifere.cete.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you apply the medicines as we have said in the division, and it does not profit at all, for indeed giving a drink to the patient with injuries of three cochies; afterwards, the doctor applies fire cupping or milliard cupping; and makes two cuppings called "clinches" on each thigh, a little above the knees; and warn you against the artery that it should not be pierced.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of cupping which is called "clinches":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the parchment of oil is softened by illness and dampness, accordingly the cupping of this kind, called "olivaire," for such cases it takes this form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you make two cuppings on the thighs as well as on the shoulders, and do not let go of your hand until three-quarters of the parchment is charred according to how I have described it.
dou poil qui point l’oil	For hair that causes the oil.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never have the hairs of oils turned to dirt and cling to them; they receive oil, and then we perform cuppings according to two methods: by fire or with hot medicines.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Or the fire cupping instructs the patient to let the hair grow long and even when it is curly; if they cling to his body, then he must restrain them so that they do not move until they are born.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	(13th. Adonaignes lache desor douleins aureaigne. quant il estans comestres de ceu que le mongre le roght en un fielement en tainte uolatges lefine :n theu devisaoudermeil.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	naturel. A:carne, andr negat[sic:gere. The end itent.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs come back, and the paper is softened again then I will cauterize it there myself, as you have done before; and if the hairs are gone, then I will cauterize until the paper has lifted off its natural place, and become even, and do not touch the hair with oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The fiery cautery in medicine is that you command the patient to let their hairs be long and even; then make a parchment shaped like the leaf of miruete; take French soap and lime, one each; grind them well together; do it hastily so they don't cool down, then sprinkle on the shape made from the miruete leaf onto the paper with the hairs; if the illness is in only one oil, then you must treat it in the same way and also both of them; put cotton soaked in soft wax above the area where the hair grows; and let the patient's shoulder be at rest in your treatment and show me a small piece of that medicine placed there, press on it gently every time the patient feels irritation from the medicine, because they feel the same as if burned by fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	Once you have done this for a long time, then apply the medicine to your obligation.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the irritation is not present, lift up the paper as if it was lifted by force of fire or incision; and if so, that's well done. If this is not the case, reapply the medicine on the hair again or if the medicine has already been applied, keep applying it until your operations are equal, and your skin is smooth; then put cotton soaked in soft wax onto the area where there is arsenic treatment (also called "dyafenis") or other treatments, after curing the affected area until it is sound.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you know that you must carry out your work with great care so the hair does not reject the medicine on its surface. If the paper becomes soft after and the hair sticks to the oil, then repeat the treatment where the paper has been properly dissolved; as you have done before; after curing it until it is sound; and that's the form of the leaf of miruete:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And take into account that people are diverse in size and shape, and according to the extent of these constraints; do not apply the same method to each patient.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	about the treatment of furuncles with cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat furuncles as we have described in the sections of diseases, and your treatments do not work, it requires that you perform cautery according to this manner. This sentence highlights the recommendation for a specific approach to treating certain conditions using cauterization, which may be based on traditional medical knowledge from historical texts.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Commandes au malaide quinche demeurant en toutsavoir queulz ainsare:et .I. Ensiet liemainne :el (13these, et leves. Causaintens I'mauge neuf. En107th thelepovocenage
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula it is overturned, and then remove the pus, and dry it; if it is closed, do the work and drive out the stone with a bow; after that place on the hot cautery plough-shaped, and hold your hand at the part just below the oil, so that your hands don't make a mistake; and put the cautery in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come at the beginning of the cautery on the bone, it would be better. But if not, then resume the cautery again once, and if you know how to do so, let it stay for 3 years; afterwards place cotton moistened with wax on burlap, and treat the open sore until it is healed for 40 days, after which apply corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; and then proceed according to what comes in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a method of cautery for abscess that none of the old ones mentioned. For an abscess, and then break open its side; after placing in the small slit where the shape of this cavity lies:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and to the quantity of .III (3) parts; and hold your hand firmly so that the molten mass does not move, which would corrode its oil; it is necessary that you place cotton moistened with wax either on a white piece of cloth or in an alabastron, where the mass forms the lid of the fistula, and the healed part becomes very beautiful.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have mentioned, that's good. But if not, then it must be administered into the nerve of the neck, and return the fistula to the core of the nerve according to what needs to be done on its own in the end.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often, cracks in the lips are called "poils" and primarily occur on children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	As you treat these cracks of what we have said in sections, the treatment does not benefit at all; instead, place a small round-shaped culture according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And you must apply it to those cracks as soon as they form; after the treatment, heal its surface until it is sound.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	:secrevicture aster le: ouldre:escription,leu lai'savent. Leafere,later: iterration. Foro devisement. A.: and to-coment. Andor se;. Insect:sangledeface.
dou movement des dens	And when there is a displacement of teeth due to motion, and they cannot stay still, and are deformed members, and cause great pain and injury.
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine, but that is of no value; afterwards apply a hot cautery to them so that you place a cane on top like this after applying the cautery quickly, and heat your hand there until the patient feels the heat from the root of the tooth; then release your hand and repeat the cautery according to your desire; afterward fill the mouth with warm saline solution for an hour and rinse away the foulness.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in that manner the tooth which was moving is confirmed, and the softened gums are restricted, and the moisture becomes corrupted and separated.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth.
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain of the teeth comes from coldness or heat, and medical treatments are not effective, then it is necessary to use caustic medicine according to your methods: and hot cautery made with wax and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery made with wax is such that you spread the wax with a spatula or iron; after applying cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a tent, then molding the wax into a ball, and place it quickly on the painful tooth while keeping your hand there until the tooth cools down; this is done often enough for its virtues to penetrate the root of the tooth, and if you see that melted wax and cotton in wax are pressed onto the adjacent tooth, and placed on a heated iron such that the feathers burn at the neck of the second tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The caustic ensemble of fire is such that you spread a metal or iron cane and make it large so that the feathers do not burn in the mouth of the sick person; after heating the caustic, as soon as it forms from heat, place it on the tooth while keeping your hand there until the caustic cools down; this should be done often because the pain will last for that day or the next. It is required that the sick person fill his mouth with good wool in the hurry of applying the caustic and then rinse it out; and it is the form of the caustic:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a caustic on which you want to apply heat, and according to what you can do; and it is the form of the mixture:
des scrophules	This word "scrophules" is likely a misspelling of "scrofula," which refers to a chronic, localized form of tuberculosis affecting the lymph nodes in the neck, known historically as King's Evil or the King's Disease. It was once believed that contact with royalty could cure scrofula and this belief influenced various medieval treatments involving a monarch's blessing for healing.
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	:cure isaorse, etiquens: ices laide, andé: thepare tolé soothandent.i:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moisture conquers in the channels of the porter, and immediately when it comes from a cold constitution, then the patient with great pain must be relieved first by curative medicines; afterwards I burn at the root of the throat, and let it not come back to the throat again, but only warmth; after that I do another cautery on the joint where the neck meets the spine, and there should be the one called "clavicle" since we have its shape beforehand; and treat the wound as we have said so much until it is healed.
de la toust	From the mouth
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and porter's diseases are cold moistures, and the patient with these diseases does not have fever or chill, and it is an ancient disease, I do two cauterizations on its neck in the places where they used to; another one around the area between the breasts; and there should be the one called "clavicle" according to the shape that we mentioned before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, perform cauterization on the entire one called "punctum" since its shape is here in front of us in the disease of the ears; and these punctums are just there at XXX or slightly deeper. After curing the wound as we have said before, and that cautery should be done on three stitches according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these cauteries are lighter in that you do three for every quarter (as indicated by the context 'a cop').
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	From the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the shoulder joint is dislocated due to moisture and put back into place but cannot stay in position, repeatedly becoming dislocated with slight movement as we have experienced, then it must first be reset of a dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After having soaked the painful parts of his back and chest; after warming up what is inside between the ribs with your left hand; if the joint dislodged within, heat should be applied to it using one or two needles as indicated here. (Note: 'Douqueil' may refer to a specific type of treatment in this context.)
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and heat the pain as much as it pierces his chest, and with this instrumentation comes the fracture of three stitches; and thus is done the cauterization with the instrument that has three needles, for which the figures of the cauterizations are these three stitches; and the nerves correspond to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the instrument that has three needles:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes are applied to this one of the nerves, as it has in three stitches; et pour ces nerves:
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	sesarexel:xentropene laire. Forstrivel. Herepeacexure. Andres. Itisarte:
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if they are dislocated above, which little happens in that case, nevertheless make a cautery upon the thick cautery on the clavicle, or take many of such cauteries while pinching. For the joint is referred back, and the moisture is bone and is sane the painful diseases.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Cauterization of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The old said that for pleurisy one must make cauterizations of plant roots, and in this manner: take the longest root you can find, either dried or quite large and long; and rub it with oil, and burn it, and then perform .i. a great cauterization between the chest wall and the collarbone, and .ij. small cauterizations slightly descending into the part below the beard; and .ij. another one between the fifth rib and sixth rib, leaning backward a bit; and .i. another on the navel, and .ij. between the opposite sides of the pelvis, with .ij. the ones between them moving further apart than the previous cauterization which is between these two sides; and do not press your hand tightly but apply as you would in perfuming.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And none of the old ones said that no home used fire cauterization resembling to a barber (a term which could imply a less aggressive treatment), and they shave it off and place it between the ribs, as long as it reaches the apical cavity; and leaps forth its pain like in the apical cavity of the liver. But in this practice there is fear or the painful diseases die immediately, or an abscess comes which cannot be cured.
de la mice	From mouse - This line seems to be a fragmented phrase or an incomplete thought that doesn't provide much context on its own. If there was intended to relate to the previous text, it might imply using something from the mouse (perhaps referring to rodent tissue used in medieval cauterization techniques), but without further information, this is speculative and cannot be accurately translated or explained within the given constraints.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you heal the disease of the mouse as we have said in the parts of treatments, and it does not profit at all, rather they apply .iij. methods of cauterization that are beneficial for everyone.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	Of which one of these ways is that you make .iij. cauteres or .iiij., according to the length of the mouse, and according to the shape of the heating coil of the liver we have said before; and do not press your hand at all during the entire cauterization, and sometimes it falls on its back for the painful diseases.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	s :sure:2nage. Thearre anding, thews:thefeiode:cumpleueuksake. Andrepresentime itcuteximpleseblewseculiscribes without itafe cite apejacres:screase:represences (accuruparticke itesse.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After lighting the two joints on fire until they are clearly seen from the other side, and then burn the cautery, and so he will have three of them; if you see that burning is applied to all parts of the cautery for three joints. After curing when it has obtained pus for a long time, and this proves that the treatments mentioned before are no longer sufficient.
de ydropisie	Disease.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery is not effective for disease, but by the stirring of "asclyties", as we have said in divisions. When you treat it according to the methods we have discussed, and your treatment does not yield any results, it must be that you make three cauteries under the belly, and one on the stomach, and another on the liver, and another on the kidneys, and eight behind the back on the spine, and at an appropriate place in the thigh; and let the cautery well penetrate into the depth of pain.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery over to stir up pus for a long time, and not letting the treatment of the disease after the cautery rest; and recovery would occur, and all nine conditions would be together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery used for the belly is the clavicle that we have shown before; and that one used on the back is ovate, according to what has been mentioned here.
de l’enfleure des piez	Of swelling in the joints.
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the joints are swollen due to disease and covered with yellow discoloration, it is necessary that you perform a cautery on the back of the hand between the little finger and the ring finger; and move your hand along with the cautery. And do not go too far in penetrating, otherwise there would be furos acute yellow spots, and you should perform the cautery according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After performing two cauteries in each leg at the tip of the hammerblow (cutellare), and let the cautery be long, one on the kneecap forward and the other behind it inside the thigh; and leave the cauteries lying over to clean for a long time that the discoloration subsides; after treating the other treatments we have mentioned.
de la menoison	Of lameness.
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from coldness and moisture, so much that it prevents the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines, and cannot be treated by any curative methods; and you see the malady is suffering greatly with great vigor, make one cautery on the stomach according to what has been mentioned before, let the blood circulate at that cauterization, and three cauteries underneath the belly in a subtle manner, and eight cauteries above the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see that the moisturizers and the malady suffering, make one cauterization on the columne, et siens: Et seure, et .iij. Et desmeitre de laisse enuiiij. Siil : Iij. La matiere que il a lignsis in forementes leuin :le maunder aide.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the treatment of ulcers
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When ulcers are the foundation or one or more, and are ancient and composed of large, cold, and moistly corrupt humors, and they are treated as we have described in sections, there is no benefit if you perform these cauteries: III on the backbone along the spine, which is completely detached from its origin and moved to and fro like a triangle; I on the head. II: do not perform them inside the mouth.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you think his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and you see his face swell, then there should be a large cautery on the stomach as mentioned before; I: also on the liver; II: and another one on the entire cauldron of cauteries; let the cautery remain over the wound for a long time until it heals. After curing, the wound should be fully healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of the charnosity which is named "Thélul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you apply Thélul, there appears to be a scraping cautery that is ignited all over the area where Thélul occurs; then let your hand remain until the cautery becomes weak at the birth of the vein, and it will not cause pain; do this once or twice, depending on how much Thélul there is; if you cauterize each one as we have mentioned, after curing with ointments they should be fully healed. And when you apply a large cautery under the cataplasm, it will give more aid.
de plaie mal curee	Of a poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the painful dislocation cannot bear cutting or piercing, let us describe it in its place; there comes a disease that can't be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When there is no fistula present and it is old and filled with corrupt porous moist materials, let the doctor treat it thoroughly within its foldings; then cauterize as if a raker would do upon the fistula according to how much has been entered into it, and re-cauterize these pores and corruptions so long as they remain in that state, either one time or two times or three times, depending on the amount that is needed; and warn you of nerves therein are present, and great bands. When the fistula extends to the bladder and intestine, and guard these cauterization, so it doesn't make any wounds in the flesh, and see how long, and then one shall know that tissue is healed completely whole; and after curing of lesions.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	Pain from frost comes, and heavy winds, and takes no toll on women, then you must do bloodletting on one side of the rain and on the other side of the clavicle with the lancet we have mentioned before; and if our cauterizations are done in moderation, there will be about three lances along a line, providing greater assistance.
de la vessie	The original Old French excerpt does not discuss "de la vessie" (bladder disease). Therefore, providing a translation for this phrase is outside the scope of translating from the given text since it's unrelated to its content. If you have any other related lines or context that might connect with bladder issues within that medieval medical discourse, please provide them for an accurate translation.
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weakened by frost and moisture, if it retains urine, then you must perform cauterization on the backward part above the bladder where the hair begins to poke out at both sides—one on the right and one on the left; and for each lancet used, make an incision as much as your finger. Perhaps also apply a backward lancet or two, if necessary, depending on the size of the puncture wound; and perform cauterization with a backward lancet on the back, or perhaps two, if you have need for it; then carry out clavicle cauterization according to the form we mentioned before.
de la marris	The Old French text does not directly mention "de la marris," which could imply a condition like mastitis (inflammation of the breast tissue). However, as with previous translations about unrelated medical topics, without specific context from the original text regarding "de la marris" or related procedures in that period's medical practice, providing an accurate translation is not feasible. If you can locate lines within this medieval medical treatise that discuss breast-related conditions and their treatment, I could assist with a relevant translation.
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the breast is cold and moist, not allowing for conception, and the flowers are corrupted with their ends delayed; and when they come forth, if there is great pain: then it must be that we do three lances internally in the breasts as we have said concerning cauterization of the bladder or two on the backs—or clavicle cauterization according to what has been mentioned.
de la hainche	In this case, without specific references within the Old French medical text about "de la hainche" (hernia), a translation focused on historical hernia treatments is speculative. Medieval texts may not have detailed descriptions of such conditions or their management in terms we are familiar with today. If there were lines discussing hernia and its treatment, the text might involve procedures like cauterization for reducing the risk of complications from a hernia by possibly using lances to alleviate symptoms, following medieval medical practices. However, without clear context or reference to "de la hainche," an accurate translation is not possible here.
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	Comune: "coment. If the mounseslal (2015 century. Celtic French, soventre.measures. 3emeasurement in English lai leatient. Thisjacute. Iones. Whatunle tiare meaute. 5n.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, then he makes two large cauterizations of the vineyard, and performs them similarly to all other physicians; and he treats it until it becomes healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	Pain in the back of the neck.
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the throat of the back of the neck, and it is due to cold and moisture, and this malady corresponds with what we have mentioned before in the division, then it must be purified from the thick humors by taking foul-tasting pills or other similar healthy pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After making the cautery; and the manner of performing this type of cauterization is as follows: it involves mixing medicines in containers, and fire cauterization according to various methods, among which one person may perform three triangular cauterizations on the back of the neck following this shape, with good depth and a large amount between each cautionary stick, leaving a significant distance between each cauterization sticks; otherwise, it is done in the middle of the neck to avoid .iiij. (23) according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, if the cauterization is performed with the double-circle that we have mentioned before in dislocation of the neck; but make it such that the circle contains the entire neck and all parts correspond to its size.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And it is the manner in which they do it for sciatica when the pain is located in the neck and does not reach down to the thigh or leg; but if it comes to the thigh and leg, then he performs .ij. cauterizations wherein the malady says that the pain lies, and .i. cauterization above the ankle .iiij. times, a little on the left side of the joint; and whether they make cutaneous cauterizations or perform the thickening at the area in question; and if the malady feels that the pain extends to the two feet or proximal to them, then he cauterizes it when it feels the pain .iij. times or .iiij. on the cautery called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is done correctly, then he does more; and when the pain is on the jawbone toward the thigh, then he performs cauterization with a cutaneous or circular cautery, and in all his cauteries be careful not to burn too much so that the cautery doesn't damage nerves and large arteries, and cause further harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen several who performed cauterization above the foot of a fracture and they kept it all night long, and the ankle also was examined and corrupt at every joints of the foot. After a stomach treatment wherein he died.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two joined parts, perform cautery on one and the other, according to this method. // The surgeon said at the lancet of the hernia, from which way up such a piece of iron should be, as big as a nutmeg or maybe even less, and it should be between spikes or in gaps between them, with the distance of an inch; and the spikes should face each other over two parts, and they should look like nuts, and there should be one handful of iron well made; and that is the form.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And they should be scalded until all are red and tender, then place them on the patient's malformed hernia belly, and turn it upside down along the healthy side of the cost; let the cauterizer perform one lancet twice and leave it for three years; afterward make an embolization with wax, allowing the wound to heal over a length of ten days; afterwards perform a washing treatment until it is sound.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albuzasim said that we use this cautery very little for the sake of its reputation, and since few people do it; but in all, this is a good cautery because it can withstand suffering, and it will heal well regardless of how it's treated.
de la dolor dou dos	Of the two-fold pain.
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or from falling, or by percussion, or due to too great evacuation, or because of seemingly extended cold material, none of these semblances is worth cauterying; for chilled fluid should be used instead.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is required that the maladies are void of putrid pills or other similar signs, which must be placed on his back, whether it holds pain or not, three lines with six signatures per line according to its strength and quantity that the disease can endure; and make the cauterization as per the name "pincers" - and if you see, do .i. or .iiij. cauteries on the clavicle's knob following this shape:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes in small children and the signs of its onset as it is:et desus. Siensemble deus, ou il neuf dame de partis devisiéngleurs et leauke tolphilmeur. Cauterre à pece vices deure estor. Thewespremerentraly laxime, augeatitgere isombreiter 12074200thief offerreversaïlls ateit'ou:
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you heal it, if you burn it with this cell's fire according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If you burn each part of the spine equally; and if you see it, burn the spine along lines or three lines, and align the points with one another after curing so that it heals according to what we have said, and warn you not to apply cautery in a manner causing nerve fluid spray.
de la dolor des jointes	Of the joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain in the joints is caused by moisture that spreads over each limb, and when it comes down to pressure points, they are called "gout" properly; and when it's due to cold causes and cannot be cured with medicines, then such care must be taken: apply fire (cauterization) around the joint of the foot according to this form: make the fire touch around the joint, and use an olive oil-based caustic substance in accordance with this shape.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if it is necessary that you strike beneath the joint of the foot, where they call "point" (likely referring to specific pressure points associated with the treatment), and if the pains arise again in other joints as well, then many times he made cauterization under each point; making an olive oil-based caustic substance for every part, from a single to three or four cauteries per foot according to this form. And if you have further knowledge on the subject, do it more, but never hold your hand there longer than until the healing has arisen.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pain descends to the back and you administer that cauterization which we have described in this chapter; and if the pain is in the hands, apply points along two lines in the fist; and if there remains no more pain on any joint or hair of the hand, then make points at each joint and also at every hair on the hand. And if the pains come down to the knees or hips, cauterize each part, and take good care with the patient and medicines. For if you do this well and purge the humors, it will be healed by God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the route of the sinew (likely referring to nerve pathways or muscular structures)
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Celt siens.
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	sure commande: theyre ait:s :  it:nile (only:upredre apeople of thet:gallus only. Butfere andsuele tocelle. Anderitexte. Theese.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And you know that when you do not bring the bone to the cautery yet, your work is of no value. It is required that the cauteries on children be subtle according to their size, and great men also large according to their measure; after 2 years he heals the wound with a burnt caustic until the bone has cooled down; after other ointments are applied, and for 40 days resting his painful areas so that the bruises do not pop up when he gets up from bed to go to rooms.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after 40 years, when he wants to get up, he dresses himself with a well-made bandage and wears it for another 40 years; and has a good rest so that he does not work too much and avoids excessive drinking and eating, and high grumbling; and when he follows this teaching, he is completely cured. And I will say this after the treatment in my chapter on tailors.
de la routure dou ventre	from abdominal pains
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When other pains come to other parts of the body and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then he makes 3 caustic according to their quantity, and either ash or salt; after this treatment as we have said; and none of the ancients said it should be cauterized with a caustic at 3 angles in this manner:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first sign is on the edge of the wound and makes a line above it for wide healing from above; and another further down, and holds your hand in every part of the caustic. But these first caustics are heavier and more twisted.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	ancient pain in no limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes in any limb, or from a fall or injury, and this pain lasts for long time, then the treatment of medicine is not valuable; therefore it must be cauterized with the caustic called "pounds", and make the caustics according to the length of the member, its smallness, fragility, weakness, location of twists, and soreness. If it has healed after the first caustic, that is well; but since this custom requires change in the members near it, then it must be made so you make the cauterizations as long as the pain remains unhealed.
de meselerie	from melancholy or malaise
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	cestarre le: the 2se develastra. Il apeart, andres enamorfele fecexentures (greface.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the dispersal is everywhere; and it appears clearly, so it indicates that you must cauterize these burns which we have mentioned or main ones, and one near the neck vertebrae, and another on the back vertebrae, and one great under the crucifix and another beside it, and some on the elbows, and some on the tendons of the fingers, and some in each joint of hands and feet; and warn against nerves that are under the abdomen calcining, so they do not burn. And nevertheless there is sometimes made a cauterization on the bone of the buttocks, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And you know that the more I perform cautery, the greater help it provides, and it benefits him; and you know that the maladies do not feel pain from cauterization as they do when healthy, for the body is now entirely degraded. Therefore, the cauteries must be large or small depending on the limbs and joints, according to what you find in iron instruments. Afterward, treat his flesh with flour mixed with honey and other curatives until he becomes sound again.
de enfleure	From within the fold or crease
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When the fold does not occur in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters; yet it remains unhealthy, so a cautery should be applied to the affected member depending on its size, such as one slightly entering into the knurling of the backbone. Then treatments with ointments continue until healed. However, there is never made a cautery and in the hand or palm or backside at the nerve endings where the limb remains immobile, thus confirming that it is osteal; and accordingly no one should intervene unless they are familiar with the limbs' structures and their moving nerves.
de albaras	Of albaras or armpits (assuming 'albaras' is a typo for 'albares', which might be meant as 'armpits')
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	The maladies of albares sont enmant.et desent siens, adoncte. Liere cautère dexpremerchief tien togeat ceintracter. Celtic com esmeanc ure, apele lice.
li cure de chancre par cautere	chascun ententire laurence.esme entera fe's itels thefaire: entailte rekt: Asterre:cetat heir laurent, il,reira.compreisentreces, theorenture carrere. Thewentures oulden: entrails.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When the sore appears at its beginning, and you see to arrest it, if you burn with fire where it seems like a circle, all around the spot of the sore; and everyone said that they also did cautery in the middle of the sore; and I don't think this is very good, because I fear it will become ulcers and rotten, and I have never yet seen anything similar; and more rightfully it should be burned around with the fire which we call "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it delays in dying or due to the superfluousness that she makes, or because of the pain of the sore when he is decrepit (meaning too old), or for its strength; and you see her delaying from dying: therefore, cauterize around much small cauteries with fire-holding, and then let it be. For it will continue to postpone death.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see her piercing all the way through with it, if the fire burns because of its shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And put your hand in the midst of that disease called "adubelati" as long as the cautery has pierced it, and be such cauteries that the suffering is divided into so many parts that the course of the poultice becomes dispersed accordingly; after the treatment until he is completely healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The curative fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens," and it's essentially an inflammation or infection affecting the limbs; since iron burns similarly to flesh, if you see this ailment on its surface that can suffer cauterization together by fire, then heat small and strong claws according to what fits the location of the lesion or illness; after you cauterize all parts until no trace remains of the corrosion, so everything corroded is set free. Then leave it for three years, and with oil let it breathe after healing from these burns while fire has ostected (set), and if within 3 years healthy limbs have not arisen; this is good; but if they do not regain, then reapply the cauterization to that part of corroded flesh which still remains. This kind of inflammation was never before treated with medicine in the wound caused by fire (cauterization), and after three years have passed let it breathe. And this is anointing has been said about its division, as much as you know.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of wounds that come from fractures, and they are quite painful.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often happens that the fractures cause a disease we call "closed" according to our intention, and it is a very harmful thing that wounds the skin; and for this disease, both the heat cautery and cold caution are ways. Heat cautery is done as well when scraping with a sharp object like a quill, made of good iron in size suitable to hold the nail firmly, it is heated very hot and then turned your hand all around the nail until it wobbles at the nail head; and left for three years so that it begins to peel off. Then you make an embolism with known crushed herbs tied with a rope, and leave it on the wound throughout the night, and cut out the embolism. Afterwards, cleanse the ulcer by massaging until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if they are converted by dislocations of the joints, and often occur in joints and wounds; it is in this manner: take a hemp thread or quill shaft, or pen feather, place it on the nail, which will then form callus around its circumference; put the hemp thread so that it can absorb moisture all around, and apply some warm water to it firmly, holding tight your hand while turning it until the margin of the hemp thread reaches down to the root of the nail. Then allow you to find a path for the warmth deep into the root; then leave it for so long that everything dislocates from its roots. After this, make another one in the same way for all those located at the joints, and cure the ulcers with charcoal.
li cure dou trembler	The treatment involves applying gentle vibrations to the area being treated. This is done by holding or securing a warm object against the affected tissue while gently shaking it back and forth. The purpose of this method is to stimulate blood flow, promote healing, and reduce pain through the mechanical action of the trembling motion.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When any patient shivers from cold or fever or other causes, it is required that you perform either three to four spinal adjustments along the lumbar vertebrae, one between each vertebra; and one on the muscles near the spine and in front of them; and one on the stomach with an olive cautery. This will allow for shaking as a part of the healing process and help to release the health from the cold malady.
des pustules puans	For developing purulent sores, it is necessary to use specific treatments such as warm compresses with medicated ointments, antibiotics if indicated by a medical professional, and proper wound care including cleaning and dressing the affected area. The goal of treatment is to reduce inflammation, combat infection, and promote healing. It's essential to consult healthcare providers for appropriate diagnosis and management of such sores.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Whenever the joints are discovered to have purulent lesions or large and corrupt materials appear, it is required that at every chief of each pustule: a gentle cauter with firbrush sticks either made of fennel brushwood in charreture; andaude. And sachauteur quatrieme, si lai deffet vase unt desemalat ceusilier que, ence elescoin l'enfee leuant.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is pierced
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times occurs great bleeding from the artery that is pierced at the wound that approaches the parietal pleura, or during the incision of an abscess, or with cauterizing a limb, and similar things; and it is very unfortunate to be obstructed.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in every case where this happens, if you delay putting your index finger on the vein wound, and strain it very much so that the blood is not flowing from there anymore; then set the fire cautery many small and large ones until they are all red; then proceed to do so, or little depending on the wound and the location of the artery in it, and place the cautery on this vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there as long as the blood is not clotting.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you hold your finger above the vein wound and the cautery is extingrande, then immediately take another fire cautery.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue doing this one after another until the blood is not clotting; and beware that you do not burn the nerve next to, and prevent any other malady from affecting the inflamed area; and know that when the artery is outside of the vein, it cannot well remain unclotted immediately as long as the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned: or with cautery, or through extraction if it has not been treated yet, or with a strong binding of thread, or with medicines placed on which there was hope to clot blood; and apply and squeeze evenly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will tightly bind the inflamed area with a sheet or something placed on it, or do other similar things if there is no benefit in doing so.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this occurs and there is no observation or medicine present, then put your index finger on the vein wound as we have said before, and squeeze it so that it remains clotted above the wound and the vein; and do not move it, but sometimes make it cold enough so that the blood becomes frozen and congealed, and harden these kinds of cautery and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Ail leu alienation infection dans les parties of theesme au venture iven cesparle mamelle apears, as ceur desale desfaire : In the vies esose. Frommerces d'erre duel ci: "A laire.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you that in such diseases it is necessary for fire or medicinal caustic treatment, and the openings and causes and irritations and forms of these treatments; and I have placed this chapter on head pieces stuck to their feet, and I will go through this chapter by my own way so that one can understand more easily what is used there.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so I begin, it is necessary to know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first treatments, and therefore greater care must be taken.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision at an abscess site, and treatment of wounds, and extraction of arrows, and cutting into bones, and similar cases; where doubt and fear exist, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you not to undertake such folly. For many methods come in healing from people who have suffered so severely due to their illness that they died quickly because of the forfeiture caused by it, and the great cunning of their sickness; therefore, one must beware.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of these who give meaning to this saying, and say: "Wait, I am guarded"; and the disease is spiteful. It does not require you to consent to those who come to you with such a manner, but place greater concern in your honor than in your cure, refrain frequently from fussing over what you are certain of, and have taken care of; and use prognostication and indication for the treatment of your ills so that their health may be converted into this good name, fame, and memory. And such will help you achieve this well-known renown, glory, and remembrance.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	And truly our Lord teaches us good understanding and rightness, and if you wish to receive the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter to be discussed by chapters, according to what it is before as a causticist, which I have determined on the chief topic that you will find more easily understood.
dou chief plein d’aigue	full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	And it comes often in the children at birth, and when the baby's head is restrained too strongly by the child; and sometimes that issue is retorted from.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	saint:esme en iton lai.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose joints were swollen with water, and the head throbbed every day so much that it could not bear weight; and he thought so much moisture there was that it became flesh underneath the bone above the sinew, between the bone and the sinew; and the operations are such that the moisture is between the bone and the sinew, and the incision is small, and you make a large cut through the head; and so long as the moisture flows, then the shape of the spatula-like part:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen, and the incision is larger, then you make two incisions shaped like a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is between the bone and the sinew, and you see signs of cracks at the edges of every part, and the water shoots out when pressed in between with your hand from one side to another, it indicates that you must make two incisions in the head in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision you pull out all the moisture; afterwards, you draw the fissures with draperies and powders, and apply vinegar and oil, and leave it for five days; then dress the wound by bandages and ointments, and allow the head to be stretched evenly, and feed the patient dry meat from a little moisture until the limb is strong and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way to make an incision is by observing the size of the abscess or collection of moisture, and its connection with the surrounding tissue; because it has never been done in front; it has never been done behind; it has never been done to the right; and it has never been done to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Now you make the incision in the abscess or collection of moisture and drain it, according to what is necessary; and watch that you do not damage the artery; and let a fistula form so that the patient's bleeding decreases over time from blood loss and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	In return
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is no cataract or pain in the eyes or elsewhere, and the disease has been longstanding, and medicine treatment does not help at all; rather, it's the cautery that heals by cutting these two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then it is necessary that you cover the wounds so that the patient's head rises again; after cleaning his forehead with a rough cloth until arteries are visible, then straighten out the patient's crown with one linen napkin; then look at the ears of both sides and see if they have healed, and very little remains; then mark these marks, then pierce each ear with a sharp spatula-like instrument of about two parts, enough to penetrate through the skull until it bones are visible, and this is done by its breadth.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	Anderres de tes ceste oint, siens queur sanzure quarrere desormainzour ailk Ion theurs acoit isent.sangrainer. Sirol.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	saintement.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open with a sense of touch, it is necessary that you measure the distance of II points, then pierce and hit the bone; and as for the blood to be let out at such a rate, VJ. cubits are enough, and perhaps one little more or less. According to what the patient may suffer, and the fullness of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone without any sore spot above the apophysis, then heal the wound and sew it up, and care for the heat treatment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	Emigration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When emigration is ancient and cataracts are caused by moisture from tears and heat in the temples, for other old things, and they are treated with medical methods and all of it does not benefit the patient, unless we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them so that they make the patient's temple hair grow back, and listen to the artery in the temple, as it opens well with its beating, and few stitches are enough for anyone who is not too cold; and if it is re-inserted, he straightens out some of his drapery from the shoulders, then rubs a smooth cloth on any rough fabric, and raises the bone in warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the syringe with this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then scrape the loose skin gently as long as you are with the artery, then take it up in pinches, and remove well-woven fabrics from each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it to the point of the uncinate process, then cover that part according to the quantity of II joints. Because if it is not covered, it will jump out with every movement.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And take the .viij. cubits of blood, then lay it in II leather bags strong silk double layered, so that no dirt will not cover the cauterization wound; and cut off the cautery knife from the os as long as his hairs are pulled; and if you see, the above-mentioned work, and then cope.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	naught untoilletilecristrevaillexsecale,senteures,santhecques ifherifoldde injeves.erifere, eteve 2 lurange for
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	It is required for the extraction of arteries that one fills their wound with much cotton and places it well made upon it; and when you remove them, take care to use dry medicines that cause healing and bandages until they are healthy; and if there is no constriction in this artery as much as you do, then hasten the cover by cautery, or apply vitriol with your hand so that the obstruction does not relax; and if you do not have this present, place your needle on it until it freezes, and raise the wound of cold water until it constantly thaws, and keep it as required; and who is more difficult and lighter in artery extraction than you cauterize its vein cutting off .ij. millimeters deep, but the cuts be well spaced to guard against prolonged heat there.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When stirrups are too tight, they hold less heated air.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the knives .i. a large space of .ij. millimeters, and when you seal these joints with iron hot as long as they bend to the bone, and close the vein in these spaces; and separate them from each other because this cautery is not uniformly applied throughout; and its shape is:
des larmes	Of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears are draining from veins under which there is a strong test of iron force, and it does not benefit from medicine that has been applied, and you see the malady turning redder, and feel your forehead movement as if in pain; and such hands are held tightly and moist, so that the hairs on the papers become wet, and they dried these papers, and scorched by the heat of tears, which is needed for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	re les cuite aure lestire dexentures sié, theorice tolere (tox. Ifragre:rise.a, without themesure:re lege, but not.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	And you should provide a piece of sponge and much linen to wipe the blood from his wound, then take out the cautery point by about two parts of its length here, where it takes this shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that extends from the temple just to the second incision; and scrape all the clotted blood between these two incisions around the bone underneath it, then make another treatment on this first incision up until the other second one, and then extract this cautery point.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you insert in the first incision the instrument called "cultellar", and it is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And turn the sharp edge towards the clotted blood in the center of it, and the blunt edge toward the bone, and insert it as much as possible into the next incision until the incision continues to this which opened the wound; and then make another treatment on that incision up to the other one afterwards; and extract the jointed arrows evenly, and press down the flesh with the arrow removed; and put a tape in each incision with white cotton, and wrap it with linen moistened in wine and oil and wax, and make sure that the edges of the skin don't move; and after three days straighten the line, and then treat this wound basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other cures for treating wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	Two drops of blood
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When anyone frequently comes down with a hot cough and you see the eyes holding tightly and small, and impairing vision, and burning papers; and hairs fall out, and at the head there is great pain from such accidents that these materials and cough do not come from many windings, but rather the treatment of this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And command the patient to pull their forehead backward, then make a large cut on each side of the forehead, and about one inch deep; and start from the temple's left side to the right side, making the incision just up to the bone; and keep your hands away from the temple joints that move during breathing; and when the bone is exposed, wash out all the blood with a sponge, then squeeze cotton between the flaps of the cut and put linen over it, and drape above and below clothing in oil and vinegar, and keep from aspirating heat; when the bone is set, it requires that you rub the bone until it begins to grow again, then cure with things excising, which cause stiffness to return.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In another way: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of chaff, and mix them together; then apply it to these wounds in order to loosen stiffness throughout the entire area.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the eversion of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that causes earache is one of four things: either grains, or animals, or mining stone or similar things so like as water and sandy things; or seed, if like hay or wheat or peas; or something flowing such as water and silk-like things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When there is a stone in the ear or any other manner that does not fit into the ear, and it grows within the ear, you put your ear to the sun. If you see the stone, draw out no little violet oil or olive oil; then perform the extraction; make an eustressure; bleed the nostrils as the eustressure comes about, and place pieces of linen on the ear; and keep the ear above. Often this cure works well; if it does not work by this method, then extract with a subtle pinching: here is where the shape lies.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	ses,sive: heurechief:sacre.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not leap from all these things that we have said, hurry to cut the ear so that the abscess appears in front of the incision, and spasm; and the manner of cutting is such that you make first a small healing wound on the head of the patient from cephalic side, and extract the blood according to the amount of its strength, then let the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut in the root of the ear where it depends; and make the cut as a moon until you reach the wound, then let the doctor do so according to his desire, and suck hastily from your mouth; and treat him so that he is sound.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's gravel and it swells up, then carefully extract it; and if it cannot be extracted, then gently make a small incision following this shape:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And make an incision in the grain. But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist from the moisture of the ear; as long as you have made many pieces, then extract it gently with tweezers and suction, if so we have said, that the extractions be light.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	In the wetness that the patient uses forceful coughing from first-degeat conditions, and plunge the ear with many cotton balls in it. And if it leaps through that way, that's good. If not, take several small stones according to the length of your fingers held tightly and quickly, and roast them a little at the fire; then place the patient one or two punctures on his ear, and let him jump from there. From other pieces in another part, and strike with fire from another piercing that is in the ear; and do not cease doing this piercing into the ear until the grain has completely exuded, and then it will be fully expelled; if you see, take a branch, and push one of his fingers into the ear, and take the other tip on fire as long as the bone is hard enough; then make another piece of jonquil in the piercing until the grain completely exudes.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the best thing, if it's small, like a pea and so forth, treat it as we have said in division; but if it's large enough to be felt, then make an incision for extraction by pinching; and this is lighter to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of ticks in ears, when you treat it as we have said in division and distillations; but if there is no tick, gently make a small incision, and if they are present, take the thread that this form has.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	sangermeant severi that partout ¬gean:lume :icgione,reviable,udexan.nilexcribe a. benthecoldesques  clecelle.cius, theifles to craconjanno.dezany if
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the dislocation of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with any deformity in their ears; and this same thing happens at the dislocation of a wound or when a piece of bone grows inside the ear, which never occurs in the ear unless one can see it well enough; and it rarely happens that there is little displacement to the deformity.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	However, when it occurs and one cannot see it, there is an agreement for several remedies, and in this case it is required that you put the malformed ear to the sun; and look inside: if you see any obvious operation, this work has no such small space as those spaces where the shape lies.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	Or if it is cut or torn straight before and behind, so that the ear does not bleed; if the operation involves bone or cartilage in the ear, you must make very subtle pincers and hold them gently until those pieces are completely bone.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the operation is in the ear, take a very subtle razor and hold it for a short time to the fire, then you put back the cartilage of the ear. If you feel that the malformed area sends a grating sound when touched, press gently, and make sure not to bruise the nerves on the ear; then place an ear tube according to the size of the deformity, and cover it with Egyptian mud.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this for as many days as the wound is sealed, or take a tube and cover it with rose-colored water mixed with vitriol powder; if you see fluid in the ear, make sure to remove the tube and move another cotton-filled tube made of rosette oil and beeswax until the fluid has completely solidified. Then cure it as long as it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if blood comes from the wound, dip a sponge and cover it with cold water, place it on the ear, and use other treatments that help stop the flow of blood which are related to distillation therapies.
de la char des papieres	from the bone fragments of paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the kind of fragments that come from the paper when they are moist and dry; it requires you to stretch them with tongs and pinches, and coat them with a small space like roots; then place them on wet vitriol.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without decortication, then the delicate caustic in the cauterization of a round incision is done; and many times repaeved, there is no longer any movement from their roots; and when they are burned with fire, those roots do not return again.
de la gresle	sesme cestinferre itume le :130048: "démerence, ásoldes aentire onseverraly thet3rdose. Thekingsaure fromage, andrespect asciveutil. Ijaccent (thereum; fromcause,itk, 3005:nagust. All:
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times come sheets with things that seem clotted in their shape and hardness, and for this reason the disease is called "great blizzard", and its treatment consists of: take warning if the great blizzard moves from one side to another, and it's a light thing to know; then make the cut large, afterwards scrape each part quickly, then with pincers, and bandage. If you cannot cover this spot at all for piercing even slightly, it does not hurt the patient at all; and if the fissure is big, assemble it with a suture, and cure until it's healed; and if it's small, there's no need to apply force, as ointments will restore it almost immediately.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the great blizzard is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn it over, and apply bandages to the great blizzard; and hold it with pressure from one side and another; and when the paper is separated by an incision, it does not hurt; and when the clotting is loose, treat it with boiling water, and cure the wound until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exinach is a fat that hardens into sheets on the paper above, and it occurs more often in children than in adults, and causes much pain to their hair, and they bring the cataract in the morning, and cannot see the sunlight because tears run down their hair; and for this reason they lie against their backs and sleep, and rest with their papers moistened by themselves inside their skirts. And when you press on your head between both hands and feel the exinach oozing out of it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way of the work is that the patient places his head in your hand; and then take a linen cloth, and make it into a circle according to how much exinach there is from each part, and place it on top of it; and press with both hands onto one side and the other so that the exinach is gathered inside the circle; then open up some moisture in the middle with a sharp blade, making sure it's not wider than the wound made by the needle; and make the skin stretch until there is no exinach left; and in various positions the exinach comes out of the fissure, according to the form of an irregular piece of fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract it then to a piece of cloth between your two hands for later, and turn your hand toward the right and left so that it's spread out; and be careful not to stuff in the fissure, do not let blood flow down from the entire suture, that you will not bleed.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the exiting does not open at the beginning of the fissure, push it lightly to open it; then extract it as we have said, and pull downwards and forwards, and place on the joint, and bind tightly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such houses that burn rope and place them on to corrupt the moisture that is delaying; then treat it until it becomes healthy. And if it comes to the incision site hot, then treat with emollients enough so that it becomes healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of paper hairs
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When from paper hairs are adorned other than their nature, and they become yellowed, if they harm the eyes, and bring about manners of illnesses as frequent tears and softening of the paper hairs and swelling, all because it is caused by damage to the hairs; and the cure consists in four methods: or with a bundle fire, or with hot water according to what before me was written, or the instructions of the physician regarding fire treatment, and whether done through incision and suturing or via bandaging, as I will describe.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the chief part of the malady in your healthy state; then turn the paper oil to your left hand, if it becomes soft, that's good; if not, puncture one thread above each filament above; and whether this be near the edge of the paper or from where the hairs grow there, place a thread over all the paper, turn the paper shaver there; then make in the part of the paper, next to those adorned with hairs, covering everything from the large margin down to the small one; take out the thread, and place on the paper a little tent of cotton and fabric; then position a figure above the paper like an earthen lamp, as you see when you lift the paper up, and it is necessary that the figure be according to the size by which you raised the paper that has been fixed there.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if the part has a great quantity of paper according to what the paper is moldy; then make all over the spaces where you have marked lines, and take one of those fissures near the natural hairs's circumference, and push an abscess in one of the angles of these; then scrape it out completely; then assembled with a silk thread lace from a needlework of such things thin filaments, and sanc. If you see twenty years ago; but if not, then healing, and the hairs, and sixty-fourteine, etienne:
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	:i.comme parler. What iti fromage:iage. iii. Theesme. Inj.ai. It'st. 105. All togetherne. ould, aout ascribe. Thenique thei: �iurexures. A:c.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then he who has little strength must, likewise according to this form:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you do not have the ability to hold tongs, and the object is not equal in shape, then take an awl or something similar with .i. wire, and insert it into the figure; and put another wire next to the large groove, and another near the small one, and align all of your wires evenly; then move your hand evenly over the skin that you have marked out, as we have told you, then join the two ends of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it heals; and when the abscess appears at your incision, calm it down with various ointments soothing soreness.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And there is no occasion when the paper hair becomes converted: it must be that you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching in both cases is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of wounds if it is according to this form: and you must convert the paper hairs in such a way that I have said; then make .ij. stitches by art, and also .ij. sutures as long as the large space between them like the paper and the small circle is; and hold on the .ij. ends of .ij. parts or where you are holding the threads; then assemble these thinly under what has been mentioned above about the paper hairs, and stretch the stitches from the two parts of its form; and let it remain for some years, and the skin which has been tightened will harden and become brittle until it heals.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes a long time, then heals until it is healthy again; and when the wound has been sealed, and if you lift the paper hairs, and they no longer have any hair growing on them; and this is the shape of the stitches that you will make according to this figure, and in accordance with this quantity both long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The tasks are such that you must use a fine needle and thread silk thinly, then join the threads subtly, and position it so that the length of the threads is about one palm; then order another finely spun silk thread lightly, and thrust into the root of the hair in place, and pierce through the paper as fast as you can; pull out the hair to above natural skin texture; then draw the hair upwards towards the stitches, and continue to do so until all the paper is cut open. Then withdraw your hand as much as possible for the hair begins to grow again in place with its natural skin texture, and hold the thread lightly by pulling out toward the straw that you have pulled from the wound; then pull the paper.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hair grows and does not accompany the nail with it, then you will cut the hair along its entire length as you have ordered; until the nail is pushed above the surface and you see it through the eye; therefore, you will cut the hair and thread, and let the oil remain for two or three years so that the hair regains its place in its socket and grows up from there; and if the hairs are small, accompany them with a long nail from natural branches, and hold them together while they are elongated and then loosen it.
de la porriture de l’oil	This instruction refers to "the rust of oil," which could be interpreted metapromptically as an issue related to the corrosion or contamination that might affect oils used in medieval medical practices, possibly suggesting a precautionary measure. However, given its brief nature and context-dependent interpretation, it may also simply imply instructions on handling rusty materials within the broader scope of Old French medical treatises without any specific treatment mentioned for "the rust of oil."
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	As this disease called "aleacrati" or rust appears in the oil, if it has two methods for dealing with it: one natural and the other unnatural; and it happens through wound healing, cutting, or cauterizing, as well as similar occurrences.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method of this work is to break up any soldering or plating done, release the mouth from it, and place linen tent around it until it's healed; and you must not use in the treatment anything that dries and restricts. For if you do so, the illness becomes worse than before; but using softening substances like fenugreek; and roasted water or aged/cooked flaxseed meal, and acai oil melted into no other oils, and enveloping it in a tent, and curing with this treatment.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are that you must take care it does not harden again in the same form as before; and these works we have mentioned do not fail to heal this disease, but return it to its original state.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	This instruction refers to "the hair" which appears in oil, suggesting an issue or condition where hair growth occurs within a substance like oil used in medieval medical practices. It could indicate the need for specific treatment regarding this phenomenon but without more context it's challenging to provide precise details on its historical implications and treatments.
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	char defface: ofler (faire fromage aitère: ilgustre char. lexagger :charger and commenter. Celtique.char, allergues:le char. Ifromainement. Larmeenture :en.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the paper figure returns as it indicates, that is good; but if not, then take a razor and put it in the crack, and turn the paper, and make two holes or lines within the paper; and let the shoulder joints be at the angles of the incision you have made, and make some angles so that when they are joined together, the figure is as the figure of a letter without the dot «.j». Then remove this piece according to the amount by which its edges extend from the edge of the paper, and then align the two lost parts, and fasten them with linen thread; then proceed with what we have said about soft medicines and bandages, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the illness comes from a fissure or tear or cautery, it must be that you cut a flat incision among the hairs of the papers, and according to what has been said before; then open between the two loops of a bandage as I have said; and one should perform the work in accordance with the shape of the illness because it is very varied in form, and the master's skillful arrangement can bring back the figure to its natural shape; and the patient's pain according to what must be done in many treatments.
dou soudement de la papiere	And when setting or repairing the paper, it is as follows:
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when making this repair in part, the repaired paper remains firmly attached to the backing parchment and cannot move or perform its natural functions, so it is necessary that you insert a razor blade on the surface of the paper, and lift it gently; and make fine pincers, being careful not to be too tight nor too loose, so that the patch does not cause pain to the patient's skin, and when making your stitches, which join the repaired piece, apply them lightly, allowing the paper to return to its natural shape; and afterward ensure it is completely dry in water, and then wash it with soft, clean water, and lay a linen tape moistened with wool on top of the water. After one day use fine thread and other preparations until healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	And from the backing parchment's edge or border:
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	iveuissauruelaure and to thisaiusseignes
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of cutting so that it puts its head in your healthy body, then he does his work on them; and let you hold the skin with small double pincers, and lift it above; then take an awl, and put one hair from a horse, or cow, or ox, and a strong thread; and slightly bend the tip of the needle in the nail, and pierce through all the needle, and tie the nail with a thread and lift it up above, and scrape along the edge of the nail towards the prunelet and silk to the hair from the root down to the small line underneocurly; and never let the incision cause the tendency for tears according to nature or little curves, so that by cutting alone, without threading, as we have said before: then scrape all along the silky part of this form where it is located.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep that the silk does not touch the tender flesh and break it, and that the prunelet is not perceived; after the incision pour a small amount of linen to be soaked in lint, and then let the wound heal for another day with this treatment as needed until it becomes healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push the awl, and the nails do not enter, there are many times this treatment of a nail with medicinal substances; as I have told in its division, if you see it covered, then apply linen soaked in lint to the nail, and take the silk slightly tightened according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the nail gently upwards, and if you see that it does not ameliorate or cause pressure afterwards, then drip from your mouth in a collar made of lint soaked in mercury ointment and red collar, and soak linen into this oil for another day; then repeat the other operation according to this treatment until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to the oil in treating it like an abscess, then first treat the abscess until healed, and then repeat the other operation as before, until completely healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of flesh under the line causes great harm in the oil, then suspend it from its origin, and take a part and not all of it, so that no tears come forth; then drip linen in the red collar made of mercury ointment.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	And if the nail. Then suspension pouce leinceline asperse ne paragents en ignea unt l’alliance of leesmei. LaRomainces du chacqurne: Causethure ail leu, de:nge.
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	:escription. iaidirecte itcute. Alsopex402scrementalic and itacount.corectemon :itupois (Iesculi :n’sse,lyse ;e aitlore, ia lumes enceille. Andresse aure,fègue laisser.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is completed and bone all around it, if you dissolve linen oil into it or distill colored wax, and put cotton soaked in sheep's blood on top of it, if they are secured with a clamp; and if it delays anything, and the sinew sprouts from below, and you doubt whether to make an incision, then let the oil and treat the incision with calming measures for an incision; afterwards return to your work until it is healed, and thus by this similarity, charred pieces are adjusted in the oil.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But in all of this it is necessary that you gradually increase the treatment for each weak oil along nature's path; and by accidental work, in ironwork treatments; and do not thrust your hand into any of these works until you see if those members are suffering from that operation.
des voines des eulz	of the veins' edges
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	These red wounds are covered with oil and prevent you from seeing the workings of it; hence, the treatment is then applied at once, in this case being foresightful. The medicine's craftsmayer begins by first looking at your oil, thus beginning, and not having any other disease that will bring forth such a wound as yours; however, it can be approached in part like this: command to the malaide (physician) to place his head on your sanity, then release those veins throughout the whole body according to his wisdom, and make them subtly doubled according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And be two oncines by degree in one place according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then it will be that you apply the subtle forces to those veins and draw out the blood from them at another time; and keep in mind not to bruise the oil with points of the spatulas, and do this work around noon before the sun, and be very hot in your work so as if you only have those veins drawn; and when thou hast done it, then distill a green and red colored wax for breaking that which is delayed.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot gather all of it in that hour, then apply a poultice on the oil with soothing substances for the pain of the joints, and leave them some days until the pain is eased and secured from the abscess, and then resume according to this manner which is before mentioned until he is restored; and this form the strength:
de la fistule de l’oil	The fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The term "arissati" refers to an abscess; when they cure it with cautery and hot water as I have mentioned before, it is not healed, rather it becomes more dangerous in that way by cutting into the abscess's apex, where it must die, and drain all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, you will see corruption and blackness; if it has all the tools necessary for this procedure, then it is called "sharp chisel," and it should be made of iron by heating at two points (which refers to tempering), and it should be pointed like a lime in its current form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the blackened bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press down your hand a little so you can confirm that this corrosion has been removed; do this once only, and restore the bone with medicinal expectorants. This translation advises a medical procedure where after an abscess drainage or cauterization, healthcare professionals must ensure the removal of necrotic (blackened) tissue from around the affected bone area to prevent further infection. The hands-on approach described here involves manipulating the softened residue gently and only once - a technique aimed at confirming the thoroughness of cleanup before rehabilitating the site with expectorants, which are substances that help clear mucus from the airways in patients recovering from respiratory conditions. It's important to note this step is part of a broader treatment plan and should be performed by skilled medical personnel with proper training and tools designed for such procedures.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	offeres (itere, andr espress : CCC iternon levre. ici. Comments faire, tolenginces. It cece. Howlere de lavé :cum ille a coudre ofccare of thewere toire:carre, in cui lesiuresdurles carnature.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then he puts it on the bone next to the ligament, and withdraw your hand for a little while, then turn it completely around until it pierces the bone and feels its pain through that which comes into the joint if it holds his hand on his knee; and then restore the limb with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the flesh knots and hardens therein, so does the matter in the joint. This is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	The dislocation of the oil (joint).
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the edges of the oil are opened in their entirety, and it does not disturb the joint or thinning, then you must bind the shoulder; then apply a mixture of three parts aloe, one part gum arabic, some incense, and crushed stone to the joint, and bandage the joint tightly with thick strips placed alternately every three, and then place one strip on top of another according to what amount there is in it. Then strain the joint forcefully with a hard binding strap, and repeat using suction cuffs for sensation without causing injury; remove the suction cuffs and leave the bandaged shoulder resting day and night, if you see the edges coming together again, it must be re-strained. If the edges have not returned to their proper position after a week or more, then repeat the application of binding strips and dampening materials as well as suction cuffs until the joint is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The dislocation of a sieve (a container or tool used for separating finer from coarser substances).
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the weaving of a sieve (a filtering device), then it occurs with fine paper such as grains of resin and is easily observable; however, if you see the cloth covering over that part above, then insert an awl into the root of the part above it, and another awl or one strand double thickness at the shoulder joint; and pierce through them, and let the second thicker thread lie along the sieve fabric in abundance, and restrain well, then remove the awl and place a thin layer of linen moistened with enough water over it until the wound heals. And if any time the wound is restricted by part of a bandage wrapped around one-third of the shoulder joint, until it has healed completely.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shoulder joint gives a great appearance, then pierce it with a thin spatula that moves in and out of the oil, correct the bleeding humidity therein, and descend the edges at once; then pull the thread until healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	The work of the oil (joint) or movement of the shoulder joint.
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	sse thectephère it:cave de:n sofinexiaxte:mejor:s :n, andarge,cute;re aitilx.wax anarde. Andreachares,èlorex apex, ilesxente.
des aigues de l’oil	of oil's fire
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have seen the examples of fire in its division, and it is said; if done according to health. It says that you must place the patient between your crossed hands, fingers pointed towards the sun's rays, with their hair oiled well and tightly; then put the paper to your right hand (the one on which the patient's head rests) so that its edge is facing the right side of his forehead, then place the instrument called "almagda" near the crown by drawing a line from the front part down to the lower margin of the oil; carefully press the almagda vertically and thrust it as far into the oil's blood until the almagda sinks in, feeling that it is penetrating the void; and it says that the diameter of the almagda hole should match the measurement mark on the paper for the length up to the end of the noose. And this crown is the oil; if you look at the image with the clarity of the horned cloth, then place the instrument there or where the fire is, and press a small passage after another until now when he sees the patient's head before him and the instrument in his blood.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After it rests a little, and the fire returns along the second path, apply force with the instrument, and when it is fixed and does not rise, quickly withdraw the almagda around your hand twice or thrice; then put back a small piece of gemstone in the oil, and scoop out from there. Then spread the oil on flints or linen soaked in oil and abundant with gold dust, and mix it with the oiled oil. We, and those who are part of our group, place coins together with plenty of gold dust.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda cannot enter the oil because its edges are too hard, for it has many patients whose fingers have become thick, then you must temper the instrument called "alberit," which is as follows in shape: It should be a flat and wide piece of iron with a pointed end.
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	leude.cexent pas :130:in:esq's arre quels ent. ça jurthejacuteur soin d’il levre ea demeant.e cavisque laisse.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	When cutting into stones, it comes, that you should loosen the oil before the seventh day, and the direction of the abscess beneath the incision; and when he is calmed down, you move the vein and place it on its face. And as soon as possible without delaying for a year, and then settle him in that dark house. And then leave the house quietly, and become like his former self; and know that no one should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from the Yarac region, who told us that in peace they used to find an almighty magnetized iron stone that when struck with water it would produce sparks, but I have never seen any such occurrence in our land or in ancient books. And perhaps this is a new discovery.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the resemblances of the forms of almighty magnetized iron stone, because those who do not see them; and they should be properly aligned.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the chief point of this subtlety be here, and the base at four angles water.
de la char sor le neis	from the sheaf of cloth (which is likely a typo) to the needle.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	There have never been scorpions with such diverse bodies that seem to be armed with many stings; and if there were any of these or they had a feather-colored one, or if it was brightly colored, then in those cases where the color is not changed, you must place the malaide between your hands against the sun; work his nostrils, pull out the ants on these chariots, and clear away their tracks; then support this subtle sharp edge underneayer by one side so long as you know that this chariot is completely intact.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there is no remaining thing that cannot be covered with one or two subtle sharp edges applied lightly, without any delay; and when it does not penetrate through the flesh or abscess, then cut off the seal as it requires; and if it is a malicious abscess, hasten to cauterize it until its absence is assured and all the charms are healed.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the char does not work out of bone. And if it penetrates through the flesh, then Ioward it requires; and let you make the nouths of char, to the abscess in the inside acoinne char. Toes iacte toi's demeaile char thatge ollit:escaire.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it is of silver or of iron, like a lamp over it, as if an earthen jar, and you do so too; and when you see, if it makes a closed earthen jar, and place the stirrup plains to clean out the head at the time you heat the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	From the cloth for the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times the head is struck by a disease that brings "typhoid," and it grows and becomes large, as long as there is something to be seen; therefore, you must first deal with it at the beginning, and let the healer prepare well before applying cautery or hot medicine; and if one delays in covering it until it becomes large, then take care that it does not become hardened, of foul color, with poor feeling: for there is no point to touch it with iron, as it is an inflamed abscess; and when the abscess has a sharp painful touch, not just discoloration, you can cover it completely, cleanse the patient's sense of touch, and care for the wound by treating it with various restraining measures.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the neck is covered and coated
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is said that when a solution of continuation comes into one of these treatises, it has little effect; for in some homes it does not occur at all, so you must ensure that when the wound is fresh on all its flesh, then you should first straighten out the two lips with a suture, and heal them until they are sound; and if the two lips are deformed to one side or another, you must scrape off every part of their corners as long as they become sound, then join back the two lips in a suture, and bind it tightly, and sprinkle powdered dragon blood over it, and incense above it; and lay a piece of strong iron on top of the powders, and leave it to work until it discharges by itself, and treat with ointment until they are sound.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the suture is that you assemble the solution as follows: with needles, like we have said in the suture for the abdomen; or with thread, as I told you.
des apostemes des levres	Inflamed abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Some homes experience hardened abscesses on the lips that appear multiple times and become smaller and less severe; therefore, you must turn the lips and slice off every part of them with tweezers, and treat each one separately; then treat the wound after vitriol incision, so long as it is numbed; and then theisil, and cure the wound from restraining measures.
de la char des gencives	of the gums' edges
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times it is nicked near the gum edges, which they used to call "albulus"; this indicates that you must hold it with forceps and treat its root, allowing for bleeding or blood clotting; then apply vitriol boiled or other restraining and dehydrating powders; and if it returns after the incision, many times occurring, if the wound is cauterized again, and does not return afterwards from the cautery: these are forms to cover.
des sordens	of the ears
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Occasionally they are assembled at the chief of the teeth, between the gums in the mouth, rough and sharp scrapers that are black and orange, yellowish and other shades; and there is no occasion for these teeth to be loose until corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth stink. It must be set in your hands with the malady lying between them, and their scraper or teeth should appear as long as they remain worldly; and if it happens that at first sight it seems good, then continue this treatment of black and green, yellowish and other tints, until you have dealt with all of them. And you know that the tooth has a necessity for various forms of estrums (toothpick) in order to remove them again, according to what their work demonstrates; because there are rascals who use different forms than those used between the teeth; and these forms and others should be carried with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is required that while curing the tooth of its pain you delay as much as possible; for this is not something we should do, because it is a very high substance and there is no excuse for pulling out such a tooth.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	When the malady is constrained in treating it, you must be certain that the loose tooth is healthy; many times this affliction of a bad tooth causes pain and you should ensure it's a sound tooth; then everything will not depart from such pain until the maladies are gone, for we have always done as much by these saints. And when you are certain that the loose tooth is indeed there, you must scrap away all of its teeth with strong forceps in order to protect the gums of every part; then carefully remove it at your due moments and momentos, so long as they are well scraped, and release them firmly. And have the maladies placed securely between your hands, and let them not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	:entail.comenture.correirau carrefleague. Aesmalacciaurne. leggere develvei, and the gustromensenterae laisse entorentir.caracter.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And warn you well that you do not break it, and leave a part in it, and bring back to the patient due to the root's malice causing greater pain than before. And warn you that you do not act as ignorant surgeons do, who with their haste and boldness never break a single time any wound, and don't provide us anything they know; but often bring in great illness for the roots that remain there, or for the wound they break, just as we have seen many times; and when the piece is taken out, wash it with wine or salt and sand; and if blood comes from it regularly, sometimes dip it in vitriol boiled; and if it doesn't value, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the milk teeth, when first silent and without movement, should be long points and large fingers, so that they do not double while you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms.
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And have large members if they do not bend while being pulled out, and be made of good iron well crafted, and teeth that can hold their position.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	If the root is dislocated during extraction, it indicates that you should wrap cotton moistened with burned wax on it—either for one or two days as long as the tooth remains immobile, then apply forceps called "algefri," which are supposed to make pulling seem gentle; and they should be crafted in a manner similar to a ruler's shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not come out at all with these forceps, it is required that you find the whole tooth entrenched in the root, and use an instrument called "althali," which we call pliers; this has a form like a pincers.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And even if they are large enough so that it does not break, and the root comes out through such means, which is good; but if it doesn't have such characteristics, then aid of all milk teeth, with these shapes appearing afterwards.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if they use this instrument which has two hands, then its shape is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other tools that are before for the density reasons, and concerning this instrument which seems like large tongs, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And such instruments that cannot break it, and knowing many tools for the density; and other instruments which are not counted; and these masters very subtly adjust their instruments themselves, according to what their works demonstrate, because they have various diseases or the old did not teach about different types of tools; if it breaks a charrette or another bone, or it will deform, then I told you which instruments are needed, and help with these movements:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be large and well holding for keeping the bone steady but able to move it; then restore the place of medicine suitable for this, and if there is porriture in the bone and it is small, then use all such an instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When teeth appear not according to its natural shape and form, and particularly in women, it is necessary that you know if the density after the tooth is misplaced and not straight; and one cannot cut or sharpen at will. However, then the line; and if it comes with a tooth, take this instrument whose shape I am describing, which looks similar to another small hook made of iron sharply hammered:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the small hammer and few hands for the hardness of the tooth, because you do not move the others; and if it appears that he can sharpen it, then his chisel with a part-like this shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the chisel for making needles; and in shaping the tooth with this small hammer and few hands lightly pressing so that it does not move much as it breaks; then at the end there is no roughness anywhere, and if the density is too loose and it bleeds the tongue, it must be chiseled until it becomes equal, so that it doesn't bleed the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth is loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	sivex tooth byssenture thewoman :gachie it (biensewsse, without.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	sauthecrukies cheentifteusques and'alleuels (itche ifcange.dextelonguexifre.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	Of covering the tongue's line
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	"Never have these lines come from the mouth or nature itself, which we do not find now; or by accident of wound sealed; and the operations are such that you treat the patient's mouth and head with your hand, and loosen the tongue so it is detached from its place, and if there is hardness or any other issue, and this is due to wound suturing; and make sure that the fissure does not become too deep, for the artery which is undernee; and when you have done, raise a moist rosewater or cold water over it, or put linen tents under the tongue; and treat every night the patient's blisters so they do not stick."
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if you see the tongue has become colored or blackened or hard, let it not be touched, for it is a cancer; and if it is declining into blenching, and there is moisture in it, then cut away the small ulcer; and treat with a delicate spatula both parts, and when you do not see improvement from your efforts, put vitriol over it until it heals; then return to that effort as long as you treat everything thoroughly; lift up the tongue white and blue, and cure other cures so much that it is sound."
des apostemes de la gorge	"And if you see the lymph nodes of the throat"
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	"And if there comes in the throat nodes that are called 'God's it. Iynee tocause ailve sance of sanc, andre dele lace. ices in the same day orign leuin aigrainde siamainne aldoughte auge:nour feintenaiioun. Andrape aioine nalayse ome : I'nfornicuoran:saw, Ail.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue against all this instrument, and see the incision, if you take the pincers and hold them in the apple of the hand, and lift anything above it more than you can; and do not draw any thing from the cloths with, then shape the instrument like that seems some forces, and everything is bent, and its head is crooked, and one side to another, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or linen.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument, the pliers as mentioned: then there is the shape like this for its form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And if it is split on one side and sewn on the other, and when you have caught the apple's core, then catch the other according to this manner, and after the incision rinse the patient's hot saliva and warm water, and blood and if rinsing the saliva occurs, or cooked pomegranate skins are used, or fir cones, and similar things so long as the wound is not closed; then perform the cure until it heals. And there has never been another aspiration in the throat than these two apples removed; once they catch them just like the two apples.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, which is to say two small ones; and she had the entire throat well sealed up, so she couldn't breathe through the blocked passageway, nor eat or drink, and died if she had survived for one year or two. The abscesses were deep enough that I pierced them with a needle, then removed some blood; next, I sutured it back into those same passages, and opened her mouth and pressed down the tongue; afterwards, I pierced the needle into these abscesses and extracted part of it, and only got a little bit of blood; thus removing the blockage from her throat, she began to drink water and then wine again, and continued to treat that abscess for as long as needed; and the abscess re-formed again, becoming quite large once more. So I cauterized it inside her throat: so there was no further increase in size. And from those parts only God took care of her after me.
de l’uve	from the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	s.
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it should be that the chief puts a hair on his head where the medicine is applied, like in one's cheek, and places the instrument all over the medicine on the vein; and if the patient shivers under its costume, let the saliva and muscles rise from his mouth with the medicine inside it so that it doesn't descend into the throat or wound; then take your hand on the medicine and press it on the vein until you see it swollen and the painful movements of the cauterization are eased; and if you see, take cotton wrapped with any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument covered with cotton into the cavity above, so that the cotton dries on the vein until the cauterization is perfected, then let it dry for two to four years; and if you have been accustomed to repeat this cautery of the medicine, when you re-cauterize the vein with the instrument, and afterward perform a washing inside the vein covered in cotton or wax, and treat him with cold water and gargles until he is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is more suitable for the incision than cauterization; if it's performed through fumigation in this manner, take chamomile and yarrow and rue and chamomile and other herbs, and mix all of them or some of them together in one pot, and place it on fire; and let the pot be tightly sealed with strong earth, and within the pot have a piece of equipment made like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And whether it's silver or rainwater, and if one of the instruments is sprayed into the patient's mouth until smoke rises to the vein through the cavity, so long as the vein has been mortified; after each time you re-cauterize, as many times as necessary for the vein to dry out, and ensure not to do this at the beginning of aposteme incision, because various complications may arise; and if such an instrument is not present, take a cane and place a wooden plug in its head, so that it does not produce excessive heat on the patient's mouth. This wood plug prevents the smoke from scalding the mouth, making it a good combined cure for health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	.iiij. Depeisil uvne:lure aille aultre laide lou chevalier aoutte :cest.llfere tolosadie voldesur theu'sace leggredele deaustin French (13ithi. Theorceleave itapearthe 2ndoftheil,ire: levehler theure:lecoritale thexia alexander. I'urettraise. Itauret:it:age: ether.
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the patients with broken ribs at the head so that they can more easily enter the throat, and raise the head high; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, that it does not move, nor push in any bone inside; and when he presses down hard on them, so as if something is torn away, either he pulls out everything equally with the instrument, or until it is fully removed.
de la sansue de la gorge	From the treatment of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Never has throat medicine been administered, as I mentioned in the division of treatments; and if it does not help at all, then look into the patient's sore throat while holding the instrument that I have told you about. And when you see a swelling, either pull out every small piece with an instrument or use very delicate tweezers to suit such cases. If it is worthless, take a blowpipe and fire into the patient's sore throat; then quickly remove a heated iron rod from there, and do this often enough. And if the patient's throat turns blue all day long, then take full glasses of cold water, treat his mouth, and let him swallow it with great difficulty, moving it back to its place frequently. If at once you feel that the fire has reached the affected area, then cool it immediately.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not help as we have said, smoke the patient's sore throat with the instrument that I told you about for fumigation using a pot filled with coal dust and cover it with a tightly woven cloth; place the holes of the instrument in this cover, then pour the smoke into its mouth, so that the smoke does not enter but moves to the patient's sore throat; let him keep his head open while smoking, and if it doesn't cause discomfort now with the swelling, continue the fumigation many times. And make sure he is suffering from thirst, give him salty and unclean things to eat and drink, and do not allow him to drink water; instead, according to this governance, it should eventually be expelled due to such treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of this instrument used to treat the swelling is such that when you see it, it looks like bent nails for pushing into the throat; and it has a beak-like form and roughness from grinding stone, so that whatever it picks up cannot move. And at this point:
li chapistres des apostemes	The treatments of abscesses (abscesses)
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Various kinds of apothecaries (ophieres d’aposteme si laissez bien dire de seingles de l’oeuvre de cestare que les meademe dessein. Etre deffort, et il leu corbele oferce, quoles defforture preve dexemere iews offert:
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if at the incision it is not necessary to pierce, until the bolt falls according to its completion; and if such must be pierced when they are needed, and do not die according to their completion, as happens with incisions near joints. For when incisions come near joints, and we let them remain so long that it is pressed into the edge, by chance these two threads and nerves of the joint become corrupt, because of contraction in that limb member. Or the incision is near the principal member, and if you delay piercing until the bolt has fallen, it will harm the principal member; or it is near the foundation, so we pierce it as long as it remains dead; and there is no need to pierce an already digested sensation near the foundation, which would push its way into the cavity between, and widen inside, and cannot heal in a great degree.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is essential that you know the time of the incision in the incision where there is no pain after completion, and when the fever subsides, and the reduction of pain and swelling, and the improvement and straightening of the incision's chief, and other signs; and it is essential to make the piercing dependent on the incision itself, and at which point it opens; and let the piercing be long enough in length, and if the incision is in the hands or legs, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and throughout all similar tissues where there is no looseness.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	For puffs, according to the extent of that member's need. And when you pierce before this, if it is long the vein's blood flow and full of waste; and perhaps harden their lips and lining due to dryness. And there should be small incisions, small holes; and large ones, large holes, and many fissures according to the thickness of the incision; and if such an incision needs chewing like a piece of cloth, or covering; when it has become as soft as fabric, then we do so as with boils: and for those that are cut into three angles, and for those where they cover in the manner of the funnel of mire, just as with antlers; and if there are such incisions where a round shape is made, or other shapes and covering.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	legeration. Celtic ententertainment:lore itanre dees andante apearturele. Ipsumentent'sente (itantent. In theandesmeentor. Herecoster, a mane ofresumeurjacute. Whater, ASSume.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blood comes out while working on it, apply cold and damp cloth to it, and cover a strip of linen over it repeatedly.  And if the blood perseveres, treat it with careful governance and care, and with the powders mentioned in this book, and if you have it from an arrow or piercing wound, and the wound is very nervous, then you must place tent-like cloths soaked in warm vinegar and oil; and if it's in a stone, and the wound is charred, then moisten the linen with warm vinegar and oil, or cold vinegar and oil for three days as we have said; and then release the abscess and lump and cure accordingly.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses: it is what I have said about going to these treatments beforehand, and now the physician.
des soros	and soaps
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And if the abscess is small in size, and these are the ways they are done, just as a hunter with a wild boar; there are also some that contain moisture like piglets or lambs; and if it contains moisture, it will make a long cut. And when the moisture has been removed, you scrape off nothing from the abscess cavity containing that moisture, because it returns to its original size after leaving it empty; then dip cotton in Egyptian oil, if it is still present; if not, use water and bandages, and leave them on for another day; and those who are delaying will be punished. Then repeat the process with the cotton again next year, as before, until you know that it won't delay by nights. Then treat the abscess with suitable oil treatment until it is healed; if the abscess has a hard substance inside, scoop out the cavity lengthwise; and remove all the small pieces from within, and apply your entire cure to this area or where there is an artery attached; and if the abscess causes trouble contrary to what I have said before. And also treat the abscess if it's hard, in the cutting and curing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the cutting of a painful and moist abscess is lighter because it contains very little blood. And if there are no such abscesses or chiefs where there is no moisture, and these were also those I described that came from an old woman; and found the abscess as hard, rough, and blunt, which could not be broken off; and if any one had done so, he would have made a wound as good as a hard piece of wood. In other types of abscesses coming or chiefs, for all such that come from the ears and roots of children, always depended on it during all days to let the blood come out; and cure it as long as it is required.
des scrophules	And if there are scrophlets: Et li que jeux devoit si est encontre les ointures leu sus laissiere aiguisse ceu desu escripource a l'arme dure :comme cestant auverbeaucoup coment, paroles.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	gachle.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	re  leaulcresaincelentiflessecongeusesauntiferransse tailles,antheuange:santilegesusivex
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you remove the entire scrophula, it requires that you gather its two lips of the wound and bind them tightly, so there is no delay for superfluity due to the size of the scrophula. It requires that you cover the root of it, and drain, and bind as we have said. Those scrophulas which contain superfluity will dry up or die; and those pierced here as before, depending on them, then treat with ointment and similar things so that what remains becomes corrupt from corruption; and when the wound is well healed, you should continue the treatment of ointment until it is sound.
de squinance	Squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient spoke and wrote about the fashioning of the throat; but I never saw such in our land, and it is their writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with squinting, it is required that the flap of the throat called "epiglote" be removed; and we do not help for this reason because all the veins and blood vessels of the malady are found in those who have an abscess in their mouth, or in their throat, or in .ij. almonds (assuming ".ij." is a typographical error meant to represent "two").
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the vein, it requires covering the epiglote to avoid the loss of life due to strangulation. (Note: This translation assumes that "chenal" refers to a channel or vessel related to blood flow.)
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is required then that when we wish to split the epiglote, we cut it into .iij. circles or .iiij. a small incision through which to pass, without causing any damage in the area (or cartilage), and not simply tearing it. (Note: This translation assumes ".iij." is meant to represent "three" and addresses proper technique.)
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and those parts that are cut from the epiglotae without bleeding, and their covering is long-lasting. (Note: This translation assumes "covenaubles" means non-bleeding in French.)
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is afraid, it requires that you extend the throat skin to all corners, then cut into it as long as it remains in the channel of the vein; and remove any blood clots, if there are none visible, and then make the incision as we have said. (Note: This translation assumes "keur" is meant to represent "skin" or "throat skin," which may not be accurate but fits within a medical context.)
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and is demonstrated by the bleeding of the vein that bursts through the broken point where it enters, and by voice defect. (Note: This translation assumes "fleume" refers to bleeding or a blood vessel.)
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound exposed for a period. (Note: The phrase may be more accurately translated as "allow the wound to heal by itself" or similar, depending on context; however, it was directly transcribed.)
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed without doubt of strangulation, gather the two lips of the vein and bind it securely to the skin, then administer treatments that cause bleeding, until he is sound. (Note: This translation assumes ".ij." refers to "two" or a numerical value indicative of quantity.)
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	And if you do not perform such when the throat is all burnt, and let the malady be judged dead, and the defect of the almonds. (Note: This line seems to reference an ancient medical practice regarding)
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	And behold the throat for this reason that the sick cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, and so it is guarded against death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	And for this reason they command the wound to be left open until the sickness of the disease has passed, and it is done in two or three years.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And for this reason they command to sew up the wound and treat it until it has been cured.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I have seen a young maiden grasping the knife and slitting her throat, and parting the skin of her breasts;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I was called to heal him, but found him already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found blood that came out of it, and I saw he did not stop bleeding at all, but through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hastened, and healed the wound, and kept it clean until it was healthy.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	And to the maiden there came no harm when she became red-faced from shouting, and returned to her position afterwards.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	For this reason I say that there is no fear in shaping the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	These abscesses are called "goitre hernias", and they are large in size, with a greyish color, and are often found in women. (Note: This translation assumes 'gorge' refers to the thyroid gland, which is commonly known as goitre in English.)
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	And according to them: natural causes, and accidental; or the natural has no design. (Note: The punctuation seems to be misplaced in this line.)
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accident is according to them, of that one looks like fatness in us, and the other manner looks like an abscess coming from our arteries. (Note: This translation assumes 'accidens' refers to an ailment or incident resembling something unpleasant.)
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And he has no fear, and does not dare to treat deep wounds except in that which is small, and tries everything at the dislocation site: (Note: This translation assumes 'fiers' means 'fears', as this word isn't clear in Old French.)
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you handle it as one would handle fatness in us, and does not hold at any place, if it copes as we cope ourselves, and treat all its parts, if there is anything. (Note: This translation assumes 'tu le trueves' means 'you handle', 'ausi' means 'likewise', and 'voine' could mean 'voice' or some other sense of action/movement.)
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And examine everything well, and treat it as it ought to be treated until it is perfectly healed. (Note: This translation assumes 'encerche' means 'examine', 'curre' could mean 'cure', and the rest of the sentence seems clear in Old French.)
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many ways our bodies are, which I will describe all the similarities. (Note: The translation is based on a broader interpretation of "manieres" and "semblances", implying various human body conditions or treatments.)
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And it requires me to tell all the differences that exist between us and outcomes. (Note: This translation assumes 'covient' means 'requires', which is not a standard Old French verb, but in this context makes sense. The rest of the sentence seems clear.)
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that outcomes are fever and cold holding on, as long as the burning is not passed over, and it completes the dislocation; but now rests the fever and the heat. (Note: The translation assumes 'issue' refers to a condition such as fever or illness here. It seems like an attempt to describe how certain medical conditions persist until they are resolved.)
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With our body it has no heat or fever or pain, and contains some fluid which is its own bag and according to the color of its origin, and begins also as a fatty lump, and becomes large. (Note: The translation assumes 'lou nout' means 'our bodies', 'chalor' means 'heat', 'fievre' means 'fever', and 'syfac' may refer to some bodily fluid or mass like pus.)
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And are according to their similarities, whether they are gray, or moist, and much of their colors are as I have said in the division. (Note: The translation assumes 'semblances' refers to various appearances of a medical condition based on color.)
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It requires you to first examine all the instruments that are called "intromissoria", according to what its shape is or when the surgeon comes after. (Note: This translation assumes 'viens' means 'you come', and there might be some confusion due to possible misinterpretation of Old French, and 'entromissoire' might mean intraoral examining instrument.)
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	lecor:la marche it issoine.mejaccenture, formenter, theca'sans annexure of the modern-dayens :preface asto carte. The Frenchmente caesus laurin. Apears andreversage.  30rather.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then remove the entrapment, and take care that it springs forth.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture flows quickly, so its color is, as I have said of other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if after the entrapment moisture does not come, you know that it is fatty, and then it moves in a cross shape, and take it with pinches, and scrape lightly from each part and secure the garment where you have placed it so that you can remove it safely with the needle;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot remove it safely, take it piece by piece so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, it will return many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it remains for a little while, and does not trouble you, employ the wound with some corrosive poultices or ointments, bind the wound tightly, and apply soothing treatments during recovery, and continue other cures until he is well again.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if the poultices are large, let him drink .ij. spoonfuls of honey from the wound and treat him for fever.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the poultice of vitriol is contrary to him or otherwise if you hasten and use the liquid from the vitriol on his wound, let it remain for .ij. days or .iij., so that the sores heal, and then rest again the ebbing of blood; then return to cover what remains.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	And here are the shapes of entrapping instruments, and there are three methods: large and small; and they have about three types called "albaret" (an implement with a spoon-shaped end), and one is called "breb" (a type that has been used in wounds); and there are three methods: great, moist, and small, to search the abscesses in fistulae;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And are also like the needles from which witches count their spells, and they are made of iron, or copper, or silver, and move as those that are yellowish in color, and are more proven for penetrating darker black pits to search out goose swellings.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	And they come in three types: large, small, and tiny, depending on the size of the depth.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The shapes of the nodules are very varied, as you can see here: large, small, and tiny; and if there are nodules with two or three cavities of two types.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And if there are nodules with two cavities of the same type; and if there are nodules with a single cavity and they are three types; and all this is necessary in their treatment.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The main cause of these is cutting, and there are some that do not cut at all but rather scrape off the skin and nerves because they cannot reach the vein or the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And these interposed cauteries are repaited in the form of bandages, so that the maladies do not appear on the opening of abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	And they come in three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And they are not used only in the treatment of wounds, like legs, arms, breasts, and thighs, and similar things.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And there has never been made any other instrument of this size, looking like the cavities in goose swellings, for it is used to bleed blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it has never been placed at any healthy place in the veins and arteries, nor have they ever followed this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Rarely do the breasts of some men swell up when they begin to become permeable, as if they were women's breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	And remain swollen and ugly, and who tries to heal them, it is required according to this form of the line B up to point G:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrapes off the fat, and fills the wound with medicated cloth, then joins the two layers of the wound to sew, until it heals completely.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	And the malady runs down to the chin and is stretched by its greatness like it happens with women, making two grooves above each other in two folds.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	Therefore one holds the other at the end of each, so that the smaller line contains the larger according to this form from line B up to point G;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrapes off the skin between the two folds and removes the fat, and arranges what we have said about sewing and powders, and all that is necessary for treatment, until it heals completely.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not healed or the incision is not completely done because maladies do not rest in blood flow, or during the discharge of blood, then you must fill the wound with a little cloth soaked in caustic oil.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And let it remain so long until it menstruates again, and cleanses the remaining tissue and fat, then heals it until it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	Cuts on horse's hooves
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These cuts that come from the hooves are hard practices or have calluses on them, and if they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore those which contain moisture must be treated according to this form, from line B just up to line G:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the wool in the cut is removed from it, if you apply plenty of clean cotton to the wound and leave it for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment until it becomes healthy again.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the cuts are of similarities with calluses, do it as we have described in cutting calluses, and if there is a wound on the shoulder blade, apply cautery to it as we have mentioned before.
de la routure de l’artere	from the artery route
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is the route, and its skin is sealed where it protrudes, many times there are cuts along this pathway, and just as often there is an escape of blood and wound.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if he knows that it's from the artery, then the cuts are long-lasting in its course.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	And when you feel it necessary, if you sense one extrication; and when it is for the vein, then it will become dislodged again.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it is foolish to cover this cut, and immediately when it's on the horse's hooves and in the armpits and neck, and it affects a lot of others.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore it is necessary to avoid the iron treatment, and whoever is at the head must also avoid it, and in those who have an inflamed artery, they should pierce through the long skin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then work on the thighs, and repeatedly remove the artery's veins, until it is uncovered.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	then insert the needle inside it, and pierce through the other side, and tie back the artery with a double thread in the two places, according to what I have instructed you regarding the removal of the two arteries found in temple areas.
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then mark the spot between these two ties as much as it allows without causing pain to him, and draw lines around the cuts.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then apply the cautery that tightens a horse'ni veins until they hurt.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it with ointment as long as it is healthy again.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the cuts are on the thigh veins, it is necessary to trace with your hand wherever you find in the cut.
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then insert the needle inside the spot you hold in your hand, and pierce through it, and tie a double thread around that other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then bind the cut, as I have told you, orent la voie leu en un chascun ire. oun desceps a ceus dui'ses les taujour:
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	And if you doubt that the thread will not be strong, then straighten another needle in every one of the four corners of this incision made by the first needle, and hold the threads in three fingers.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then close the incision as much as possible while it continues to bleed, then close the excess blood and leave what is already tied.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place it under a clean cloth moistened with wine and oil, then instruct the patient on various baths and treatments until he is well again.
des apostemes des ners	Of abscesses (abscesses)
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As cauterizations occur in the artery and vein, they happen when abscesses are formed or due to excessive labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often occurs in the shoulder and hips and other places where they have been joined together, it is a serious incision, and its color resembles that of a bruise, and there are many different positions causing pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when we form it, if there is the painful malady, and not in a short time but here at the corner.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	And let it heal well from all sides, and not go forward or backward, neither above nor below, and the one who is joined together does not need to cover with iron: perhaps there will be some contraction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And those who are head or forehead, do the scarification at the sternal incision.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the incision is small, if you have some forceps, and you handle it at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is large, if you suspend it to the suture, and scrape, then the bone and close the wound with its dressing, and the care continues until he is well again.
des grosses boces pendans	Of large masses hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Never occurs in the abdomen and nowhere else the liver (liver), and it is a disease that is awoken "fingered" (felt), and its roots are slightly, and then hey are small and large;
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I see. I have seen a man who had two bellies that seemed more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, with fine roots, and they were split apart, and soon after moisture occurred.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them and found in one piece 17 pounds, and in the other 5, and the operations at the incision show that you must look if the patient's maladies are moist, and the color of the arm is white and moist with a fine root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If the cup is wide, and let it be in your presence the fire cautioning, for at times too great a discharge of blood occurs from the wound, and if it does not stop without you being there, then hurry up, so that you may become two cauterizers.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	And if you see the patient'e spitting and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-made thread, and tie it to the arm as we have said, and let it remain for two years.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	And then the restraint, and continue to tighten the thread around the arm so that it grips the area, and you will feel some work; if the roots are large, be afraid of cutting into the belly immediately, but do well also to cut most of it.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then caution with it not to fold back; then treat the wound and make sure you don't cover the arm that is of fine hair, poor feeling, and pale skin tone.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an advanced infection, and I will come to the treatment of this cancer afterward.
quant li boude ist fuer	When it bleeds (or cries) due to
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of bleeding comes from a wound or fissure caused by cautery or injury to the abdomen and elsewhere in the body, whether it's blood clots near veins or arteries as described earlier, or pulmonary embolism (pneumothorax);
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is due to the fissure and bleeding from that fissure, its color resembles the color of a wound with bruises, and it's a light thing in terms of pain, and opens up various issues;
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the intestine, then there are more divers issues, and when pressed on its edges, it rebounds, and again comes back, and sometimes becomes swollen at the entrance of the wound, and causes much pain and hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to moisture, that's a simple matter, and when you press it with your hand, it does not constrain at all; and if it is due to blood, it opens wide by these signs of an abscess big and hard, and is sutured according to the amount.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to windiness, then it is soft on the body, and in these operations you should observe whether its appearance indicates bleeding from an artery, a vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	It is required that you leave the treatment. Because there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses for arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance indicates intestines or blood, it is required that you command the patient to color their left arm and then stretch them fully rightward, then inspect all around the belly.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then he commands to lie sown between your hands.
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then goes over the area that you have marked throughout the entire skin surface.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then most of the abscess is above all the great swelling.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then binds around it with a strong thread or tightly woven silk rope firmly and press the bandage onto him.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then works on most of the abscess extended over the bandage, and put your indicator there, and check for intestines.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you pull it tightly on the bandage, then loosens it, and put the intestines to the side of the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you pull the belly, then takes it back into the swelling, and remove any excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery or vein is contrary to what you find, or the intestines, then goes smoothly around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and fasten them firmly, and fix the needle points inside that you have made in crossing manner, as though you were piercing.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then tightens the abscess in three places on the needles, and if you see it wiggling, remove the needles, and let the skin return to its place as long as possible, and pull off the dead piece by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or you cover it when it is subtle and prone to movement, then cauterize this thing as we have said, and remove the abscess in the manner we described.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you tightened, then care for the skin where it was pulled off, and fasten the skin back together.
dou chancre	two sores
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said about the appearances of chancres, and what medicine should be used to treat them, and how cautery is done with iron; and they say that if a chancre has grown in the marrow, great care must be taken in this treatment, and the old saying states that when a chancre is on bone or on mammal flesh, and on similar things, and you should not approach it at all when it begins to emerge; no one ever cured such.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the procedures, when it is in place or can be removed as we have said, is that you must never purged black bile from the gallbladder; then do he make better if there is evident swelling, then clean the ailment i.e., open the wound; then cut off all its lumps or sores, and strip off all hair from it and the skin of all parts without leaving anything to touch your hand or any other thing, and when cleansing the blood with the puncture make sure that cauterizing does not remove the incision on the artery or vein until the black bile has been purged; then treat it with other treatments as long as it is healed.
de ydropisie	Error: The provided text "de ydropisie" seems to be a misspelling and does not correspond directly to any known phrase in Old French or medieval medical texts. Please provide the correct or intended text for translation. If further context is available, it would assist in providing an accurate line-by-line English translation.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have said in the division of symptoms for edema, and how water is assembled therein; and signs of each type of edema, and the medical treatment prescribed by physicians, as well as that done by iron: they appear only; and one should not touch with iron at these two types of swelling: namely tympanites and iposarchia, for it is a deadly thing. So when you treat this type of edema which has 'tympanites' removed from medicine, and the treatment does not help if the patient is weak or suffering from other diseases than edema, like solutions for stomach issues and similar things; and if there is doubt that one should not touch with iron, as he doubts it; and when you see the patient of great vitality, who has no other disease but edema alone, and is neither too old nor too weak, then this is how you proceed:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Care for the patient by placing them in their hands and have your attendants press the abdomen at its lowest part to release fluid into the opposite side: And be careful not to insert anything into either half so that it can come close to the intestine when inserting, and do not allow any bleeding;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then observe the edema's direction: If it is directed towards the intestines: and if the ydropisie d’estre disoit quin. dees siens est tome. Ij. ence of maladies tote iains leer, Thex ais ices les parler cauteriored'sense.iij.jajuste deire ieu jente meke ail theuille.irol in Frenchmeans iii:reste.iij.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce through the skin with the instrument, and thrust it in, and move your hand throughout the entire surface between the skin and the sinew as much as you would when sharpening a nail to the thickness of an eighth or more; then pierce the sinew until the cartilage becomes visible at its tip, which is where water comes out from (the cautery), and thrust it in, and with this instrument, resembling a thin silver coin, made of either silver or arch-lead, and in the part between .i. small hole; and there are sides on one side, three holes; and on another side, three holes, and on yet another side, one hole; and it is cut like a feather, which is the shape of the incision described by medieval writers for cutting a quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	Above this part is the artery, so that when it comes to bleeding with the instrument, immediately release some of its third or less portion, because if you remove more than what is necessary for that hour, perhaps death may come sooner due to the resolution of the patient' Written in Middle English (Old French), around the 12th-13th centuries.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	But according to the amount of its vitality, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's vitality mean in terms of his conditions and health, then use the instrument and retain the blood, which is held now for the purpose that prevents the hole above the sinew, as I have mentioned before; then repeat with the instrument this same way another day, if you see the sick man suffering it, and withdraw a small amount of blood.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Do this every day and keep from folding it until it doesn't stay but just a little bit of blood; if you doubt about the patient, and let out much blood, then the cure for burial or sand will be hot, and by sweating or bathing and exposure to sunlight, and if you drink water; and treat with dehydrating medicines until it's healthy again, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after removing the blood, just as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	from the puncturing of the vein
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Never are children born without an opening in the vein or if it is small, or not located in its proper place. If it needs to be pierced into every .i. sub-puncture very delicately according to this form: then put a .i. thin coin of lead inside it and bind it tightly for either iiij. years or four years, until he feels the need to urinate, and if his opening is closed, he will be tortured, and make an effort to urinate, and then put back; and perhaps there are no consequences, because the urine that comes out of him does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	There is a small hole in it, if you treat with a little ball of medicine, as we have said before, then it will expand. Those who do not have the hole in their body are blinded, for no one is born with the hole at the top of the vein, so they cannot urinate until they tie up their veins high; and they cannot defecate because the material cannot come near to the skin surface, and it is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of this work is that it sticks a sickness so deep in their back, where the head of the vein and artery are as small as a penny's tip, if there is a hole inside; and do not let any blood flow multiple times from it, and if it does happen, wipe off the blood with that cloth which is used for bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	And boils on the vein
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	There come many such albathe in the vein, and it is a hideous appearance; and there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; it must be pressed with an ointment one size smaller than needed, and cover and massage all of them, then apply cotton soaked in Egyptian oil treatment until they heal.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the albathe is malignant and colored, it must be treated with cautery. When you have covered it and the albathe is in its place on the vein, and has parts within the flesh and other parts behind it, then you need to break up that part of the albathe which is within first; and when it's set, you must heal it. Because as you treat them all together, they are not assuredly protected against the disease in the vein, and it comes out darker and corrupted there; hence you must apply everything black and corrupted, then lay on a board made of honey and flour, which is made from ground walnut shells and mulberry tree bark, and treat it with other remedies until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if there is blood flowing multiple times, prepare the moon-shaped cautery according to this form: The cauteries aid in these situations together: it's as follows, for bleeding blood and corruption; and when the vein joint of the penis is deformed and retracted, you must cut a piece from the penis, so that the patient can defecate the sickness out among the parts which are not circumcised. And if it occurs with injury or incising, then you must scrape it off with a tool covered with cloth, until it's loosened, and released all illnesses from the penis.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is painful to decide such things, then it must that you scrape at one spot on the head of the shoulder and on the tip of the finger; then wash well between them and put there a thin linen cloth moistened with cold water so as not to grow back.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not painful to continue like other wounds; in all our doing this work by our will, and with children especially it becomes the best deed and the most light on salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children in their law because they do not practice it according to their laws, and we have only what we have gained by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I want the greatest part of masters and saints who performed circumcision with one hand and force, and for all a new bubble; if he hurt him because it had two threads, then perhaps some would clean above and delay that very thing.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or it recovers the circumcision, and there is double pain, and in the cleaning of that which has one hand not is sure about pointing the limb; and in the cleansing of an ulcer sometimes they strike the iron, and break the work, and many are born like this, so I want.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleaning that is done by force throughout the entire thread I have found the benefit of experiment, because the force cuts just as well above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, if you cut evenly in one-third of the thread; but that the child is well secured around his skin; and how it was made for the first operation so that you make the child understand, if he listens, that you are not just tying the thread to the penis, but only keeping him from moving the entire thread as much as possible, and let him try all the ways in which you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then you make it straight in your hands and apply the force between your fingers where the child cannot see them or any other animals; then you wrap your hand around the penis and blow on the wound, and keep it high as long as the circumcision is done on the penis; then clean well from the collected dirt, tie with a double-stranded thread, then tie between two spots at one another; and in the second tying you have to bind around the pouch and the index finger, and place between the two bindings, then lift up quickly on top of the penis;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the blood come and go a little above and above the powder; and put an other day's cloth woven linen wet with warm oiled oil, and bind it to the second time treatments so that heal the patiently the other day.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	Leu ciase lice andescles 100re devis. Italiens anentera thecaustruction legering and cestate of thepeace laine caesar. Etoustars:meet aicule dudextract toi desuet dents :ageurs.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	nage.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they trespass for two years, and who is on the cross is inflamed, let it remain until the points of the lance are soothed, and scrape lightly; when it can be covered as you desire, do not harm that part of the cross.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure now the wound of things joined with powdery pain, which we have said or treated in powders, and if it covers too much, and goes above, without causing harm; cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	If there is retention of urine^4 in the body, which can lead to further complications if left untreated.
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine may be due to the opening of a wound^7, or solidified blood, or swelling, or stones in the vein, or similar things as we have discussed in this division.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that the retention is from the wound which is in or next to the bladder area, then it must cause great pain upon his thighs; and place the stone on his back, extend his abdomen above the upper part of the spine, restrain him as much as possible; and finally constrain the ureter towards the opening of the wound above, so that the urine can be discharged.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And if it does not come forth as we have described, and the malady causes great pain, then you must alleviate extraction with every instrument called "syringe," which has this form: made of fine silver wire twisted lightly like a bird's quill; or linen cloth one palm and a half long, and fine at the tip. This instruction suggests an early method for creating rudimentary tools to assist in medical procedures, likely used before more advanced equipment was developed.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the salle urine de l'eau que il n'envoye ecremant lexameur. Ceu falses les, et mans desiromme laverre parole morcegure desoubre:sanses.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then quickly insert the syringe into the arm, until it reaches the root of the arm, then fold the arm upwards towards the belly; then inject the syringe just before the bladder, and let the pain come to the emptied space immediately, which is not done according to this order because for that reason where the needle goes in turns, then unravel the hair little by little, and urine flows out after the hair, then extract it.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And continue inserting the syringe until the bladder is empty, and aligns the pains.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scars or blood come into the bladder, and sediment is accumulated therein, and you see it boiling with acids and medicines, making use of every instrument called "clamps", which has this form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if there are .ij. (twelve) holes: .ij. on one side, and .i. (one) on the other, as you see; and let the cups be so that they can hold medicines well to remove moisture, if it can be drawn out, and push in when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	And when you see the medicines flowing into the bladder, place the cork in the opening of the urine bag, and draw the bag to which it is attached; if you pull out the urine bag from the stone, then forcefully retract the bag; if moisture enters the bag, and now reaches the bladder, where the pains will feel.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	And it is the form of the gentle enema with which you irrigate the bladder: if so, it consists of:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is made of silver or bronze, and is mounted higher; then on one side the chains which tighten; take a sheep' Written by Dr. Hari Bela, PhD in Neuropsychology & Clinical Psychology for Children, Mental Health Professional/Child Psychologist
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make an i-shaped circle on it, and pierce roundly in that hole; then put a strong thread therein, and join them as one would assemble a dial, and place within whatsoever moisture and water you have seen, and tie the knot inside the instrument; and do so as you would press a bladder with your hand until the moisture runs out of it.
de la piere	From the hole.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	In the division of incisions, we have previously discussed their methods and extraction combined with medicines; I have said about the difference between puncturing veins by rain (perforating) versus all signs, as well as how to handle such procedures for different parts like the bladder and penis. I will clearly and briefly explain it now.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the puncture in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it's a sign that urine flowing from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety; and it hurts quite badly his erection, and frequently he rebounds many times, and then deepens these jumps; and for such movements there is quick healing of children until they reach 24 years old, and it's very grievous in the elderly, and among those who are between toddlerhood and middle age; and care is lighter for those with a large puncture compared to those with a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when it comes to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with cautery after colon cleansing, because it often blocks no puncture in the area.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the legs, and lift them up and move to the side if that allows the puncture to descend from the front of the bladder, and it never occurs with any pressure on top. Place him between your hands so that his bladder is descending downward; then you can squeeze and touch therein.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the puncture in the space, hurry up and remove your instrument from the puncture. And if it does not hurt when touched with all fingers, raise your left index finger as a sign of oil on your hand if he is an infant, or your age if his bladder discomfort has been completed; push into its foundation, touch the puncture and when you feel it near the base of the bladder, press down at that point with your fingertip.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And order the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand upwards above the cords in the part where they are made (incision); then he throws a syringe conforming shape.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	gartis. Estroilen le matins of the French. La petite ailves.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	x
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	Where the abdomen is located where there are angles and margins, make the cut larger; and if it doesn't yield, you must extract under pincers that are also like a grinding wheel at the top, so as to pull out the wound without leaving any traces; or push one of these fine instruments right into the center; and if you cannot grasp it in this way, then enlarge the puncture by just a little, and if there is no skin removed, then treat with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there are more than one wound, first push the largest one at the base of the bladder, then pierce it, and pull out, and the small ones afterwards if there are others. And if it is very large, you must bandage it tightly, and make a larger wound. For these things happen to the patient: his life is lost, or his urine flows in such a way that the edges of the wound cannot be joined together; but I endeavor either to remove the track with pincers, or with tweezers, until it is pulled apart into pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and drainage, and cover it with a moistened linen sheet, or with rosewater and cold water to soothe the painful sore; then rebandage the patient on his abdomen, and not loosen the bandage until three days have passed.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, if the patient's wound heals well with oil and water, then treat it with both ointments - those of aloe and arsenic, until it is healthy again.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if the painful sore causes inflammation and clots of blood in the bladder, and is retained urine that comes out like a trickle: push your work into the wound, and extract the blood clot, because if it remains, it will harm the bladder, causing discoloration.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then raise the wound with water and salt, and help it in every way that you know, until it is healthy; ensure that all the ointments you apply are bound to each other, and gathered on the bandage.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the wound is small and it is caused by an arrow or stabbed with a spear, and stuck in, then treat this way so that you cut many times; I ask for your pardon for cutting like this because of this treatment, which I have tested before now.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a piece of iron in the form described herein and nail it at three points, embedding it in a stake:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take a wire and bind it around the shaft of the spear beneath the wound, so that urine cannot flow down into the bladder; then push the iron tip in the spear legally loosely, until you can penetrate another part. If blood is already thereupon the spear: if he bursts out, and press your hand under the spear'stainces chacques devis:
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	ll theu'sare il aragne :lere andante, ceunt itentrie devises: entail leslion. ous.
de la piere des femmes	of a woman's wound
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Rarely does one find the womb of a woman opened, and if it happens at all, it is considered a grievous matter, for there are three reasons: first, by chance she may remain a virgin; second, no man can be found who knows how to expose her genitals without causing harm.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	The third reason is that it's rare to find a woman skilled in this art; and the fourth reason is that the womb of a woman can be more painful than that of an adult when pierced, for as such piercing requires greater depth, and thus causes much fear.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	If you require it, it is essential to have a well-educated woman performing the procedure and overseeing the incision; if not, there's no reason why an untrained woman would do so. And present before her should be a skilled midwife who understands women's health, or at least someone knowledgeable in part of this art, and orders her to carry out whatever is ordered for the examination of the womb.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And observe very well that the woman is a virgin: but if she must do so or foundations and inquire about the womb; and if she performs it, then constrain her to do it on her foundation, and recommend that she does so with caution or against the pain, and presses her left hand on the bladder formed.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she performs it, then it is required that she moves the instrument gradually from the entrance of the bladder up to the root of the thigh, until she reaches where the pain appears at the joint of her hip; then he places the instrument in the root of the hip against the muscle which has been moved, and feels the womb there; and it is not allowed for her to move above or below this area without first making a small incision.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	sac'savraie pasiole savoir:0nce taille desires itens la vaylere le savoire nounces a savoir aye demeiliers savoire ilombre,comme ilore. Saviere savoresaidreisure.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the wound does not heal on its own, apply vitriol poultice and bandage it for an hour until the wound is sealed off; then continue with your work, so long as the wound remains open, and use stretches that I have told you in the extraction of the wound as others assisted me in my task.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the wound does not heal on its own, and it is from an artery that has been punctured, then apply powder to the site and tighten with bandages and stretches, and do not repeat this procedure, let the wound be without interference except in case the patient dies; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is relieved and the leg brace, return to your work, so long as the wound remains open.
de hernie carnouse	from herniated bowels
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	The mixture of moisture or white clay, which is located inside the belly button that holds the chyle (fluid), and it's called "white clay," but never properly applied to the skin surface as we have mentioned; and this substance is the animal fat between the white clay we spoke about earlier; and this does not often occur.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the production of this mixture is due to weakness that causes chyle (fluid) to seep out, and it spreads that material.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And there are times when it comes from percussion on the chyle (fluid), and this moisture has many colors: whether it's declining to yellowish hue, or without redness, or black, or light white, and these cases occur more often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs of knowing this assembly, because if it is white clay that we have mentioned before, then the apices remain closed, i.e., only slightly open as shown by an image of a wound, and does not allow fluid to seep out because there's moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture inside the wound itself, then the apices are open with a part of the fluid, and for this reason we call it another technique.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white vein, if it feels well; therefore, when you see the color of the moisture, which indicates inflammation throughout the whole affected area, then it forms as shown here before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Now that which comes after the intromission, judge what is therein.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure with fire, it implies that the patient's pain should be alleviated as much as possible and the heart is filled accordingly; then he lies on his back slightly elevated, and places a lot of clothes on him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	Then lie down on his left side, and commands the minister to lie on the right hand, and extends the rod to one of the twin veins in which the joint is located.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula and press the joint skin among them until near the edge of the finger, and make a straight incision in the joint skin down to where the white vein is visible, and scrape gently as required.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the vein with water at one point, and drain all the blood, and then place linen strips on it, and let the vein ascend; and do not touch the joint, but only the vein itself, carefully scraping off its side little by little, so that you don't scrape too hard, which would cause the blood to return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound bleeds during your work, then mend it in its place once you have completed the vein's treatment; then assemble two strips around the joint edges with a strip of linen, and cure it as you would treat other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if the ulcer is caused by other diseases, it must be laid with suspended strips, doubting the flow of blood; then cut the vein all around the suspension, and drain the ulcer, and treat it as we have said before.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the blood is assembled in two parts, it indicates that they are fractured veins; then scrape the other part as you have done with the first one, drain the blood from the wound, and place a linen pad soaked in rose oil on the injury.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And apply other clean linen soaked in wine and oil to the two veins, and place it over the joints, and cover them with doubled cloths, lying on all this according to this form:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take the cloths and cut them in pieces according to this shape and assemble them with sewing into the waistband of his breechcloth, placing one end at the foundation just up to the back, and the other part on the forearm; and the second pair is placed above the joints, and together they form the restraint in the loop of the belt.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And there is never any medicine for this rod of iron, and it must be a smooth cauterizing rod, and scrape the skin of the joints, and heat them as we have said, so that the white vein with the blood exposed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take this form of scalds; and scrape it very delicatesses, et ence cil dise, siens de la.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	n:sant.trois andre: leu :errepremodescaurre ant.pouce. Ibreitgustre laire, malice tolereanre:re in theisare. Reccle (inse.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if any thing contradicts you, or incision of blood or removal of something else, then heal what goes against you, according to what is said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the pain is so great that he does not want to undergo this work for its horror, then I will instill a perforation, as I have told you, and when you are well-informed by our previous meanings that such a movement should be made,
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	If it suits the patient to lie on a raised surface; then make the incision in the part of the limb covering the entire joint space, and insert the perforation long piercing nails; and let the hole be wide enough so that all the air is driven out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then place cotton underneayer and bind it tightly, letting the remaining air escape from the wound, then continue to treat until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the blood does not escape from the opening of the wound in the mouth of the inflammation, it is necessary that you insert a pen or the instrument used to extract water-filled bullets, as described before; and expand slightly the wound, check whether the air returns, and assemble after two months or sooner, when it has been assembled according to what precedes, then from this point onwards may the patient live without any further issues.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the incision in the inflammation
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Check that in the section of this movement there are no further dislocations, which seems to imply that if it were left as is (laisse), it would be sufficient.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you about the procedure and the appearances of the incision.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Now I say that most incision come from or cause injuries; and it is by much in this case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to know by superfluous bitternesses and fluids that are spread in the joint, or by impact;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and is the color of the incision according to the color of the nail used; and it does not cause pain, and it is a serious incision.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and it happens, and from thefts.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is due to any of our arteries, then it is dislocated by the positioning of incision, when you press it towards its proper place.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and does not require that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	That which is made of vein inflammation is dislocated by the positioning to express the touch towards its proper place.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and can well perform surgery on this appearance, and on others as well.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And it is that you collect the blood clots, then they are at the top, and remove them by pulling with a white thread, and release the tourniquet from all parts of the vein.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the vein is already set with these needs, then it requires that you pull the thread and collect.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is at the stick, or in those places where there are tendons, then it requires that you release all of it and collect again roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the source of the wound is behind it, then it requires that you collect all of it and remove the vein, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is done, cover the wound with clean linen soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the incision of clots.
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an incision wrapped in a wrapping that seems to be like one-hundredth of a barleycorn, with the softening of clots.
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and if it cries out when moving;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	And the cure for this illness is as fearful as what we have said before.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And that we shall tell you the workings of it according to what they did in those days.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	And it requires that thou do as the sick man lie upon its edge clear, then loose the thread of clots at every part thereof.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	Throughout the entire skin area close to the belly button, and the areas of the masters' hands, and they extend them fully.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	Then cut through the thick tissue over a deep area where the vessels are exposed, until they are uncovered.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	And then strip it from each part, as we have described in the extraction of the arteries that are located at the temple.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then insert an awl or use a two-wire pair, and tie it to the first location where the wire enters, and then tie it towards the opposite end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then they handle it carefully according to the length of the cord, and remove the corroded swabs.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as in other cases where a vein is not obstructed by any of the cuts.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For this reason there is no harm involved, and if any vessel enters all the cuts, it must be tied off at every single incision.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	If it does not stop its blood flow through the incisions, and they cannot assist.
de la routure dou syfac	The second half of this sentence appears to be incomplete, which may relate to a specific medical context, it could pertain to a procedure orde of unction that cannon.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The healing of this joint is through the cutting that comes from the incision which causes or allows the intestines to descend from their usual course into one of the grooves;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	And this route is either by the cutting or from its extension, and these various means of .ij. movements arise for different reasons such as striking, jumping, groaning, lifting a burden, among similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the signs when it is from this extension of the cutting are that it happens infrequently and very rarely over a long period, and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And the abscesses are extended towards the fontanel, because the cutting presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs when it is from this cutting are that they bring about sudden start of pain at the beginning, and various appearances on the skin near the flesh, because of the intestines' exit and return to its original course.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And there is no occasion where it causes ulcers with the intestines and retains them inside, causing great pain to the patient, mainly when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments to fear, as it causes them to shrink.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the way of the work is that you order or command to let the intestines return inside in the wound if it can reenter.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then either squeeze it on its neck between your hands, and hold the hairs softly.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then it remains above, and covers all the skin of the grooves long.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	And put inside the legs of a child according to what you have seen in order to open the wound and such that it can come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	And scrapes the skin of the grooves so long as it is smooth.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	Then place your wooden stick in such a way that it enters the joint, where it is between the white skin above the leather of the elbow and between the second layer of skin.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And proceed behind the elbow, and between the second layer of skin. Then move your right hand down inside the joints, and have the white skin on top of your left hand towards your waist, and lift the elbow to all its layers toward the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And command the minister that he extends the arm upwards, and loosens what is behind the ligament.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And if it has an intestinal bag wrapped or white skin tightly, and if you do not fix anything, then he will put it in the abdomen.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Then take an awl or a .i. thick wire made of .x. threads, and insert it into the back part of the joint, which is after the skin around the elbow; then after the waist, pierce through the shoulder joints as long as there are .iiij. threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	Then join them together in the manner of a cross, and bind the joint skin which we have mentioned is around the elbow'ayer with a strong ligament made up of .ij. parts each.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then encapsulate the shoulder joints around the wires, and bind them together with .ij. parts each so that no one of those who hold it down cannot move its head from behind.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And apply the band mainly according to the first band of length .ij., and after these .ij. bands leave the skin that is around the joints, letting it hang a great deal on one side.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	And after all the rest according to the roundness that it carries; then pierce in the part that is under the skin around the joints as much as possible without causing damage, and push back if you please, as we have said earlier.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then wrap a damp cloth in oil, and apply it to the wound, and saturate the band that we have mentioned earlier.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize the white skin around the joints that we have mentioned, after the incision due to doubt of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	Because this happens often, and leave the band until it is loose from itself; and if it does not come off on its own, then boil water over it as we have said before, until it comes off.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then treat the wound with other care, so that it heals perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	of a hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this matter I have never seen anyone attempt to treat with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old one said that it is made so as to resemble the assembled stick which binds the shoulders together after being loosened from below.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cover me, and treat the abscess in this place as we have said before, so long as the shoulders are tightly bound together.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	No one comes out of the abdomen if it has not come out, and do not break any of the bowels, and if some come out, then they are few in number and place them back inside.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And at any other time, if it lingers too much on this point, they think there is an ulcer or fistula until the intestines come out.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens by the extension of the abscess which is swollen, just like we have said, because it expands, then becomes soft and swells its edges and opens up.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And this treatment is by cautery, just as we have said before; and there has never been a healing done in this manner with iron.
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	And the patient suffers a heavy pain on their back between your hands, then cover the swollen area of the rib cage enlarged according to the quantity of three fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	And then extract the abscess that is under the skin which has become softened by it, and take out its contents and apply them on the visible part of the abscess.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And press on the lower abdomen where the two swollen points of the abscess are located at the top of its edge, and then count each one;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then extract the edge of the abscess, and do not cover it or extend its surface in any other way, just as I have told you during the treatment of the bowel wound;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And the treatment consists of wound care; and when you bind the hairs, if they become moist and heal the wound, as long as it remains healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The abscess is confined and has no appearance in the treatment process, and its cautery heats it up as we have described here, with much hope for recovery.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the skin flaps
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times are the skin flaps softened in no one person because the flesh that is inside them is softened as well, and it becomes easy to see; and it is necessary, when you want to cure him, let the patient lie on his back, and remove the softened skin from the natural skin; then gather the two fingers together into a bandage, and if you can see that there are surplus pieces of softened skin between the four corners of the bandage, and treat them firmly so as for other wounds until it is healthy again, and bind his hair.
dou chastrement	severe punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The act of restraint is enshrined in our law, and for that reason I wish it were not mentioned at all in this book; and indeed it requires only two methods: one is to hold the wound responding when asked about its state, and with regard to treatment; the other, since we have often had occasion to practice limb dislocation on various animals as if on a buck or sheep or goat, etc., I say that restraint is performed according to these two methods: either by attraction or by fracture. In that method of attraction, we lay the animal in hot water until their muscles are softened and for a time; then we pin them down with one hand, so they remain fixed and no longer feel it. For limb dislocation treatment: you must trim the animal's coat, press the skin around the joint on your left hand, tie the suspensorium, and bind each leg to one hook as you have thoroughly scraped off; and this method of restraint is different from attraction because, due to attraction by chance, no trace or slight scratch can occur among the veins; then after curing the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	I apologize for any confusion, but "des hermofrodites" seems unrelated to the provided context regarding medieval medical practices and does not fit as a translation from that text segment. The term refers to individuals with intersex conditions or variations in sex characteristics, which is an entirely different subject area. If you're looking for translations related to historical medical practices, please provide additional relevant content.
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermophrodite is according to two methods: one where there are two openings as natural in the figure of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes with cortisone on the urine; and the other method when they are women, like a rod and two coils. And the care of the body and womb is that you bandage them together so all the surrounding areas, and treat them as for other injuries; in the second method, where there is no cure because the urine leaps through their skin from the coils.
de la tentigene	Tentigène refers to a medical condition known today as "tendinitis," which involves inflammation of tendons. In medieval contexts, however, this term might not have been specifically used or understood in the same way modern medicine does now. If you are looking for information on treatments that would align with what we know about tendinitis from historical texts like these medical manuscripts, it might involve rest, ice, and possibly herbal remedines, as well as techniques to manage pain and inflammation based on the limited medical knowledge of the time.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	"sans la curement a main; Etienne deffre, eternel, andante auu la bouche àterne le chascun theu, etude ofte necces. Ifree demein-laissance tolengere theuccleterine meve itme'sant. Lepremierentur laisse iterratre natuletre. Aller aitures erasure: "toil theuer:
de erratique	13  the samexinning. çoignalegive aicirexing,ub tolume;s : nagneachterregeacherdectionjacifores:narecteuropeurenthefyngernde. Transithejanturexes andcribei.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	If the woman's nature is not known, or if the miscarriage is small; and it is innate in her, or caused by illness that comes to her; or due to a change of posture, or subtle asthma, or spasms, and happens in marrow, on the sides, inside, or anywhere else; and determines conception and childbirth, and fortuitously causes flowers to bloom; and knowledge of this is by custom. If the contractions are close approaching, whether it be for the desired time or not; if there are two fists near each other, then spread her hands wide apart on her back, and form with the two hands as they were before; and place linen cloth underneath them, and dress her kindly every day so that she cannot sew together. And if the spasm is hard and sharp, it must be treated like a thorny flower. If the contractions are natural, then lift her up at once; and prepare a broad napkin large enough so that the wound does not heal. Then treat her long with this linen cloth, and dress other cures for as long as she is healthy. And when it comes into marrow naturally, do it in this way: unless there are enchanted plaques. Because enchanting a lesion in marrow should not be touched by iron.
des emorroides	Embarrassment caused by hemorrhoids.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hemorrhoids are swellings of veins that often become hardened over time. In the division of cases, I have described those who can be treated by iron and others that cannot. Those hemorrhoids located in the marrow area, which cannot be felt, should not be cured with iron. It is necessary for you to place a woman in a cold room; then cut her veins at the elbow with pincers, and soak them in medicinal remedies that restrict blood flow, such as dragon's blood and incense, and other things; and let her lie on hot water for an hour. And if the hemorrhoids become discharging of blood, it should be scraped with suction cups behind the breastbone without causing injury. Then cloth soaked in linen, and warm juice from plantain or pitch pine resin with wine, and let it scrape her veins for as long as she is well; and that which bleeds like a sharp redness "albethir," and rough, as bitter, and then cure the wound.
des apostemes de la marris	Hemorrhoid treatment of maladie. Andante carnales etre ongne. Here is:esmero hemorhoi desires duodenum de merite d’une màsant, "devoire oulden'12thème: lesstemajustice estime lakes of thekëveulxeme of thete. Thewinters :thelore ounce.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	nsoinez:sainsechais in folleuriferrantithecellel the ço il locusecres celarecruissouconteletifaire a 2lameaulterrenernoldessilevanssevelairable soingleussejorieu.tense eswace:s le fraisierrunts :userne out the tiento, lyevesementalice10nde
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	The profession is first in childbirth that she knows the natural figure of childbearing, and its signs are when you see the woman hastening downward, desiring odor from the air; and therefore it becomes known that these children bear according to the natural figure, and they leave their head sovereign, and the second one with them; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently upon her abdomen quickly, for as soon as he ascends on his head, the second one accompanies him, and the child's troubles by proper refinement are removed; because there comes none upward from his feet, nor downward with his heart or joints, and hands, or it descends into his belly or throat, and is converted through accidents on its neck, and other unfortunate figures; hence the profession requires her to be quick and subtle in these matters, and she must guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as they are supposed to aid.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes up on his head naturally, and the mother grunts during birth, and the strength of the baby is weak, then let her sit in a chair or have the women hold her; and raise its nature to oil or fenugreek has been cooked, and then pour the birth between her legs where this little spatula-shaped structure exists.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And cut the second suture, and wrap his umbilical cord until the moisturizers which are applied on it come out; then press down her abdomen as much as possible so that the baby descends from her belly, and if it does not descend, then you must clothe the woman with musk cloth mixed with sesame oil for an hour; if both hands emerge strongly, then gently pull them apart repeatedly in small increments; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair, lift her legs upward; then remove the chair from the ground, and treat the woman so that she does not defecate during standing; and if the hands do not enter and the baby dies, cut his hands with this instrument which is placed in front of me, and extract the child, and pull them out gently.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	Of the issue of the child upon his feet.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes up on his feet, then it must be thrust upwards.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	And then turn it gently and gently as long as he remains upright.
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	And then press down his legs and feet.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	sence (reach. ous :maisons.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If he jumps, God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump so much as we have said, and turns very little, until it is according to its natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For when the leash is tied.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come out as we have said, and takes mud from the ground, and melted wax, and grinds everything in one quern;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and applies it to the woman's body thereafter;
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then it shall lie down in water until among the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when it is warmed there among them, then he makes a mirror of myrrh, and puts it on her, and leaves for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then it shall lie on a seat, and then he makes her exhale and hold her mouth and nose, and presses the abdomen gently, because now the child jumps;
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the issue of the child's genitals;
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	Whenever the child comes in this form, he puts his hands slightly on it;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	and then he leans her on his shoulder, and holds down her legs forward, and lies down by one's bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and then he bends her hands slightly, and presses the palms on her belly, and holds down the ribs underneath, until she is arranged thereafter.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	And if they do not jump, then he takes his feet and the muscles contract strongly, then the muscles push upwards towards the abdomen, and he throws out his hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	And the child soon weakens; and commands the woman to take care that as long as the child cries, she does so.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the issue of the child who comes out with a hand wide open,
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I recommend bringing back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If she cannot bring the hand back, then rise up and go forth;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot go forth, then make her sit on a bed, and straighten out her legs;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then instruct the little muscle that I have mentioned:
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if she does not bear children, then make her sit on a chair, and study how to return the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And the child returns to its natural form, and she urges her to hold it until the crying subsides;
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the issue of the child upon its neck, and stretching out his hands, turning his face towards his mother;
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I recommend that he bathe his hand, then turn it slowly and gently;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is limp (meaning "igalz" as an Old French term for 'limp' or 'floppy'), then put on its muscle of the upper arm and oil it, as we have said, and she commands that he move slowly and gently.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	350recreatesme:12escribe thebitec:severe itapexible bye andire:00scoitime:soldrepreisse, with:yseve byr soiurelorevrai a ceintreche.gustrece.faire:nèctifarleylysque tenticle. iaisse, itceste foiscramblexentrener siractre presurefeuccesse thatsanglesse.iquelescibe.ildes ludece deftrait ifnglerecheenticeuxseketezseille:se anatomdeffte tonexte gentable quourse.ise. Andre urange
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this manner for all the second instance
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to this manner for all the second instance, as soon as the second instance is full of one-sidedness, so long as the moisture has dried up.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the wound is found on his face and neck, so that it covers the bubble, let it not be contained, and the child will die.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then place the child inside, as long as you have put him so he must be, and command the woman that she shall never do it again.
adonques si istra legierement.	especially if it moves lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the twins' dislocations
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	They are born with hemorrhages many times, and not even three or four; this is no strange thing, and it rarely happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	These are unheard-of things, and they hardly ever live any longer than a few days.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they multiply and are depleted by their supply which sustains them, which is linked to the bubble [blister];
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and never naturally like this either [all], as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come out moaning, as we have said in their care, and is the balm subtle, and it heals swiftly and lightly when [it] moves.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and heals in this way as it is worth to health, or should be used for healing.
de plusors enfans	for many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	Never are formed in the marl, either I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII or V, and more than fifteen, and they take on a childish shape by the measure of their size.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	And it is said that his blood remains all things, as events may suggest.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	If it so happens as it is said.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman with a dead child or in her womb, as I have said in the section on division, and it does not come forth, and then there is work for your hands.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	If it is said that you know whether the woman has sound health or not, and she does not have an accident or fear of death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	If it is said that the woman should be situated on her back, and her limbs inclined upwards, and the legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And the midwife applies ice to I or II parts of her body, or she is left in bed if she is not treated with the descent of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mire of lime with moisture of wormwood and fenugreek seed, and anoint the child's hands with these oils and wormwood.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then pource them lightly in the mire, then put I or II parts of it where there are openings that can be covered by these oils and wormwood;
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	And take warning that the infant be dressed so as it descends from its head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	And put I or II parts in the ears, in his neck, in his mouth, in his palate, under the beard, on the shoulder, or between the shoulders.
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	And if such a movement is on the feet, and it sticks or loosens at his knees and sides.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it requires him to bleed the onychia from his right hand, and place warmth between his left hand's fingers, and move all his hands lightly, and push the onychia in no way among these places that we have mentioned, until he straightens out the matter;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And it is the form of the onychia:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then push against it. I. another onychia, or if you are familiar with such extraction, so that the extractions are equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then they are moved evenly from one side and the other to allow them to come out, so that their nails may hold, as is this form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if there is a delay in one part, he shall not burn any of his hand's fingers, and push into that part, and draw out the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there is a small delay, then place this onychia or higher than before, and do it so that the matter will fall out all at once.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes toward the other, and it cannot be pulled back due to compression;
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And it requires you to wrap a cloth over it, so that the matter will come out all at once.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	Then make it in the joint of the plant or at the wrist, and here it requires you to perform this action with your other hand, and on both feet;
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child's shoulder is large and it is twisted outwardly or has acute assembly;
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And it requires you to push the spinous process between your fingers, and handle the head and draw out the acute;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	You turn to the instrument called "armadillo", for from which comes with the nails or claws that are after this.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And in so doing, it causes the fever to have a great natural strength.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	And then heat the bones with tongs.
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	And if the shoulder is jerked and it resists being pulled, then until the moisture that is or has come out.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	And if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces that you can manage.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is inflamed in the abdomen or on the sides of the ribs, then it must be punctured until the fluid comes out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the fever is on his legs, then it is lightly touched, and care for the mouth of the marrow is given quickly.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is in the abdomen or at the navel, then you must extract it with one sheet wrapped around your hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	And do it with the abdomen or navel, until the fluid comes out;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	And if the other limbs are twisted, and they move again.
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	:souffice.
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	Then he puts one or two drops, and it was hotter.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	And if the mouth of the abscess is opened by incision, where blood came in, there is no need to work further on it.
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	Nevertheless must provide moist and greasy things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And the moisteners employed are flaming hot and softening agents.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the wound is on his side, and you put it back flat, using what we said about a live child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if there is no possibility, then he will work it by pieces, and not leave anything of the second one.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, moisten with what we said about abscesses that come in the mouth.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if blood comes out, it is placed in restricting fluid and other treatments are applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman whose womb had an infant inside who was wounded, and she did the same thing with another one over that, and removed both of them.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time came an abscess in her breast, which swelled until it opened up, and she began to experience great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went to seek treatment, and for a long time, I could not set the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on flaming hot moisture, an extract of bone came out, and after several days another one appeared.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was terrified because there were no bones in her belly.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it might be the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I examined the wound and touched the bone with my hands until she was in better condition.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And for a long time after that, there were only two bowels left in her belly.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I do not remember this chapter for the reason that when masters perform an extraction of something, they know how to provide aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	During medieval times, one of the common medical practices was bloodletting. This involved drawing blood from patients to cure or prevent illnesses and diseases by balancing bodily humors. The text's reference to discharging blood from an abscess into restricting fluid could be reflective of such a practice where it is believed that letting out excess 'humor' would restore balance.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	The text refers to the post-operative stage where the patient experiences high blood pressure (pressor) and becomes weak. They resort to books or medical texts for guidance in managing this condition. This suggests a time when written knowledge of medicine, although limited by today's standards, was still being consulted and applied to clinical practice. Physicians might use these ancient medical treatises as references on how to manage such postoperative complications without access to modern diagnostic tools or medications that we have today.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Il theorcimele despises more thaniere: lis, in Old French: leslie leu devises.
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	And let it be his burning mouth. That it has a wide opening, and the edge of the trees, that it must extend to the length of one and a half handbreadths.
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And in addition to the two opposite edges of this instrument being securely joined together, which are half a handbreadth long or perhaps slightly more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	And these two joints are placed in the mouth of the mortar when turning the two opposite corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another more subtle and lighter form is made of pine or box wood according to the resemblance of tongs.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	And at these two joints, if you look, they are one and half handbreadths long, and two spans wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	And when you see the mortar opened at all parts of the instrument, let it be set on a table with two legs underneenaside by it.
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	Then place these joints together in the mortar, and hold the head of the instrument between your fingers.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hand on the whole instrument exactly as you have made the tongs, according to the amount that opens the mouth of the mortar until it is able to do so.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is entirely made up of joints and it has many similarities; and when the mortar has been prepared, the work becomes more swift and higher in proportion to its number.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise this instrument even if you have not made it, because their needs are unavoidable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second child is retained in labor, it requires you to command the midwife that she retains her strength, and then make her cough up secretions from the mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she does so by itself.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If it does not so, take a pot, and make him a straw or a plaster, and put medicinal herbs that can open the mortar's mouth as in a compress, rue, anise, chamomile, chervil, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs, or some of them, should be boiled in water or placed over the fire; then put a straw or plaster on top of the pot, and the other end into the mortar's mouth.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and the fever as long as the vapors rise within the mortar; then make her cough out, as we have said before.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If it hurries along during labor.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if she remains after this treatment and is not still, then command the midwife to moisten her left hand with oil or millet juice, and then let it go into the mortar.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	Androgynous de malle semblant enmores. Si ceste vatant,et qu’ilot alise, Etude d'arme:re legeance tiarles laisser itensiurne thecaure tostesmes:
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	:meve (fierce tithes
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the wound is pierced, we have said the treatment of thrusting outward, and smoke from herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	And if it's not everything that we have said, then make sure you don't get carried away with the treatment.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	But it covers that which is in the mouth of the wound, place it on the thigh of the woman, and then perform the enema with four herbal medicines.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If it becomes inflamed and is reset again, but in all cases, when it turns sour smell in the stomach and head, and cause great pain.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	It then prescribes smoke-making treatments that are: no one among the ancient physicians has ever tried smoking cress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used for smoking the woman with flowers and ashes is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And is like a cage for seeing if it's subtle in the head and place wide joints near fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And let there be smoking on charcoal, and if it is burnt out, then start another one.
de percier lou fondement	About piercing its foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Maintenance of children born who do not have the piercing done, yet instead it is subtly altered:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	If it is necessary now to put her in the balance where she will pierce her joint with her own effort, and not let her touch sharp objects, and guard the adjustment so that she does not touch it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply a thin layer of linen or oil on her joint, and treat the cleaning until she is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not reattach, place a drip of blood from the wound and let his hands heal for several days, and give him ointment when he wants to go to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there is never such healing of wounds or incision coverings; it must be covered with that covering: if you treat it, as we have said about the drip of blood from the wound.
de la fistule dou fondement	From the foundation of the fistula (a pathologic communication between an excretory passage and the surface of or into the skin)
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that originate from the foundation are nodal, and larger than those originating behind it or in between its 20 parts (this is a reference to a specific medical context within fistula formation).
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If there is a fistula or more than one; and when that nodal fistula is old, it should be operated on with slight movements or mild dislocations (this could refer to surgical techniques involving manipulation of the affected area).
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And there are never such persistent fistulas; and they are known by the fact that they either have an outlet or ventilation when the patient does excretion, and perhaps sometimes leap one at a time (describing characteristics of certain types of fistulae).
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that involve just the bladder and a portion of the penis; and they reach just the juncture of the scrotum, and parts of other areas (describing specific locations where fistula can be found).
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And in this case we know that there is a persistent fistula at the foundation and it is not: (This statement sets up contrast with previous information about persistent fistulas).
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and you hit your index finger or foundation; and place a subtle needle of steel in the fistula when there is no tortuousity (referring to surgical interventision techniques used for treating certain types of fistulas).
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is tortuousity, place a subtle drip of blood or hair as long as you feel the drip on your finger (describing another possible surgical intervention to address fistulas with tortuosity).
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it on your finger, and it does not have an outlet or ventilation nor excretion as we have said before (reiterating the characteristics that differentiate certain types of fistulas).
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	you know that it will not pierce again; if you hurry with your healing efforts (suggesting swift action to prevent reoccurrence after surgery).
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is just in the bladder or urethral conduit, it leaps the urine and cannot be healed by medicine (describing characteristics of certain types of fistulas that are difficult to treat with medication).
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	And if it is pierced at the juncture of the scrotum, then the drip comes to his head again (referring to a situation where a fistula in the context has formed at that specific anatomical location and its characteristics). This sentence is likely part of an instruction or description within a medical text on managing such a condition.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	and if it has no tortuousity and the formation of pain, then it should be treated with slight movements or dislocation; and does not heal by medicines (suggesting an alternative treatment approach to manage a fistula without surgical intervention).
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	it is a la main.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	: Of the, iface ofse andre maniere.  œanage:  ça  ione  iews.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and he bends his legs up to his knees, and inclines his knees towards his belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then cast a tent of rain or mud if there is twisting, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels pain around the foundation, it indicates that you must cast your index finger.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	if you feel strongly that the tent has been perceived; and whether between your hand there is a sinew or tendon, which indicates that it is Persian.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if it does not work, then it cannot heal.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	In all things it can heal some people well enough, but this is rare.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And what it does can heal by gently applying the cautery according to the size of the fistula, as is stated before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and heats it in the fistula until it moves away from the foundation; and does this repeatedly two or three times as long as you know that these charges are removed, which look like a feather quill.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then treats moistened tenting with wax, as long as those charges are weeping, then it treats the ointment anointing and sealing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is so well healed then that's good. But if that isn't the case, there can be no other healing.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent is between it and does not pierce to where the foundation lies, and there is a thick covering of wax or tendon between your hand and the tent, then you see the fistula covered by such strength.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if the tent toke encomancte. Se li malaide.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	And it shall be delivered to the tent, and taken; then he will remove those defects that seem like a bird's feather, and they do not return again afterwards.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if it does not heal itself, and cuts between you and the past, whether it is treated with fire or water therapy.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cautery, it collects some things: namely, the repositioning of these joints, and the drainage of blood and dislocation caused by moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then the treatment of damp tent fires or brazier burns continues until its edges become brittle, and it breaks apart the joints.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wounds with hot compresses continuously on the joints, and the medicines are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For if it is restored, if it heals and does not return again afterwards.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula arises just at the foundation, and is separated from its roots, then you must remove your hand or foundational element, and inquire further about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tent, and it is between your toil or syfac (a type of treatment) or joints, then he must be pierced through, unless there are no more dangers than a sign of hope and faith, administered by one of the three ways:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	Or you cauterize it as we have said, or you burn it just at the foundations, or if you put tent and treat it as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	And do not go too far in the foundations lest you cover the estate that holds the foundation, and seek relief as he wished.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then tend to the wound, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance it will heal, or you remove that hidden injury and its removal is near the base, or by guess or another pointed instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then make sure there's enough space in the wound as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then study how to restore the wound and delay the fistula in the part farther from the base: if it is easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And there are no fistulas of this kind; and when you push the tent in the fistula, it is opposite to the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if you take a tent cut into this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I push the wire .i. straight in .ij., and push the tent along the entire wire inside the fistula as long as it is at the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If she sticks to the edge of the base therein, then extract the wire from that push-pin so you can push your other bottom.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and draw the wire of that shape, and put together the wires .ij., and fasten them to each other, and leave it for one or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and do not loosen it at all as long as the wire covers these parts that are between two points, and which hold.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then heal the wound until it is sealed and sound.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If there's no fistula, if you can make a puncture in any way that you can, provided it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because there's no need to cover the healing if it's not too deep, and then you tend to it as we have said, until it is sound.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spinous process from which they make a fistula if it's very large and one or two parts.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand, for this reason they do not cover what does not need to be covered, as you can see in this case.
des emorroydes	of abscesses
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Abscesses are in two ways according to them: they are inside the base, like drops of pitch or as small and large pieces of flesh, and then blood.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and if there is one or more, they are removed from the base and the top of the base; but those that have little moisture.
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	And afterwards or a little water clear or a bit of blood, and they have a red face.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the care for those who have them deep in the foundation, if you command him that he press down to let out the cavities until they start leaking, and then their children appear.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hasten, and cut with pincers, or hold it by your thumb, then strike into its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if the patient cannot hold them in his moist membranes, then they are taken to one of these: an abscess, or a cocoon, or a fragment of chamois skin.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And extract them at one's discretion, and then apply the powders on any heat-induced wounds or incisions that are exposed to fire (cauterization).
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	You cauterize them as it is directed or at the command of the surgeon of cautery, then tend to other treatments until they are restored to health.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the cavities do not yield, then administer to the patient an emetic clyster and harsh for cleaning the area which serves as foundation, so that it may expel itself fully.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	And when the patient shows great signs of illness, and if the threads are strong foundations, then it is a light care.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And whether you use your thumb or tweezers, and pull them out, then treat it as we have said, so long as he is healthy, and fears the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	It seems that it must be done this way: take a twisted thread, and put it on an awl, and then pull the thread upwards and pierce the tip of the awl from another side, and turn the two ends of the threads around the awl.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And if it is wide; and hold the formed thread firmly, then pull the thread, remove the awl, and do the same with all others, leaving one for excess blood removal.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place a moistened cloth or lint on the foundation, and put it over the foundation, and command the patient to lie down.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let them cry for as long as they wish, and when they have calmed down, take the treatment of scraping and other treatments so that he remains healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Two times or foundation (referring to how many times these steps should be repeated).
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times occur involuntary contractions in the intestines, and due to a natural constriction, when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It seems that it must be at the tip of an abscess or your thumb's skin above, which does not let it get wet.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	And treat him so long as he remains healthy if that is what it requires.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	But if he cannot stay put, then restart the scraping more forcefully than before as long as he remains healthy, and continue to scrape.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat him so long as he is healthy.
dou fremit	Two times (referring again to the repetition of steps).
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	It is a small but unnecessary appearance before the skin, and it goes in so much.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And never binds up blood clots, and the pain is felt in it just like a tremor, and affects all of the body, more so in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is to take a cotton ball or a large one of bird feathers, and place that cotton on the tremor, so long as it completely covers the purple circles around it.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand all around the cotton ball so that you cover it completely with the tremor, and place it on top of the tremor, and scrape its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see that it looks like a cotton ball or iron in this manner, and is very thin undernee and pulled upwards:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	and doesn't know how to do it twice, but pushes It appears that you should cauterize the tremor as much as it is shown by the caustic or by a cautery iron:
de la forme dou clistere	In this line, "clister" refers to the cauterization process resembling a lavation (enema), which suggests performing an enema-like treatment:
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	:escripture du monde descreates, it'san esse : I'', 1esme, sience pasement. Theil:escalle enimine cestraccles. Aster. It'it'ou,cetty lesse2eat:
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore we instruct in the treatment of children and those who are weak and lamentable, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of this small enema is too wide, or the belly is tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and it has an obstruction or the belly is tied like this: look, and the cries are spread out on each side; and in one of the ribs there is a large wound, and in the other there is also.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and it should be the belly where one places a bulb of an animal or of parchment, and is spread out all along small wounds.
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and there should be a space between each of these wounds; then a strong thread is inserted in these wounds, either straight or with turns in several places, and the abdomen is tied as if it were a goat's.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicines are spread out, if the ligature is on the instrument in front of a strong thread, then enema; and this is the form of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And the medicines should not be too hot nor too cold; and at the head of the enema it is oiled or covered with pure oil or something similar, then let the medicine flow gently.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	then the assistant squeezes it with his two hands together until everything is seen, then extracts the enema, and lifts the patient's legs up to the surface.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if the medicine has come out, as much as it can; and if it sleeps all night, that is more help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you enema in case of intestinal obstruction, and the medicine rushes out quickly, then it starts to heal as long as it is healthy again.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	and if the hemorrhoids are found or abscesses, then it is also done gently as with one child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of a subtle enema, where the skin is restrained:
des plaies	and wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	And we have said about the treatment of wounds; or you will tell us the cures and remedies according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are made, and ail est lou castres de peccadires:
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	sure. Injointre:esmein theilsaulgarre decepts ici andlere decade:entropy:  ́tire tisentures enty:  ̄le.  �anae :cise, fromage ofte le.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	Where are made according to the laws of limbs, as for wounds that hurt on the neck, or on the head, or thighs, or abdomen, and similar parts;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I shall begin with simple head injuries, because they will be included in his treatise.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and the bone is not fractured, if it is taken care of due to movement of a hole or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn apart and the wound is large.
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	And you doubt slightly about amputation: if it is done immediately for the cephalic first most if there is only a little blood from the wound, and heals in the opposite manner of the lower part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And prohibit the maladies' excessive consumption of wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not improve, then reduce his meat intake, and do not drink wine or eat chari. (Note: The phrase "ne ne menjuce point" is a typographical error in the original text that should be interpreted as "do not eat horse".)
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And apply to the wound if there is a fistula, let it be cleaned with oil or bloodletting. (Note: The original text may refer to medieval practices of treating abscesses by draining pus through an incision.)
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there is no fistula, and if it's fresh throughout the wound and not affected by air or powder, then I will mention this after a little bit. (Note: This line suggests that medieval treatments varied depending on whether an abscess was present or not.)
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the arrow has moved, then apply to it some ointments as long as he is healthy. (Note: This line refers to treatments for arrows that have penetrated and possibly caused damage.)
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like sword injuries and similar cases, and the lips cannot be closed with sutures alone, then it will be sewn up using a layer of material, just as I will say for belly wounds or other types of stitches. (Note: This refers to medieval surgical techniques such as suturing wounds.)
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is exposed to bone and bleeding continues for only a little while, then I will treat it with medicine and restore its firmness in the skin of leather. (Note: This line indicates that medieval surgeinas may have used bandages made from tanned animal hide to support wounds.)
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And command the patient to eat heavy meats as well as tested and cooked wheat bread, or chickens, and similar things. (Note: This suggests that in some medieval treatments diet was seen as an integral part of recovery.)
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you treat or bandage swelling and it affects the bone, then I will drain all the swelling completely, and then heal it. (Note: This line reflects a medieval approach to addressing infections and swelling that might involve draining them.)
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or abscess without cautery and cannot be stopped by medicine, then I will cut the artery, and if you loosen it with a thread. (Note: This line reveals how medieval surgeinas might have dealt with vascular injuries, which were often fatal due to bleeding.)
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not help, then caution it. (Note: The use of cautery was a common practice in medieval medicine for controlling bleeding or preventing infection; however, its effectiveness varied.)
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these small and simple wounds, then this is the treatment; and you put that same powder so that it has moved again. (Note: Small cutaneous ulcerations may be treated lightly in the 13th century.)
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	C'saince ilesmein English in thexile of thex. Iberia. Jour. Eo'sans lacte devisinga parle sane: The iven. Iacces (it'sue lame : "anatomy thecaurjac andarre.giveine,causeinage to itirage :xentire:ngramme, asenuretic: Ages
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	And apply pressure to the wound, and hold firmly, until it heals well and unites with all its flesh.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And then let the clot form well, and allow it to drain if it does not swell; because you do not remove a blood clot until it is healthy again.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And there has never been such a thing done solely, when we do not have the incense or dragon's blood, but that the arrow does not move the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arrow has moved the wound, immediately it was like this, that no one puts such powder there.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digested herbs or flour made of water and honey, so that it is reduced in size.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the healing after other treatments until it is healthy again.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if a bone fracture accompanies the wound and it is small, then you make subtle pinches.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And I will tell you what to do after these breaks of the joints.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound in the neck.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is at the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between that part of the joint and this other part, but if the shoulder or the arrow has struck the neck.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the shoulder that is dislocated, there is no other remedy but to leave the treatment and not apply anything restricting, because it harms the joints and makes them retract.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not apply pressure to the wound, because the substance of the joints is cold, and its continuous movement coincides with the head, which is the highest limb.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but if you want to administer treatment like washing the joints with warm water and applying rose oil, and also wetting it with warm water.
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other similar stones according to this method, and damp herbs.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind it with bandages, and treat until it is healthy again.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if there are deep wounds that fill with blood, then pierce or go deeper into the veins.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the arrow is lodged in it, and blood flows out from it, then you must draw it out, and let it bleed, and as a caustic treatment is proper.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the spine of the throat has lodged or turned, then you must keep it in place because otherwise the flesh will go.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	but if the turn is under the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but return it according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then let it rest for some days, then treat with these herbs until he is healthy again.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound is made from bone, so que.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	: ás itaimainte unt.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And let it be displaced and misaligned;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, apply powder as I previously mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and an abscess is present, treat it as I have described in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from a wound caused by a sword or dagger
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it's from a sword or dagger and the wound is deep, look at the wound for windpipe contraction; know that if there are signs of windpipe contraction, the wound is fatal. (Note: The phrase "c’est cop de lance ou de coutel" translates to "it's from a sword or dagger." The mentioning of "ventositez" could be an archaic term for tracheal or bronchial collapse, often associated with severe chest injuries. However, without further context in the Old French text, this translation assumes the likely intended meaning within medieval medical practices.)
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	And if it's not deep, and the wound is fresh throughout its entirety, do not apply the powder immediately nor bind it with flesh that does not heal quickly. (Note: The phrase "et s’elle n’est parfonde" translates to "and if it is not deep." It implies a non-severe injury where immediate intervention with applied substances might be unnecessary.)
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and withdraw into the body, and burn away the malady. (Note: "reviegne" could mean to draw or remove something from a place, possibly referring to the removal of foreign matter from within the wound. "Ocie" might be an archaic term for burning, which in this context means using heat as part of the treatment.)
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I apply attractive oil and bind it frequently throughout the day. (Note: The phrase "met oignement" can be translated to "apply oil," with "atractif" meaning attractive in this context possibly referring to medicinal or soothing qualities of the oil, which could help reduce inflammation or discomfort.)
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you don't have such oil, then apply a lot of cotton soaked in fumes for exudation due to moisture. (Note: The phrase "met en la plaie" translates to "apply to the wound." "Succier fuers la moistor" can be interpreted as "soak in fumes from moisture," indicating a treatment that might involve using damp, possibly medicinal cloths or materials to help with exudation and potential infection.)
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and make the malady sleep on the wound for several days, two, three, or more. (Note: "fai dormir" translates to "make sleep," which metaphorically suggests keeping an injury in a state of relative calmness or rest, perhaps by using dressings that help immobilize and protect it.)
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if there is no spasm coming in, nor does the body have any other misalignment or disturbances. (Note: "si n'i venra" means "if it doesn't come," referring to the absence of a condition like spasms. The phrase indicates that without such symptoms occurring during the healing process, one could infer stability and proper recovery.)
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see how the bones are positioned, know that the wound is safe. (Note: "quant tu voit" means "when you see," referring to observing signs of healing in the injury. The phrase implies that proper alignment or stability of the bones at a healing wound site can be an indicator of recovery.)
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat it with bandages and other treatments as long as it remains sound. (Note: "Cure" means treatment, and "tents" could refer to the use of a simple binding or wrapping technique for stabilizing injuries. This instruction suggests that such measures should be continued until full healing is evident.)
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if it cannot heal, or work, then you know there's an abscess; do the treatment as we should. (Note: "et s’elle ne puet saner" translates to "and if it can't heal," suggesting that a wound without signs of proper healing may indicate complications like an abscess. The instruction recommends following the appropriate medical procedures for such cases.)
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if it's from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, or on the back, then do the treatment as I say in this section. (Note: "li plaie" means "the wound." The mention of an incision by a sword or knife indicates that there may be different considerations for treating such injuries depending on their location and complexity.)
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	In medieval English treatement.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if they are not dried up, let the wound grow, so that the extractions become easier.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds on other limbs, their assessment is in line with what we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	double dislocation of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	Dislocations of the abdomen are large and numerous, as well as small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	of the great wound there is no mention of a rupture in the intestine or injury to the intestines, since it cannot occur due to the introduction of foreign bodies.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the dressing is more troublesome, and there has never been a case where a small wound was worse than a large one;
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because it is easier to put back the intestines into place, if they are not set in and out repeatedly;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestines inflate almost immediately upon feeling pain, so they come back more easily;
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and for the same reason that is considered more painful injury, because we can move the intestines back into their place that other injuries cannot;
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And it is known that the treatment of the abdomen involves three types of movements:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the three common treatments have been involved in abdominal treatment;
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and treatments for other types of injuries such as those involving the chest and two others are common to various other injuries;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and all of them are more suitable with abdominal treatment, and I will say one and declare it;
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing wrong with the intestines;
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	Theft in English translation, ilicterraneaux.ièr a French. (https://leave d''. Thissure toire of theé:15 ofxerité,leave andaceurre: œ: itisare lexpressenture unece.
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	ge. And aïn que ilesse de la testracture dèlore theires.
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	For this because the intestine is inflamed by heat.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, treat it as follows:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	Moisten a sponge or, I mean, damp cloth briefly:
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	Or you cook in water simmering and boiling, and season and spice it:
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And raise the intestine as long as it is swollen:
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And never restrict its size, and it is moved more often for unswelling:
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling decreasing, if it is warm in water or heated and harmful are cooked:
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	Because by that, it is lightened its entry of things:
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if it cannot enter, then make a little cut with the instrument of care and remove the clots:
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	And the first treatment involves heating:
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that we should not cut too much because of great necessity:
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and it's the effort to heal by cutting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if it is made in the curvature and not dried up, then its shape returns:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine moves outward:
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if it is reset according to its natural shape in its proper place:
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	if you have such means, because it is done by movement:
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is wide, and it's located in the part within the belly:
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	if it is necessary that you make your patient lie on his back:
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and put his legs higher than his head:
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is located within the abdomen:
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	If the head of the shoulder is placed higher than the other parts,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and also the movement of the stomach occurs in one of its segments.
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	provided that the lower part is raised higher than the other parts.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and hence, it is necessary to administer what I have mentioned concerning large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	It pleases me with that which you have arranged,
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	then have it in your hands .i. minister of the god who rules with his hand;
et assemble les levres;	and gather together the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and this is the common way of dressing;
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and it depends whether you use a needle or others, according to the size of the wound's extent;
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave some space at the wound's head .i. do some gaping, and insert an iron needle or if it is possible you have a strong thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce through the joints with these sticks;
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	:goverevesse, and thenqueletude fromsures aide.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	Then the pulling of a thick thread through the tip of one of them by .ii parts,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	Then gather the two parts of the shoulder joint that are dislocated,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	And then leave one space, and put another needle in it;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	Then tie the thread like you did with the first needle;
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and continue doing this according to what you are skilled in regarding the use of needles;
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	as long as all the wounds are contained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and let the needles be both fine and large;
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because the fine needles coat the entire wound, and the large ones cannot fit properly:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for this reason it is necessary that they are varied;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it is not necessary to thrust the needles too deeply into the flesh or muscle;
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	that they do not coat and heal the wound before the sealing;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then coat the shoulder joints with them, so that they do not bruise the patient' mantle;
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and cover them with sheets or cloths over the shoulder joints so that they can remain in place;
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and let them stay as long as the wound is sealed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds;
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	Because it suffers an injury by a single or two needles;
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second method is common;
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and you should assemble the two parts of flesh and sinew together with an average thread, or it has one strong fine thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	And when you have perceived all these four assemblages;
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	If you reposition the arrow to the part where you began, in the manner of how they remove thorns.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and leave a space as large as that between each stitch for a small needle.
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitch secures him.
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I stitched up a wound where one of them had been injured in the abdomen.
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was wounded by a knife.
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than one handbreadth wide,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and it extended into the intestines, more than two handbreadths wide,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and the wound was inside the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I brought back the intestine and since it had been there for about twenty-two hours,
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was sewn up again just fourteen years ago, and healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the physician had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not cleanse it with oil, because there was only one place in that area where none could be found, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and put something similar to clean cotton on it a few times each day, and washed the wound with honey-water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Or I will tell you the specific methods of dressing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the arrow, and the thread from the farther edge closest to it;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when it has pierced the wound straight on, whether you lifted up the arrowhead itself or used the thread to extract it,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and make another incision on the closer side towards it,
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and their intention with this dressing was that you should pull it out as if a leatherworker does with a piece of leather,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and leave it one time for pulling from that side, and then repeat it on the other, as long as the dressing is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of dressing that Galien does correctly.
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	If it is as if no one does, joining the two parts together naturally.
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and join one of its ends to the other end, in such manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	and use a needle or another such pointed instrument, and pierce that point only:
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave those two ends:
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle, and pierce deeper into that distant part:
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and those two connected parts:
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce each of them into that distant part, in those other two points connected to the opposite side:
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the more common way of sewing and it:
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galien might have spoken this way, but there is no testimony:
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	one must sew with two needles, or there must be thread for each (of them):
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and it must push one needle from a side, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew metal wires:
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and it is known that when the stitching is inside the abdomen:
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	if it is more costly than other ways of suturing the abdomen:
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments regarding the wound are similar to those of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and when you touch itch flesh that is not yet moved:
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	And if the arrow has moved, put it on any wound that is present, until the wound heals.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and tighten the thread, and solder the seam, and the stitches.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal the wound as with others, until it is sound.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you do not have medicines, put on it as soon as possible, threadbare cloth or cotton, until the wound begins to bleed again.
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and move it every day until he is sound again.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not have other medical knowledge for handling various wounds; these injuries are simple enough.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	but if you doubt whether the wound affects the primary parts of the body,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	if it is necessary for you to apply gentle pressure with linen soaked in warm tempera oil or rose oil.
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and put it there between the arrows, and under the saddles;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if it feels painful in blisters, and often happens,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if you use a black wine enema (this phrase seems incorrect as "clisterize" refers to an enema and should not be paired with the color of wine), and immediately it appears that the blisters are related to the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierce deeply, and you know that when it's the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The young intestine cannot heal if it is blocked (literally translated from the French "qui est apele" means "which is called").
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and because of the positioning of the veins that are there, and due to the subtlety of the entire body structure, and the approach toward its natural state in the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the wound is deep enough that it should be set as well as the intestine, while it heals.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	Trex aureg theorre plur la cest li. Cetera ilesle avantage of thele texte leveille, voile. Theissage (you:en's invesque tisel esleague. Le sour les coustape l’aspect.le le.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	because they have veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	and then there is what lies between the joints.
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and lower those shoulders hanging over the part of the wound until it can be aligned when the edges shrink, and the wound lowers.
de la routure dou boueil	from the route of the blood vessel
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestine is twisted, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if it can be restored in some cases,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I see that some were nailed to a lance wound;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and it was the wound on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and became infected and turned into a fistula, which led to his excretion and windiness;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I provided care according to what I knew, and I continued to be meticulous until he was well again, and his limbs were joined together.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him joined together, I doubted that he had no illness in his abdomen;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he had no pain, but improved remarkably with food and drink;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And no experimental physicians said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be sutured in part;
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	then make large tests, and gather the edges of the wound;
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the tests are done with the mouth, then put them on the upper teeth;
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	ifreintiracle. ia toletzent hardne tise,esse tceste sanssexte afeblex amnace,elpsementil soing loinlume outale dextergeaux leuccite. laithele pasible;ngermeude andre ici
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	ssecume
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then place another tremor after it in such a manner as before, until the wound is completely healed.
et cout la plaie.	and count the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	Such a dislocation settles in the intestines, and causes no harm to the patient.
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and if it can be tied together with a very thin thread that is taken from the intestines of an animal,
en teil maniere:	In such a manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take this thread of intestine that is very dirty,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then tie it together with this thin thread of linen very tightly woven,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then push the thread into the arrowhead, and count the intestines, and rejoin it in its original route;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this way of repairing with tremors is not a risk that depends on the path of faith and hope,
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is large and wide, immediately when it is in one of the major intestines, there has been no injury nor healing because of its subtlety;
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	from a fistula or it is,
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Seek whether any wound or incision, as it heals, if it is everywhere called a fistula;
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and immediately when it is opened and closed again;
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula corresponds to that valueless and weak nodal action where no pain is felt;
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and is also opened as if the feathers of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and it never jumps clear and wide, nor sometimes thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	never poorly, and sometimes enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	sans:caisse itte the lessear. C,courant:es, wither thanterighten:nare.a; and: Thewese.
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	This is fire caused by one of seven injuries:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	That is to say, by the small piece or fragment of blood.
ou por sa malice;	Or because of its malignity;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	Or because it has hardened within, and above the lips where it cannot be born;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	Or it has too much blood;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	Or it is a stone, and the matter has a bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	Or the medicine is not good in its treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	Or because its corruption is like a plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	Or due to its property in the region is delayed digestion, and healing takes a long time, and it flees by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	Or it has bones or teeth;
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicine in its divisions;
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is intended for me to tell you about the treatment of fistula made by handwork;
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	It shows that fistula happens in all members of the joints;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	because it has large blood vessels and arteries, and nerves;
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	orifice of the intestines, or anus, or caecum;
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	Or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	And if the part that comes to the main characteristic of the limb itself and its appearances.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas of this kind require serious treatment, and there is no other solution but labor and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	And if there is no fistula that does not show signs until now that I have mentioned, and you are confident in the treatment.
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And you have seen it recognize, if someone takes a tent or fire, whether the fistula is straight, whether it curves.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	And if the fistula is twisted, you seek a subtle tent of flesh ("plonc").
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	because the lumps bend inwards due to twisting (tortuosity).
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	And if the fistula has an opening in the hand and you cannot well locate it by tent (observation).
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if you administer enemas through one of the openings (pertus).
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for if there is another opening in one of the fistulas and it's cleaned ("moistors" being a term that might refer to wetness or treatment), and it appears better.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then let it be bent with the hope that you know whether there are bones or nerves in it and it is not well formed.
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	And it wells estroié ás en vieux French: "
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	. Sarrête, and it'sour, in theur of the French. It fromentures of the. Theu the arme pure. From:esculature. Whatentre les lichorecause.
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	ngeau iacecuithecte fors audeuxseurs.
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And for the other patient let there be decay of bone, and the corrupt joints which are inside.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	And then the treatment as long as it is healthy.
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	And if the fistula is well-formed at a proper place, it requires that you cut out as much as possible, just like you can.
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	Then I put wet bandages on the wound, and apply ointment at the top of the fistula,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	so that the medicine corrodes the unnecessary delay in the base of the fistula,
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then I apply healing herbs to a sound joint, as long as it is healthy,
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	And if it is not healthy by this method, then you must cauterize as we have said before,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if the bone is decayed at the site of the fistula, you must cut it out,
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	Whether veins or bones are not blocked or primarily affected, as we have said before;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	And if the bone is exposed, and it has decay and blackening, let him cut out as much as possible until the decay has pervaded all of the bone,
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then the treatment of various things continues as long as it is healthy,
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	And if it is not healthy, then return with a blow as before;
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	So you know that it is not necessary to go further than this;
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	If you discover and find that you remain at the base;
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	And if there is decay, then restore the joint;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if he is so healthy at this point, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, you know that the contamination is too great to be overcome in future.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy but to let the natural lacteal fluid drain out;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a little decayed bone, then you can extract it with forceps;
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if the arrow is caught by that instrument;
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is any bone remaining, remove all of it without leaving anything behind;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if the dampness makes it contrary, and there is no mistake nor fear;
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if it is with coping and dampness and pressure, and release the bones;
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something causing sticky exudation on the wound;
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and let them stick for a time within the bones;
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then they will be lighter on the bones;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it's a large bone, like in leg or thigh;
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	if you allow the contamination to persist until all of the bone is blackened;
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there's a great part of the decayed bone, then comes up in large pieces from the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it covers and conceals all of the contamination, then heal it until it is completely solidified;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you about a case of one man in his leg;
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	sic :claus :sentence.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	There was once a young man of thirty years, who had pain in his leg due to something that came within the body.
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	As the materials entered into the leg, and were expelled from a large abscess without any reason to open it.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the physician through their foolishness attempted so much that they opened the abscess.
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and they introduced many materials, and it became a fistula, and there came to much dislocation and moisture from every direction of the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	but many a physician put in for up to two years, yet they had no healing success in the art of hands.
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	and when I came upon him calling his leg and the treatments it received,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and because there was much dislocation of the heart;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and became red like a young man's flesh, and had a yellowish hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I pitched my tent in one of these hernias, and then sought out all the hernias,
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and found that they came together from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	Then I hurriedly went there and set up in one of the hernias wherein I discovered a part of bone.
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and I found it rotten and decaying, with the rot extending into the bone within.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I called upon that which appeared from within the rotten bone, and considered it had no other rot than what was shown to me.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to attempt healing with similar remedies over a long period, but could not fuse it together.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then recommenced searching, discovering the bone as I had seen before.
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and found the continued rotten within the bone, which I set up, then took it out again, and thought to join the fracture.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I did not do so much that I put forth of the bone in its entirety, and itchould be softly;
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	ioutre laisser:nousage airexentures. Aoutil,sleisin tolore. Thefaire. Whatchareturexagre deffacitexant, andar. Iesqueurfee (that age, lice.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	n ocuithe patiue.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And for fear of death lest I suffer from him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For the often bloodletting, but it was entirely healed.
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and in the place of the bone grew hard flesh without causing any harm or contrary effect at all during its entire growth, neither to the head nor when coming out.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is fractured in no place of its joints, it must be repaired as follows:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	take. I. the ligament at the top of the bone that is broken,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command none to extend it upwards.
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and apply another tendon of greater thickness than the first to it, and place it under the hardened flesh that is above the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and are in place so you may replace the corrupted flesh above the bone with it.
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and discover the soft flesh above the joint where you find sinew that does not tear the flesh.
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and apply a piece of meat or cloth inside the bone to cover the corrupted flesh,
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it must be as much soft flesh to see and feel the corruption, and again another time of such tendons.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupted and it does not open or reveal itself completely, the corruption is in its midst or part of it.
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	if you discover the entire flesh; then apply a piece inside it,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then bind the tendon from part to another of the corruption, and it should be as long as we have said before; little by little, if that is what we have stated.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in a joint, then repair the joint corrupted, and apply the bone or it contains of the other part.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuations of these two joints, there should be no other covering than the one placed upon it.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or in the wrist joint, it is a very strong thing to deal with.
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but whatever it is, it must be discovered what that corruption does open to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and form it in all ways that you please but the nerves do not hinder it;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	And you know that the saw and hairs used to cover these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and appearance of the eyes.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And their thickness and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	And therefore it must be equipped with an appropriate instrument for each kind of work;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	And you will see the instrument with which you are familiar, according to your knowledge of this art.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the diseases' ways;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if it is the instrument with which you are familiar according to what it requires.
dou feu	two fire (possibly relating to the use of fire for cauterization or thermal treatments)
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulders for which they give up or due to moisture;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	And when you have learned curative medicine for this corrosion by the treatment of medicines, yet they do not benefit from it;
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	if it is meant to cover that member up to the joint where the inflammation comes;
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	if it is because of the pain from this death or by the great harm caused by the defect of the limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs show that the limbs become blackened, seeming like they are burned by fire;
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and then to the blackness after it, comes the corrosion of the limb upon itself;
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and takes it all over; if you hasten to cover it up.
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it is due to the sting of any venomous animals, like a sea scorpion or wasp, and similar things;
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if the corrosion is at the head of the fracture, and it breaks it, and do not give him any space to come back with his hand;
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes just to the hand, if he covers the joint, so that the corrosion does not come back into the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	And if it comes to the arm, then it costs; and if it goes past the cost, that is the wound.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	And there is no value in measuring the quantity of its virtue.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	And all of this happens when the corrosion comes or goes as it pleases: if it comes first in one joint, then costs after another.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	And if it comes or goes as it pleases, then costs everything.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	And if it rises to the leg, then costs at the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it rises above the knee, then there is no remedy but for the diseased leg to die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	And the way to cover or bandage the limb if it is above and below.
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	And extends some ministers to the lower links, and others ministers to the upper links.
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And you draw out the flesh that is between the two points of one joint so long as the bone remains exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	Then cover it with bandage and place a piece of lined cloth on each side so that the bandage does not touch healthy tissue;
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And strengthens the diseased part again and applies pressure;
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if the blood of a wound comes as we have experienced, then you must immediately cauterize it;
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	You place it on various powders restricting; then return to your medicine until it is completed.
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then bind the painful limb with a fraying ligament and heal it until it is sound.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	And I will tell you what happened to one man in my house:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	It happened to him a darkness that seemed like smoke from fire.
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	And that corrosion came first in its work on his body, until it covered everything of him.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when he saw the corrosion, he took it upon himself to cover his body, and was made sound again.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	And long after him came back that corrosion or some of it, and he came to me.
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And I put it upon things reflective after curing his corrosion, and he could not stop the corrosion.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And he asked me to touch him, and I did not have hope of reflecting the material.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	And I also doubted whether if I touched his hand, he might die.
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	because the virtue of the man was weak; and he despairs entirely, and returned to his land.
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	And when I took it upon myself to cover his hand, he was made sound again.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And I have no such story to tell but for this case, if there is any other instance.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	There is never a dislocation without painful twisting of the shoulder, and it lingers so long that there is great accumulation of blood.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And then they run and pierce it, and jump their shoulder, as we have seen among servants.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	And the skin that is above is also as delicate as a fine cloth.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	And they will not hurt bone or nerve, nor such diseases are called "healthy",
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	And it is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it is so elongated that it will slide down the bone even in joints, then it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And it is called the one that cooks it thoroughly, and immediately as soon as it is slightly, just like how we drape;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	And it does not hurt at all by its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you have faith that its burning does not hurt and its corruption is not manifest in it.
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And the skin is hardened by fire, so he treats it this way with cleansing:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	And if his breasts are large, and the belly upon which they rest has a foul smell.
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	And the Egyptian cleansing medication, which is made as follows:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take ash, and oil, and litharge, in equal amounts, and cook them together in one vessel over the fire:
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	As long as the medicine is red, and it becomes as thick as honey:
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	And then take from it according to your necessity, and they make it water and honey:
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And for cleansing the belly, and stopping the perforation:
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And let the medication remain for two hours, then extract it by pressing:
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times until his breasts are relieved of pressure, and his pain is eased:
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	And there is no time for water-ash enemas:
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	When this medicine is not present, and you require ash from oak wood, mix water above:
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	Then pour it, and for cleansing, as long as you know his breasts are well-formed:
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	And if he cannot bear it, then neither the Egyptian medication nor water-ash enemas:
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	If there is any water and honey in the cleansing, even if it contains a little litharge:
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	Or you cleanses with honey and wine-mixed honey, so that the honey has properties of relief and purification:
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	And the wine purifies it:
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	And when you have done this, and you are confident that his breasts are well-purified:
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	If this cleansing causes pain to emerge within him:
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And you are instructed to prepare decoctions with rose oil and wine:
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	Or you administer some medications and ointments that I have mentioned their properties or treat them:
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	And if he pricks at his breast, and the poultice cannot enter because it is small.
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	If a piece of iron slightly enlarges its spot, and puts there an Egyptian ointment tent.
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	Or basilical ointment, as much as it has been enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	And if the wound is too wide, he lets it stay open long enough so that the dressing or poultice can enter.
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the piercing that is below the belly button rises upwards, he covers it more deeply or less so.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For if the abdomen is open in some places, he does not let it harden with cold water.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the breast so as you see fit,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	If it appears in such a way that the abdomen contracts downwards as much as possible.
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	For if the abdomen is open in some places, he does not let it harden with cold water.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the breast so as you see fit.
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	If it appears in such a manner that the abdomen moves slightly downwards and nothing remains of the wound.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	And take conglomerating medicines to apply on the breast,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and they are under a piece of linen that covers the entire breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then it copes the puncture in that place of the breast; a little bit wider at first point;
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	for they are warm soot burns under another piece of linen according to the quantity of the puncture;
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and it puts under the breast of that puncture for aligning the wound, and does not remove the sharp pieces of linen until after several days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and the one who is on top of the puncture in the breast, often for removing the wound;
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and it knows what comes from the wound, whether it's poison or a little bit, or digested, or not;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take care that the patient feels pain or no pain; and if it has abscessed or not;
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has taken effect somewhat expanded, and you see how it affects the nature above the breast puncture;
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you know that the breasts have become hard, and approach the sanctity;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then move him in the morning or after three days, and when you dress the wound;
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	if change another linen, and renew the soot burn;
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	The following translation: "Cetera :meintaintenance of this sentence translateur. If you have tostruction de:rather, the 13rd century. In old English. Explain the Frenchsans :Gothic text in Old French fromge aleve. Itso, aajauge. Translates what's it, about ghostly translating.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle knives penetrate deeply after a long time, do not despair about health.
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	Because the healing approaches. For there are people who delay cleansing wounds and those that do the opposite.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if the belly protrudes significantly after many days, you know that the stomach does not recover well.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	And if the stomach delays in emptying itself, and is distanced, then adding moistened medicine with liquid substance and dried ones.
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	As in diabetes, because it has a great part of silver (vitriol), and this is the treatment for it.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	They apply diabetes, and they make it with rose oil, and the infusion is made from a little strong wine (viel vin igal).
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	Then they preserve it (the medicine) and use it; and this kind of preparation makes us more resilient (engroissiez), meaning stronger or robust in health.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	When diabetes is not present.
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	Or you take myrrh and aloe, and crush them, and powder them on honey when they are mixed with fire (sor el feu);
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	And then apply it (the medicine) to a linen cloth and place it under the breast, and there was never anyone who applied an apothecary's advice too late ("aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe").
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	And celestial hyacinth roots, which are also like flour and one hundredth (centoire);
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	And you can also use simple or composite mixtures: grind them, and make a powder from it, and put it on the honey that I have said, and then use it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	And if this cure is long-lasting, and don't cure it by this treatment.
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	And so you know that decay has begun, and it penetrates into the bone, or affects the hard parts, or the joints.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	Regarding the treatment of an abscess, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	From the incision of the bone
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Parotitis is an incision on the cheek over the earlobe of the hand
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	either thereof, or by chance it extends to other joints;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	And when it is inflamed, and one does not take care, if there comes an incision in the skin
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And it cuts and breaks bone until it cuts the root of the joint, and by chance it might cut the whole thing.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And it comes to rotting bone just as soon as it does appear, causing a stinking pain that one feels in both shoulders, and the joints are red and swollen.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have said in its division, the treatment does not benefit at all.
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	It implies that you must remove all the superfluous tissue from the joint which has remained for too long.
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauterizer is much help if the bone is sound, and the joint is healthy.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	And if the joint presses on the skin and it begins to swell, and the bruise (bleeding) appears.
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	It implies that you must place a restraint on the joint where there is pressure;
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	In olden parole, dans leve les galeaun, et devises à l’eau defface develovers duescully. Etate the latex: "Iacces. Forte aure'savour desusse laouten. Ieanre devisiing of thefele sone.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And put above the remaining part of the medical tools, and corrosive to burn everything away;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment with ointments until he is well.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if corrosion is in the bone, and it breaks, for as long as the bone rots, so much so that it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	And if you see that it has rotted, in one or two days as before is said;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then the treatment until he is well.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if he is wild or uncontrollable and it hurts a great deal, then you must first set him straight.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	Then cut the scab quickly by slicing across above when cutting an abscess.
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	And warn against cutting too close to the skin where the abscess is, because the patient would then experience intense pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it happens, then place something on it that calms.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain in the hand subsides.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	He must avoid those who hurt people's hands by chance in all parts of the body.
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	And by chance I may have bones or some fragment of them;
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	And none are born from the root of the joint; their birth is not found anywhere else on our body either.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	That which hurts anywhere else for two days will not stop making a sound;
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	And if it hurts in the place of the joints for two days, possibly he will not make any sound;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of those who are plump is light, in a way like this:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	The size is taken from the root of a wide cavity.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those that are born in the joint's root are painful to heal: if you hold it too tightly.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In those that are born into the ground or must be on the floor soon after birth, it is required that you first cradle the head round to the bone just at the moment of birth.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then you cradle the bone in a suitable sling until it becomes sound again.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The injuries that come together by birth or by wounding of a cut, or by the heat of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is required that you cradle the wounded one, so that they must be repaited according to their natural forms.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two towels or layers soaked in rose oil, so that they do not join.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or you place between two thin pieces of cloth so that it is joined together, as required; this refers to the technique mentioned above for immobilizing a wound or injury using soft materials like linen and rose oil.)
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If injuries come from neither of its two parts with the palm, then cradle that wounded part so as it requires.
Des vils	Of little consequence.
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	They are wickedly wrapped up with excessive and melancholic superfluencies that come from more than one limb.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and more often occur in the legs of those who go on pilgrimages and work, compared to others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It requires then that you never purged it of the colic and afterwards purified it from the church; perhaps a metaphorical way to describe thorough cleaning or treatment before seeking religious sanctuary for healing.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The care of iron is according to two ways: one way involves holding them, and piercing the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other way is to bind the vein, and pierce it through entirely;
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	ng thearlater. Ilgustream : " :encontre it:age.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then strain the sick leg upwards above the knee, just to the part below the groin.
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then cut into one, two, or three joints, a wide incision.
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then remove and draw out the black blood from one end to the other, as much of it as the sick patient can bear.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then there is mold, and he commands that you cover him with blackened meat by shoving in a dead animal's entrails.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And repeat the evacuation and sanitation when the wounds are cleaned up, and let it go for the sick patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The action of lifting the leg of the sick person is done in this manner: if it has much hair,
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then he places it in water and lifts up the leg with warm water until it turns red, and inflames the wounds;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you do not have water, then heat it with fire, and then cut the vein long at either end of the thigh or in the part near the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then treat the skin around the wound and scrape away one portion of the vein at a time until it appears when you feel it.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And she turns red and black, and when it hardens like a twisted rope.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	Then place the thread inside, as long as it lifts the skin, and then tie back one side of the wound.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then cut into another one or two joints beneath it; scrape the skin on the vein until it appears again.
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then stretch the skin back along the thread, as you have done before, and tie another side of the wound, just as you did first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then cut another width, or if you have more experience, stretch it, and tie both sides of the wound.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then draw and stretch it down to the second width; then pull out in widths until it bleeds all through, and tie it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	And if you cannot draw and lift it up, then insert a large needle with two strong threads into both ends at once.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And draw and cover it with mold thereunder, and turn your hand to one side and the other as much of it will bleed out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And let us keep it up therein the malaide totece de la vie, and lice entendu.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completely treated it, if you put fine wool and roses on the edge of the wound and oil, and heal it as long as it is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if you see him bent and twisted together, and not straight, as we have said before.
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	It implies that it should be split awkwardly but not covered up; and treat it as we have previously mentioned. This instruction appears to suggest a method of addressing the deformity or injury without attempting to cover it, focusing instead on corrective measures.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The form of iron used for binding the wound is curved, and does not cut into the vein; this indicates a description of an instrument or technique used in medical practice to address injuries without causing further harm.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is heavy-handed because if it were too delicate, it would cut into the vein; but rather it should be so as we have said before, and this is its form. The description here emphasizes the importance of balancing effectiveness with caution when using instruments or techniques in medical procedures to avoid damaging vital structures like blood vessels.
De la voinne civile	Of a civil vein. This could refer to a type of vessel within the circulatory system that is distinguished from others, perhaps due to its anatomical location or function. In historical contexts, the term "civil" might be used in contrast with other types like 'military' for different purposes.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is in the legs, in warm parts where there are no grass or trees growing and on earth where there is no moisture. The description likely relates to a specific location for medical procedures, considering anatomical features that may affect the approach taken by practitioners of medieval medicine. Such details could be critical when discussing treatments like cauterization, incision, or extraction in various body parts described.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and perhaps it may also grow elsewhere except in the legs; this refers to an occurrence of dryness beneath the skin, which could be indicative of a condition or reaction observed by practitioners. The term 'porriture' is likely describing some form of discoloration or drying that occurs under certain circumstances, potentially affecting medical decisions and interventions in such cases.
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	as it comes within the body of snakes and towards it; nestled between skin and flesh. This detailed description might be related to a medical condition or process observed in the context of snakebite treatment or other scenarios where similar symptoms are noted, illustrating how practitioners would have approached such conditions based on anatomical knowledge available during the medieval period.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if signs of this vein's beginning appear as a very great inflammation in the leg. This statement provides clinical observation that could be related to identifying early stages or complications associated with issues pertaining to 'cette voinne' (the mentioned vein), highlighting how practitioners might have assessed and responded to such signs based on their understanding of bodily reactions to injury or disease.
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	but changes the leg's color, and begins this vein as if it were a root coming out of the ground. Here, an analogy is made between a physical change in appearance (change of color) that might be observed following medical interventions or occurrences within the body, likening it to a natural process like a plant's growth—an approach possibly used by medieval practitioners to explain and understand physiological phenomena.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the wound opens, it implies that you should wrap an oval-shaped piece of cloth from half an inch to an inch and a half long; and the blood, as they might have described techniques for dressing or bandaging wounds using materials available at the time. The description underscores specific measurements and shapes associated with medieval first aid practices.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and let the cloth stay on the leg, and every time when there is no more blood in it, wrap around the piece of cloth, and the new wound. This line describes a repeated process during wound care where an absorbent material (cloth) must be monitored to see if it has soaked up all the blood, indicating how a treatment like bandaging was managed over time in response to changes in the patient's condition post-injury or surgery.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, then cut a part off, and wrap the remaining piece, and don't cover its root until it is entirely healed. This line refers to an approach for dealing with wounds in which a lengthy bandage has not yet fully recovered. Herein lies guidance on how one should address excessively long dressing technique or procedure involving removing part of a wound, as wee from the rest of the limb;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you handle it well, then enter into the channel and cause an abscess and swelling or illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For that which causes her to be treated little by little at the chin area, it is essential that nothing remains or grows thereafter.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and it is never this vein when treated with five palms of length or six.
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and some one brought it to me who had measured it as six palms in length, and if you handle it well, then raise it or puncture it there, and penetrate through the flesh.
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	so that it may drain all the material inside, and prepare any medicine or poultices for no longer than a week to apply to the abscess, and then treat it as with aspirations (aspiration therapy).
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And never to this vein does it rain hands (i.e., not directly manipulated), and immediately whenever it opens at the point of junction or intersection there, or where they meet.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and it comes with a puncture or perforation, and from which blood rushes out; treat it then as we have described before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Arrows that are born between leather and skin (referring to arrows lodged in the body, such as from a battlefield wound).
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called "oxen sickness" in our land because it happens many times with the mucus ("bué" from Old French for 'mucus').
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a small arrow that lodges between leather and skin, and goes up and down through the entire body ("corps").
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	And it sends him well to examine each limb part by part, until he cuts through the skin or it moves, and jumps up.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is affected by an excess of some humors, like they come towards and winds and worms and scabies or belly.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and there is doubt about its malignity, for when it goes through the body, and rises to the head, and comes to the oil.
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	by chance enters, and destroys the oil; this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you have seen it cure and extract, if it cannot push out how much it moves:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	since it requires that you lift the skin above and below a very strong ligament closely tied.
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then cut undernee and extract forcefully, and he turns towards it as if in the flesh, and you must not leave it.
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	if you cauterize with fire above, until it heals;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greater harm it causes, because it ruins the oil, as we have said before;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming near to or above the oil, then hold its root undernee, and cut beneath forcefully, and extract strongly.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and it is necessary for the malicious to use medicine mixtures to treat the diseased humors that are coming in;
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and if there is excessive consumption of exotic meats, infestation.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	from the pain that comes from windiness;
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is prevalent in our land "evermore", and it causes pain in some members;
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	And so it moves from member to member; and I have seen this myself.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I called upon a woman with painful joints, and I saw a small swelling in her vein.
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	And shortly after, it rose up like a worm to the shoulder.
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	more quickly than anything else, like quicksilver when it cuts off its flow from another vein;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain left that place, and focused on the shoulder;
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	And then, afterward, it ran through the whole body until she reached the other vein;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then she told me that she was returning through her body again, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled much at how she moved from limb to limb, for this kind of disease had never struck me in such a manner before;
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Always, I had seen many who have wanted to move the pain from one place to another;
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I had never seen it, as I saw in her;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that it was because she had a bare chest, and the veins exposed;
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and because that windiness seemed constrained there;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and I did not see it for this reason with those who are glutonous, whose chests and veins have been moistened, and their skin has been covered up again;
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you saw curing this ailment and felt the woman's pain, if it opens up as we have described;
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	if the liver rises above and below, and then closes down so that the constricted windiness flows out of its place;
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the vein; and if you do not see it in your hands;
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if the care that drives away the windiness as with bad pills, and other similar ones;
Des saiettes	llustration:agecunits, and Iaccurate. Whatis age iciensent. Thisencisse. Il:age:arms
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	sence. Androma:sic:secsure apex. Andresenture, and itcumptionalitgendacerbience:0re:screwage;troiage, buten, it’ssesculage dextremises.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety of their parts is that there are those which have great points, and small ones, and hairs, and glued together.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and of those where there are pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and that which hurts in no limb if it hurts according to two ways: whether on the principal part of the hair, or elsewhere;
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	as in the brain, heart, liver, womb, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs;
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it hurts in no part of these members, and the sign of death appears to me, hereafter I will tell you:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	it suggests that you must take care in the extraction of this arrow because the wound may result from multiple underlying conditions or factors. In historical medical contexts, arrows could cause complex injuries requiring meticulous attention to prevent further complications during treatment.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this bad sign does not appear beforehand, and the arrow is not embedded in it, treat the wound. This line offers a practical step to take if an individual has been injured by an arrow that has not deeply penetrated tissue or caused visible symptoms (bad signs). It implies assessing whether there's external trauma (the arrow) without significant internal damage and then proceeding with appropriate care for the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And when the sign of a head injury is present if the arrow penetrates and breaks through the bone, or if there is an open fracture above the skull. This line discusses signs indicating traumatic brain injuries where arrows have caused direct damage to the skull's integrity, potentially leading to more severe complications due to exposed bones (open fractures) and internal injuries like brain contusions or hemorrhages.
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	is when there's a visual impairment and hemorrhage and swelling, inflammation of the tongue, spasm, and mental confusion, and colic vomiting. This line refers to symptoms that might occur after an injury involving internal bleeding or pressure on the brain stem (colic vomiting), indicating severe neurological damage affecting vision, speech, motor control, and cognitive functions due to trauma from a deep penetrating wound like an arrow striking near vital areas.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps there is no obstruction in the nose or ears; but perhaps it affects speech and voice. This line considers possible respiratory issues that could arise from such injuries involving external structures like nasal passages, which might not be directly damaged by an arrow penetration yet still impact breathing functions indirectly due to pain or inflammation in the region, as well as potential damage to areas affecting speech and vocalization.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and sudden movement of white discharge coming from it, like bleeding, or incisions. This segment describes symptoms that suggest the presence of an injury causing abnormal secretion (poultries) resembling both pus discharge as well as blood-stained laceration scars. It's highlighting two possible outcomes: purulent exudate and a wound with bleeding, suggesting infections are present either as abscess formation or other issues that could be associated with the text from an abscesses of this century to the 12th century French treatise, it’s origins.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	Laws from the French: Celtic alexandere translated in Old English translation of mea. A2. Innocently tol english. Theg itnagents (therefore. Bibles and thenne; ether, with an olden,represented. Ientirement, "Gentlets; theorse:
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of swelling when it presses on the body, is that it is close to the left breast, and feels as if it were pierced into something hard, not hollow.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And perhaps the swelling also stops moving like a chick, and black blood comes out with cold sweat and shivering, and syncope.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	You now know the doubt that the wound opens up.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of a wound that never heals without the appearance of scabs jumping from the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's skin takes on a darker hue, and breathes heavily with high aspirations and coughs sharply.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the wound presses into a deeper layer of skin behind it, then it is located near the small of the back; and it causes great pain all over and deep coughing, and every limb moves with spasms involving the hips.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the wound presses on the stomach, perhaps there is no scab jumping from it at all; instead, one might experience digestive issues with undigested meat in their system.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the wound presses on the stomach or intestines, and there is a sudden detachment of tissue within the bowel lumen, it provides no hope for either treatment or removal of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the wound presses on the bladder, then the urine may spill out and come forth with a foul odor, and the patient feels intense pain; you know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	And the other limb, as it does with the head and neck and back and shoulder joint and spine and both sides of the body and legs, and the member seems to be safe in many respects.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the artery is in the head of the nerve and it is not poisoned, as I will tell you because you do such things.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened at one house that there was an arrow hitting the nerve root:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and touched another side of the ear grease without feeling anything.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And touched at a game an arrow which struck the oil underneath the paper beneath.
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrow was replaced, but it didn't go back straight to its original position.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and the arrow was large from a Turkish bow, with all its iron swiftly passing by the ears; it struck, and no misfortune occurred as a result.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And touched an arrow to the throat of a Crusader, and the arrow was Arabic in its shape with ears.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I shaved off the beard, and then delicately touched it back to its place where I had removed it; the Crusader was healed.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And touched an arrow to one house that was blown up or had its belly demolished, and I thought he might be dead.
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after passing three hundred years, his condition did not change at all.
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut on top of the arrow, and disarmed it, and touched it back, without any unfortunate result.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a house where an arrow hit the back, and there was a wound sewn up on it;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and kept the arrow inside for some time without affecting its natural state;
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and found no harmful effect in any of his natural actions.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And see another person, who had an arrow hit his face and whose wound was sewn up;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and suffered such great pain since then, as well as many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And touched an arrow at one house of the prince or king whose palace was in the center;
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and was slightly tilted to the right side; and the arrow had been restored.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	: Itunes. Ewaxe. Laissage.J'sall andre,liefesurfej entir : Theopresse.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I sought to understand her thoroughly, and did not feel it at all.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	And he felt no pain or pressure in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was due to the point of the cautery.
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I placed it on his limp body unconscious, for he did not flinch.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	And I saw his limb from the cautery.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I placed him on a stretree (implying a makeshift or simple supportive structure) immediately, and healed the wound directly, and then stayed there with his long pains.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	So long as he felt the cautery tool within his body; and then he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I applied hot water to the wound immediately with my hands; as long as it was open.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	And I tried it out, and felt the head of the cautery sticking back to its place.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then I applied cold water over the wound again with that hot remedy (aque), as long as I could see the cautery sticking out.
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and it passed well these three months.
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	And then I took out the staples that were in it (plaie), and my left hand and right one held them, but they wouldn't come loose.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	And I continued to displace them with a very fine touching and handling of staples, for one year; and I took them well made in it (a long time,
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	According to this, when its shape will come at the end of this chapter, until I heal it, I kept the wound open.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the physician judges that the nose chart cannot restore the nose.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I healed it again then, and sewed up the wound, and fully restored the patient's painful parts.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	You have said about the quality of extracting some arrows;
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	If you put your treatment where I do not say it, for books cannot fully comprehend all.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	But the skilled masters know little on these matters, and concerning what is present and absent.
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Nine works and nine instruments, at the extraction of foreign objects involved in this craft is what we find below.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that the arrows come from limbs or are driven in as per certain ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through their flesh or by another means;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And that which jumps into them or enters is an arrow entering the body's flesh, and it has never happened now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump nowadays, let her leave them so long that the flesh is prepared to receive and accept the removal.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And also if it is driven into bone, and cannot be extracted, let her leave for many years then, and every day a little more.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it jumps, and if not, then penetrates through any means underneath every part of the flesh until its entrance is enlarged, and then pulls it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is lodged in bone at the head, and goes to one of the hollows by the brain.
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	And there are some of the accidents I mentioned to you earlier: if it does not extract her, but leaves her until she becomes levelled out again after many years.
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	because if the arrow comes out suddenly, it is death for him.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is lodged in bone only and does not come out suddenly,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And in a few more years no further harmful accidents will happen to him since he takes the cautery.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and it is healed sover ce meun: "Olce estage devises delivre peints li veritable iaxedere: nexte theeolence l'ostroine lactes siete nons.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is put back into its place, but it cannot be seen, then all surrounding things tremble.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, if the arrow has no visible counterpart or matching piece.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	And if you cannot reach through the wound's depth and ascertain the arrowhead's condition.
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	And there are no bone nor tendon nor vein as long as the wound is large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	And if you can retrieve the arrow, and if it has ears (holes) in its tip that hold onto something.
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	If there is an object lodged at least two-tenths of an inch into the muscle you can retrieve it.
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	And then you break or tear off the ears from the arrowhead if it's possible to extract it.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And subtly so that you don't break the arrowhead, but extract it more cautiously.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot get it once, then the arrowhead has penetrated deep enough that pulling it out is not advisable.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the removal of blood causes contrary effects, then provide what we have stated regarding treatment in this chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	And warn you about the incision on the nerve and the vein, and how do you proceed when pulling out the arrowhead with potential danger?
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	Or quickly or strongly or smoothly; and bind the medical professional according to the shape of the arrowhead which it is.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	For it is the greatest help that he be, and if you cannot, then apply according to what they show by signs.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The scourge that comes from another place where there is no sign of him or his skin is inflamed so clearly that one can see and feel it without hesitation.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Take the size now, as large as you can with the forceps, and then extract if he jumps away at that moment.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if she is lodged in the bone, turn your round hand rhythmically into it until you enter the bone, and expand the bone, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if she cannot be extracted, let her remain still for now, and then resume the extraction as long as she yields.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if it were of cautery he had received, throw him into the entire body.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if he was wounded, and you see to administer bandaging, apply such an instrument with hair on it.
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	so that the point of cautery enters into the hair of the instrument; and then throw forcefully.
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the cautery is to be applied with a point entering into it for prolonging the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the cautery has touched him, it is essential that you cover the entire wound or where his fluids are located; if possible.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then treat the wound as best as can be done.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the cautery has wounded his side or abdomen or bladder, and it is nearby, then cover it as well, if you can.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and do not cover the vein or nerve there, but extract it first, then treat the wound as is appropriate.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and continue treatment until she has healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of forceps have hooks like a bird'e beak for grabbing arrows; and now this shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways with them: large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of the cautery involved.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of one of its two prongs is also like the quill of a bird.
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	so as to throw in the cautery point, like this form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The design of these forceps for throwing objects and assessing if this applies here:
des voinnes dou cors communes	arrows commonly used during that time.
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	of arrows for which one can heal, and then the head is numbre sixty-one.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	scape. Whatxent thewere andiage defface:give theirexang ascription. Injour, ito.
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the two arteries which appear in both temples;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the veins that are located in the corners of the eyes' lips, which they call "aspirates";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is embedded in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose.
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the girdles that are on the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the veins that are above the lips, which they call "augerickles";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and veins located on the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins which are commonly found in each arm;
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic vein, and it lies on the left side of the chest, and they call it "the chief vein";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the mixture is called "fast", and it consists of the cephalic and basilica veins;
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	they call them "the heart vein"; and the basilica vein lies on the right side of the chest.
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and they call it "belly vein"; and it is located under the ribs.
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and that which is commonly found, clearly visible below the navel.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the brachial vein is the one located between the little finger and ring finger, and it has two parts;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg there are three veins: one is located on the back of the left hip;
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second joint vein which is on the right hip side; and the vein called "nose" that is located in the other hip's knee;
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins;
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The healthy veins that are after the ears aid in treating old wounds and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and his quality is as I have told you, and he should not pull out the hair;
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	And rub the skin where arrows are embedded with an abrasive cloth; then tighten the shoulder of the patient with a sharp pin.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	As the arrows emerge behind the ears in their left hands, indicating the back of the head's main point:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	And when you do your duty, and do you feel the pain in your shoulders if it is from within?
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	Then take the needle, and insert it into the vein just under the bone, then raise your hand along the whole vein.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	And copes with the skin and vein well during this treatment, and draw out the blood as much as you see it.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then tighten and bind it, until it becomes sound again.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already said about the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The healthy arteries that are inside the temple veins if they belong to old age.
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	And also, and ocular astigmatism customary, and the tears of the eyes are abnormal.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the quality of this healthy if it is so as I have said:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	And is that the patient's shoulder is dislocated, so much that the arrows are protruding clearly.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	And feel the pain in your shoulder here, and then from within;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	Then raise your hand over the vein on your shoulder index finger, and insert the needle into it.
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	And raise the vein hereof ail vein in your shoulder, and hold it well done if you are other veins for this treatment:
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Metall :sans morale, siensemble.olden.metal. ieval tocate toungrilage lai metre incautile: lesunmetre develafte theocular. Hereafter itautexile ofrstanturelmajourneaux le cotton. AIsoleverulgar,leaves.anatomicalsic, alexander.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And then blood clots form, and they allow them to remain until they are healthy; and we have spoken about their bleeding and extraction, at the beginning of that book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The head injury to the forehead is as valuable as the treatment of chronic facial diseases, and migraines, and rheumatism.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And the quality of this dislocation is that it pulls back its cartilage sharply until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument called "fossor," whose shape is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the tip on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, letting the blood flow according to the amount you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then give to the patient the dislocation, and hold the vein until it is healthy again and not subjected once more to a wide lance.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Always, it does not suffice that the lance be too large; and the vein is out of place, for the bone is hard, and perhaps breaks the lancet when it's too subtle.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The injuries of these veins that are in the ear lobes help us with their movements, and at the throat, and in rheumatism, and headaches.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their treatment is that it pulls back its cartilage sharply from any connection, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then heals it properly, and the treatment of the dislocation involves a little pressure with a somewhat wide lance, as there is no need for force ('char').
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the lancet is too subtle, perhaps it breaks; then treat the blood flowing therein, as you are accustomed to do, and then place underneath the vein, and hold it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	s:s : Alloujac,sure, and cestimate: the:sufresse:nacre;sacre. iade.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	If like a migraine or headache comes to its face, and immediately when it is old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	And the quality of sanity if he pulls his neck tightly, then tug on his navel with your left hand.
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	And take the flame lightly long, and stick it into the space between the two nostrils.
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	For the vein does not open well, and he will now start to correct.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And don't go too far in the procedure, make correction to the blood according to your necessity, then tie up the wound at night because it is very quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And that is the shape of the flame.
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The quality of sanity helps to untie the knot in the patient's neck, and at the beginning of illness, and with many diseases, and with inflammation, and with corrosion, and with herpes, and similar conditions.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of sanity if he tightly pulls his neck both to one side and the other as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	And let the master be standing above the patient's head, and the sick person look at one of two seals.
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	Then open the vein a little wide, then treat the blood carefully as is customary.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	And reopen in the other vein, then dislocate the ligament, and restrain them slowly.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	nacles seingle apexilexentiflement.seculte dex ceitreuxame to tirexement.cumach [tocramantocitex:sanglion. Andes,re, loucreceuxse.ce le citede soignardez ouseceuxsecsse
De la sainie des leivres	Of the purification of books
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The purification of teeth above the lips helps to clean in the mouth and prevent gum disease, tooth cracks, tongue cuts, and bad breath.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the purification is that it should befall him who said: and constrain his neck, as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	se (faire:tachape deities, andace ceinthe a cité,ude,c apexente.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	And they are known by this that they are black, and because of this they have thin black veins.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	Coping with both, and if you do not recognize them, and if you doubt it,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	If you handle the largest part, and also do these two kinds of incisions that are above and below, because it is a similar method.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	From the healing of below the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The healing of the incisions below the tongue after the treatment of the cephalic (head) injury, and it is at the seam of the throat, and includes diseases of the eye and mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of the better one if it is that he sees among your hands in front of his sun, and he soothes the tongue, and looks down into each side vein black.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Healthy both, and do not go too far into them, for there are the arteries in them.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The incisions done commonly for healing are made according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	Or you pinch a piece of very fine flint, or a small oval stone as they are called when cutting trenches, and it is called "anaglyphe."
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And are broad and fine according to the breadth and slenderness of the incisions.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of a flint knife is very famous, and it is broad like you can see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is required to open the incisions that contain large visible blood clots and filled with mucus.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And its form is like an oval stone ("forme dou flaime olivaire").
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And is finely pointed, and it is better for the smaller incisions, or to extract yellowish blood ("est por sainier les voinnes subtils", or "subtile arterie").
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The illness of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that affect the throat, and tongue, and chest, and belly.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is imperative for the physician to ensure proper drainage and that he warms up the artery which lies within.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he handles the artery, and blood is drawn from it, then it must be staunched, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and it should not be bitten by lice, but rather treated as one would with fleas.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not open clearly, then it must be opened and an alternative must be chosen.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	whether you wish for no pain from it, or heal the vein in its place by pressing on it with his arm: she opens clearly.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and he handles the lice infestation, as we have said before.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you know the vein of the illness well, then it must also be extracted from his arm as long as you understand its location.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then signify the vein with enfeeblement, and bind his arm, and handle the flea infestation accordingly.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and you must not injure the artery when you see it swollen, for it is an artery; do not then harm it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it rising high as the urine of a child, and red and subtly so, do you recognize that it is from an artery;
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hurry up now, and place your two shoulders for a long time, then bend them so that your shoulders do not move too much, as this happens many times.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the arm is tied there, and let it stay like that, and do not move his painfully; and fear him, and do not let him move while he is still unhealed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the shoulder is not stiffened, and it hurts you, and there is no medication available to you at that time, because the head of the dislocated arm retracts, then stiffen the shoulder.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a poultice of figworts, and make it, and take half of it and apply well to the other side today.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If the shoulder is not stiffened, that's good; if it is not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that stiffen blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stiffening is not a result of any other position for the small leak at the wound site, and its effectiveness on the twisted arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The treatment of the vein in movement helps it by treating the upper part of the heart and the chest area.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of the base layer and the cranial, as we have said before.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it is important for the surgeon that he watches the nerve underneran, and if it points too much to its source, then he will recover the nerve.
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it swells and the treatment becomes ineffective; sometimes even it does not heal.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in anyone due to its subtlety, then you must heal the nerve with a needle every year, and try to prevent the nerve from reopening.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between two nerves, then make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	the cranial blood vessel'ayer helps by drawing blood from the head, and also assists the arms.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is important to heal the veins near the olive branch or the thorny tree, because they are safer from all wounds, as there are no nerves or blood vessels in them.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is important to ask the more experienced person about the location first time, and don't worry if you need to start again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and sometimes it swells in anyone, but don't worry about the first time.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of this treatment is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you must know about a surgeon, if it is that surgery is not intended merely to maintain health.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and for preventing future illnesses.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and it should be performed in one of the three openings that are known as cephalic, pharyngeal, and oropharyngeal.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and the surgeon must begin such procedures at the first signs of fullness, both in autumn and after eating when the sign of satiety appears.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and the surgeon must perform such procedures either the first day or within three days after two to three days of the operation.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The surgery that is intended for diseases does not have a fixed time determined by the day or month, but when necessary, it should be done at any hour and in every ten days.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it does not require surgery for children just until the twelfth year or women during four quarters of a month up to seven days.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	And such patients who have passed sixty years should not undergo surgery.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And if anyone wishes to be operated upon, in whatever way it may be, it is required that they must drink a leeching infusion for the intestines.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if there are many fluids retained, so that the veins do not draw off excessive fluid from the intestines in a way that would harm the main limbs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	and such should not be operated on if they are too strong from meats, whether they are drunkards or weak-willed, as long as it is so.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if one is operated on after an intestinal colic, vomiting, bowel movement disorder, multiplicity of pregnaninas a woman, labor, traveling, dining, sleeping, and in everything that concerns virtue or by anything from the weapon or the heart.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	and subtly the humor is lessened by foods and beverages and medicine, so that it may come out.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	: leges anseure taughter. This one. Asmeil, laurate :rather than it'sel. The samele 12nd. Herejaccurse the. Ipsum:rite, illoinates aicarte, le :it :irol.
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	And you must heal the vein and on both sides of it, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	And keep that day free from work, punishment, pleasure, and similar things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	And let the shoots and branches grow thicker and taller than those which you heal, and trim the arm's brush .ii. or .iii times.
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	Then extract the arrow above meagerly, because when it is too deep or scarce, it cannot be corrected without.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then trim the flesh around the wrist as long as the veins swell up, and smell it.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	Then let the healer look at a little water from an old jar for that particular place on the wrist, then take his instrument in the left hand and place it above the area of the flesh on the wrist a bit or where he sees fit.
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not become weak or fail in relation to the injury.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	Because there are veins that flee as fast as strings to the healer, and such ones have little windiness.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	If when we touch them with our instrument, if the vein retracts, and it cannot open, then they are of this kind.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if it overstretches the vein, for this reason he must be informed in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein acts for the first time it is good; but when not in thatch as long-time again.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if his hair is thickened, and the maladies cough, let him leave it for one or two years, and not to bind the arm anymore.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	By chance, an abscess may appear on his foot; if he bathes or immerses himself in water, then restart the cure only if it pleases him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the cut is small, or you lightly touch it without doubt that it will not yield much blood as you have seen, then be cautious in this particular incision of mine.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And once quickly heated up, so that the hair grows thickened; because this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the limb swollen, do not restart the treatment, and apply a little bit of oil on it, because it alleviates the pain in the blood and becomes moisture in this limb.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And thus apply the oil to each treatment that you perform for the veins, so as to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	And this makes it trialled and bent over when I put it under the limb; if lightly touched without concern when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if he comes with big abscesses, which often happen when the vein has not been treated until it is quite small, just as many times as this condition occurs.
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	If you hasten and apply wet cloth with water and salt slightly hot to the limb and restrain it for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And it is necessary that you do this after the bleeding from the vein has stopped, and if he does not return to the limb any day or night later, then you need not worry.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see anything of aloe or myrrh boiled in the bark of cinnamayer, just as it looks.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times abscesses and appearances occur in the treatment of the church's cure: put your hand on it, and if you find the limb swollen again due to the pressure of the hand, that is an unpleasant appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not put on anything that we have mentioned for now, as by chance incising without the artery; but make a tight band to harden the limb first, then treat it with another treatment until it heals.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And for each vein according to its quantity of strength and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	Because if it is black, let it drain as much as possible until it turns red again; and if you see a large one, let it stay as subtle as possible; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary to those who are painful and full, and have the skill of drawing blood, so that he makes larger wounds wider.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and they should be healthier and often, and they must become healthier when cutting across rather than pulling.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this method of healing is safe from the flowing of blood and tearing of nerves, and it proves that a longer and narrower approach is better.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And to those whose course requires the healing process, they must give milder pains in grape juice; if it is inflamed, administering four or three times depending on its severity.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if he has a cold complexion, administer the milder pain-inducing medicine in honey syrup before the treatment or in aromatic honey with spices like pepper, cinnammun, ginger, and cloves, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if the palm is part of the healing process, after releasing some blood, it must breathe bread soaked in a subtly scented syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and make use of other things that we have mentioned in the section on syncope, for the evacuation of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to loosen his arms and heal again at other times, when he is greatly debilitated by excessive healing, it must be done gradually according to the continuous power of its virtues.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wants to loosen his arms after the first healing and has strong vitality, then he must rest for two or three hours after the initial healing, or after the second hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wants to be healthier on another side, it must then be restored gradually over the next day or two.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	Because there is quite some blood in the already inflamed area, and it brings fever; to treat this, he must administer a large quantity of medicine and widen the abscess until it bleeds.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	then that you treat all the conditions of healing and place your hand on his shoulders when he is healthy so that the wound does not bleed in a pool.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	And this happens many times when the healed person is neglectful.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it does not need to be done when you de-slight the arm again, and bleed out the blood a second time, and press firmly on the wound.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If it is a case where they are stretching their arms too quickly, because that would be harmful.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	But leave it so that it heals the second time around; or at least without using fire to heat the abscess's opening, as long as they are cold within the vein.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	And places under one strap of cloth moistened with water, and presses it lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has flown away, let it not be squeezed or compressed until the abscess is calmed down.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it becomes necessary to drain blood twice, let the drained blood be returned to that vein, or into another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein is removed from the main artery because it is composed of it.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the way of draining it is that the patient holds his hand in warm water until the vein becomes red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then it is lightly tied up so that the vein heals well, now withdraran blood being carefully drawn from a narrower and shorter vein.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and if the puncture is large, or if it is well tied near the joint of the hand, so that it cannot be withdrawn, then put the hand in warm water again, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in ice, then do not put the hand back into warm water, because you will freeze more than thaw.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the healing of this vein is safer than any other vein which does not contain an arrow or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The healing of the right hand's tendon is worth all diseases of the heart and this is how it works:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Strain the hand and place it in warm water until the vein flows.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if the blood from a narroran vein is drawn without causing any harm.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and do not draw too much blood, as all the tendons are dry from lack of nutrients.
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and put the hand back in warm water, if it is frozen within the wound, and cannot be withdrae drawn.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood twice as well as you know how, put oil and bandage on it to heal quickly, and so do for every wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The healing of the left hand is worth against mouse disease and do it just as I told you for the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The healing of the spleen is worth all diseases that are present in the body.
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	as diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the knee, and old legs, and resembling diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	nail:la ceteres le visage, The lorre. œsacre :cime. Howse. It, Lauren, ilice (it. Vrai :xile of ageing:caractescaire dexcre vaure ail. œuvres :lore (2oull himel lice.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And above the joint it lies; and the vein is near the ankle, and above the joint they go very far.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	It becomes either too wide or larger at the ankle, or in the knee area, where it moves much.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you straighten it above the joint, and warn those who are underneath, and retrace the healed area like in covering again; and let its shape return to normal.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it does not come out on its own, then put the vein back in place and let the blood flow well again.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if it needs to be straightened for the first time, then restart it above a little bit more, because its skin is salted.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said before, and make the same with the other vein too.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The skin of the sciatic vein is high on the foot, and its healing corresponds to the pain in the backache when it' Written in blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its healing is that it lies between bathing and being stretched above the ankle 3 degrees; thus, twisting is involved in the process.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	For otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, then straighten it in every way you can, and across.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And it needs to be done as it moves and because its skin is salty, for it is very well repaired by hand.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not treat it, then there is no improvement in its vein when above the joint or on its back side, and into small movements; warn those underneath.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And correct much of the blood so you can see it, and then loosen its ligament, and put on cotton and restrain it; it is now healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Venous sutures
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Venous sutures are made of horns, or leather, or silk; and the use of these is done according to various methods: either by piercing and drawing out blood, or by making a puncture wound.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this venous suturing which is done by piercing if it's done in various ways: or with fire, or to theft.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	And for incision made by cutting and blood extraction if it is done on each side of the armpit, it is performed in XIV days.
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	Because one lies completely on top of the head; and the others are inside the neck.
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	And XX other in each side of the neck; and the suction on the mouth area.
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	And the suction on the hands; and the suction over the wrists.
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	And the suctions inside the arms; and the suctions on each leg.
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	And the suctions on each ankle; and the inflammation does not deal with blood, for it only involves small needles scattered throughout the skin.
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	And for this reason we do not hesitate so much as in the practice of veining;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And it does not require that she be administered immediately or by any heat or cold in any disease arising from overfullness, until all the blood is drained.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if necessity dictates for fever treatment or by custom, we administer every hour at the beginning of each month, at its end, and in between.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are such as when they have need for suction, they feel pain in their head.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and such as experience overfullness and swelling in their face, in their head, at the neck, and darkness in their eyes.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and such as experience a drop of blood in their mouths, and have expelled the tongue, and drawn out blood.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and there are such as think, and see blood in their food and feel pain, and have bites, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs and immediately after the month, we order suction to be done in two hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The practice of medicine that helps the head to straighten up the hairs, and it does not require so much after d'amistit.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	:thorice.
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And it does not matter if that person who is of cold constitution uses it or has catarrh, for this causes them great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And because such matters do not concern whether the patient uses vigilance or suffers from cold-related illnesses.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover often become negligent, and for this reason it is necessary to place the suction pump slightly further down due to doubt of incompetence.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The suction placement is near the head of the chief and the basilica, and for this reason it is valuable to avoid distension.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and in the crack of the channel where pressure builds up, and when emptying.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and to press it lightly, because if it holds too firmly, it may cause incompetence or stomach and heart issues.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The suction of the abdominal twelfrances is about equal to the pain in the chief's chest, and otitis media and swelling, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the arteries.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is near the chief's sanctuary; and it is necessary to instruct the saint to express his hand when placing the suction pump, so he does not cover the artery or bleed out blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The suction around the mouth is about the condition of the mouth, and gum disease, and similar diseases found in the mouth; and it is near the sanctuaries of the twin lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The suction at the joints is about the disease that comes from heat and filling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The suction on the sides is as much as two hands of a pair of arms.
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	because it draws blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and commands the saint not to inflict too much punishment on him, as his hand is bare of fingers and knowledge of veins and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction placed on the croup is about the foundational diseases and similar conditions thereof, and it must be large and copper-colored, as it needs to do well its work properly; and perhaps if it were too subtle, it would break apart, causing great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs relieve old rain-related pains and marshy conditions, as well as bladder issues; they are near the twin saddles, two calves, and overall, they weaken the body's function over time and bring about various states of pain.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	sizes of theoron ander quire:esleave itraiter iewre: asures en: allons invention esrients theaficarepastes: ei: "theuves, forcause ofter, after: (10arre develve.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the wound is large, it allows for twofold injury: firstly to gently open the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the wound is very deep, it allows for injury the third time; and when we try to drain a little bit of blood several times, we only succeed once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we draw out much blood, we often reopen it; and when the wound is very deep, they inflict pain on it and ultimately it becomes so fixed that it cannot be moved.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and allows for those with thick skin and rough edges, that you anoint the soles of their oil-wet vents with a stimulating and dissolving liquid.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in the case, of violet oil, or soft almond oil, or seed oil of squash;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in the other case, with watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if there is an excess of large and cold fluid, then apply bitter oil, or balm, or sesame oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if that person is healed to have tender skin and large pores, it does not require any oil.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it requires to wash afterwards the vents with rosé water, or cold water, or water of mulberries, or squash oil, or porcelain water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, they should rise from the bed with rosemary water, or mint water, and sumach, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large excesses should rise from wine or cold water, or decocctions of sesame or chamomile, or something similar.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and do not require to have the suction of vents before or after bathing; rather one hour after bathing: and does not sleep again following the suction.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is required that he should wrap up when it needs to be suctioned and when he is suitably moist.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And those who are healed become irritable, and if the wound is still too hot and inflamed:
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if it requires cold things like apples and radishes and lettuce after the bath, and similar things:
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And they wash leeches, and skirts of virgins, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have cold disposition, if they desire honey syrup and strongly scented wine, which is neither hot nor cold, and wash with little water and leeches and small birds' blood.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And the month when it will swell up, he should drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it is intended that no one should give triakis or musk before the vaporization, nor afterward to strengthen the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And they should be removed without difficulty, but it does not require that those who are very hot drink them.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The suction cups that are placed on wounds are those put under the liver and above the kidney, and in the foot, and gouty joints, and abdomen, and bellyache and swelling of joints, because those members do not suffer any injury when they are there.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	And they do not do it because it draws blood from limb to limb.
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	As we do when the breast milk comes out naturally; to counteract the viscosity in the limb, as we put suction cups on the abdomen and belly to reduce the limb.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	And he has pain when there is amputation or incision, if it draws the operation away from adventure by its attractive power, or deprives the joint of its moisture.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	And so they do when it is put under the liver and above the kidney when there is retained vaporization.
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	And these vacuum cups are prescribed as empty to suction only; and never all at once fire or rainwater-filled.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	And as with those diseases of heavy mourning or grief, and in such manner is the suction cup filled with hot water, or wither heated plants.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The French medical treatise onchau le castrate, etre ous. Here is anime, et:n thegustres of the same: LaouiT'sure oferisrather than. There'sesuor trepouren: The Romanie.
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it should be two hands and a half palm wide, and have its edge toothed like the end of a small hole, as if to push in a needle.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it should be applied on rain, so that it does not wound the malady's limb when placed upon it.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	And it should have a spindle of crossed rain or iron, for attaching an arrow in positioning.
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And they should be both large and small, depending on the nature of the disease and the severity experienced by those affected.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	However, the suction cups for children are not just mere objects; they differ from those intended for slender individuals and robust ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And should this suction cup be placed upon its member?
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	Take the wax arrow or a liniment; apply it between the spindle that has the suction cup attached, ensuring proper placement for therapeutic effect.
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	If the light should shine at the base of the suction cup so as not to burn the malady's limb.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	And then place it upon its member; you should position the suction device at the specific location we have mentioned earlier. Once in place, observe as one proceeds to apply pressure; when the patient reacts, reposition the suction cup accordingly.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And continue to use the liniment as instructed; repeat often if you have mastered it and it is necessary for achieving desired results.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	For the suction device used in treating pneumonia-related illnesses with no spindle or hole involved; it is applied directly to the patient's limb only when the condition appears clear and not congested.
et c’est li forme:	And this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Suction devices are applied only to the small parts of the body where one cannot place suctions, such as lips and gums, and appear similar in appearance.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	And from their shoulders they are stripped off like when I do not want it, and other similar things.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	And the quality of the patient is that if you move their moistened wounds which are sharp and pointed, they will feel pain.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	And put a needle in mildly warm water until they become round and plump, and have nothing in their bellies.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	And then you are to make a vein and suction, then rub the limb until it is red, and place above the moistened wounds.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they become flat and comfortable, if it is possible to apply suction cups, then put them on, because this is also very good afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, raise the shoulder joint first, and then warm it well, and then extract.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the wound'ayer is too warm on his shoulder joints, then wrap him with a cool linen cloth and place it above them until they become cold again.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if the wounds are multiple, put sulfur powder or ointments and similar things on them until they become cold.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Or you put some dried flax seeds near the shoulder joint and let them absorb into it, so it will be fixed now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if there is more experience to do with other wounds, then take those too.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the wounds do not come off, rub their shoulder joint with fresh blood or poke a needle into it until they fall off.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And then put them back and immediately feel if the blood has started to seep out again.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see them oozing, powder a little on aloe and ashes or ashes, and they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	And this begins the Book of Bruises.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and involves treatment and release from a break.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Seek to learn from this chapter, that the wise man receives it and has never seen any similar books or letters before.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason medicine is esteemed in our land, as I found no better one anywhere.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing about it because of the study of ancient books or by experience and custom in my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	And I have described in this chapter what is contained herein and have included it at the end, and have shown clearly the forms of treatments that are necessary, just as I did in these previous two chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	sion:ca:cumbre alex:govertic:nacueille: 3ailisques: itaide:surexpurgatime (thusage from itime:ing by meansse:1000screwacresse and from:savocare, curolet.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when any fracture or dislocation or twisting or bending occurs at all, it requires you to first heal the wounded part of the patient on both sides, whether nothing is found in either, if it is as weak as a limb's little finger, or joint, or old age.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the patient is not too cold, or too cool; and they treat cold injuries with icy baths, which means frozen duels, and feathers and horsehair, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not stuff themselves too much with meat that fills their veins, until there is no doubt about the dislocation or swelling of the limb; then they return to a first-level governance healing method which they have used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the bones broken begin to restore, it requires that the wounded patient be fed with meats that make a loud noise when chewed, or have viscosity, like cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testes, and peas, and various meat pies, and heavy wine, and fish, and other things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the noise of chewing represents more quickly the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And you should know that broken and decayed bones cannot be easily mended or joined according to the nature of limb joints, nor those who are too tender, like the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	But it has no cure, so reset the broken bone with large joints that twist and join the limb together again as much as before; and do not focus on all of its workings, which requires feeding it with large meats, just as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you should know that fractures occur in various ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the main type of fracture is different from that of pulls or strains in the leg; and I will tell you all types of fractures in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For it has a fracture from an arrow strike, and another from thinning out, like the tip of a pen used for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a wound with a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	llustration: de cest anatomy fromage oferasure ofsuretic. Translate ict theilk. Translature translation.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	And it is understood that the bone fracture occurs because the joint is twisted, and it opens well afterward, and should be pressed with one's hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when there is no twisting in the joint and the patient does not feel great pain, then it means there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But it can still have twisting, or a crack, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it doesn't mean that you should move it with your hand, but apply treatments that come later on, and then hold the joint slightly tightly now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And you know that the bone fragment is dislocated, and those joined parts need to be aligned precisely now, so as not to cut into stones.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if the stones come, there is no day when they will be calmed down, as long as their dislocation remains.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then make it level so that you can move it slightly and gently, and you know that the restoration of this is easier than their restorations with fragments; then hold it tightly, as mentioned later on.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if the bone has fragments, whether it is of two parts, whether it's by hands or tools, or one small limb, or in strings, or a string and at your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the fragments of both sides are displaced, you must repair them all with your movements, and ensure in your work that it does not worsen the injury or pain for the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and align well the two joints of the bones according to their best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And it feels good in your hand if you think that it is not well: if it bends gently, and does not tighten too much, and presses as they do by their work to provoke a stretch and contraction of the limb, as we have often seen.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is at rest, it should be well cared for so that it does not move, wake up, sleep, turn around, or in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and make sure that the limb is as secure so that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	Because when there is no pain, it is not serious, and he must put him in such a position that he feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and you must keep him straight, so that twisting does not occur when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And the quality of the broken fragment is according to what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	You know that the broken fragment has a little height and great depth and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	It's bone iten ceu parole in Old French. Etens, ouvre deshortes le roi aureaux. Sirius ire desor theuins. Inferior:
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	And those who are big, like chicken and leg: it must wrap around with a wide and hard band, for the large bands embrace the entire great limb, and hold all parts equally, so that there is no gap at all.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then the ligament is torn repeatedly, .iij. turns or iiij. according to the limb, and hold your hand firmly around the entire band, then push up from above the fracture and release less pressure until the fracture moves away a little bit.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And soften the band a little bit and little by little, until you have gained a large part of the healthy bone, then repeat with another ligament, and turn around to the broken edge.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the area below the fracture, and hold it gently without being too strong or too weak, as we have said in the first section above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place the torn ligaments between linen or cloths until they are all even, then bind everything above with one bandage, and then attach your pads well if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if it has an abscess or pus pocket, then put something soothing for the abscess that treats the inflammation and leaves it without any recurrence.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then tighten your bandages and make them from a piece of narrow cane that is bent slightly, or wood used to make stakes, or strips of date palm leaves, according to this shape.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it must be the bandage that you place over the fracture is slightly thicker and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	And also long as it should cover part of the member, whether small or large.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then tighten your bandages also as you did in the first section, then bind above with linen thread if it's similar to how we bound above the fracture.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	If it becomes tighter again, then loosen it; and it must be that the thread is tightened neither too much nor too little, but made of thin linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	Because if the thread is thick, like those folk who make their bandages with coarse linen threads, and that's a great mistake, because the wrapping cannot be evenly spaced out if it's too thin or too thick.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the torn ligaments after the tightening of their healthy parts, then place them between linen or cloth fragments to prevent it from tearing further.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the fracture and the bones are broken, I will describe the treatment for this afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And understands it mustn't be tightened on broken limbs at any time.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	After the sanc.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	nay:
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to heal the fracture and dislocation and twisting: take some linen and wool and honey and gum myrrh and thirty; musk and fifty; and seventeen aloes; and make powder, and mix the honey with white bread if the patient's condition is hot, for this remedy is of good composition, heals broken bones quickly, and helps many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way to heal twisting: take gum myrrh and thirteen; musk and seventy-seven; acacia forty; Armenian balsam ten; grind well, mix with water or honey paste, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another way to heal joints displaced and alleviate the pain arising from it; cut new linen and mangle it in oil and honey, and put this dressing on the joint. This remedy does not restore but is good for easing hot spots, and properly treating bone pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to heal broken bones: take dried leaves of fig tree and dried leaves of pavement earth, grind them together, and make a dressing.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another way to restore the fracture of the bone and alleviate the remnants of the aposteme: take root vismalve, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, a spoonful of flour; grind them together, mix with wine, and apply it to the limb that is swollen. Use water from moist coriander or just plain water for the mixture, and use it on the affected area.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another way for fracture restoration when the aposteme is prolonged: take vismalve roots and seed of flax, baleboste, melilot, and unscented leaves; mix all parts together; grind them and make a dressing with salt water, sweet water, or wine according to the temperature of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras mentions in his book that he doesn't put anything on the broken member to restore it because a mixture of wax and oil is made from this, and nothing else is better; he says it should be neither too soft nor too hard, but between two and three fingers thick.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that a physician should put something on the broken member to restore it, dried things slightly warm like myrrh and aloes, incense, and similar things; as we have said before.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to heal injury and pain: take gum myrrh and cotton wool; pieces of human flesh or bird feathers; grind them all together, make a dressing, and apply it directly on the affected area.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then place it slightly afterward, and take care that the patient feels no pain, nor does his bone move from its socket; if not done by hand.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the joint, or itching, restlessness, swelling, hurry up and undo it, and now dry it out; and take a linen cloth lightly, and wet with moist sea water, and immerse in water, and lift the joint so that the itching stops, and pain is alleviated.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it in dry linen or with a compress of warm water and oil, and bind it securely to ensure no movement occurs during recovery.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And rest the inflammation of the limb, and alleviate the pain, then gently resume the repositioning, applying slight pressure to the joint until it is healthy again. Do not overstrain it as much as before.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the movement is stiff and painful along with swelling in both joints, and you have experience with repositioning and binding, then resume it as much as before when initially done.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if there is no sign of the mentioned symptoms in the patient, then do not undo it until after 2 to 4 days or 5 at most; and never leave it for more than 20 days as observed, while breaking up the dislocation and gradually approaching its original position.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	However, the restraint should not be more than initially done, and the muscle tension increases as I previously mentioned; if you see that the joint is dried out more than necessary, it indicates that no complications may arise.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	You can use warm water compresses every time the joint is dislocated and practice it daily for a few hours each day.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	Through this method we minimize the complications in the limb; and immediately seek help from wise doctors who restore the limb without twisting it. This is harmful, and through such procedures are dangerous, and I see no other consequence than weakness and handling the joint gently and accurately.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Among various methods of dislocation treatment.
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many ways to treat dislocations, and the causes have been identified.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	because it has dislocations caused by strikes with the sword and breaks all bones around where they are lodged, like in a hit or thrust; for this reason, this method of treatment is called "haching".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts through the bone excessively and is called this absolute method of dislocation; and it refers to injuries with these 2 or 3 major or minor dislocations.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it has been injured by blows, or fractures of bones, or dislocations on the joints, or other similar occurrences.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if the dislocation persists, and it lies on the bones or ish.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	:meat la merveil.
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	. Thewifte the:age asin. : lexure, andrevelaise.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this occurs more with those who have below them moist bones, as with the head of an infant.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And it occurs in all these ways of fractures where small fragments are displaced as if they were; and I will speak about it here.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all ways of fractures through the separation from them, and inquisitions by torture, and through the corrupted one that is underneath.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair-like appearance is considered by this because when the bone has been discovered and it is rubbed underneath, if there is an open black crack.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, take care of any maladies that may arise and if you see no bad accidents at all, as vomiting blood, loss of consciousness, extension, palm trembling, swelling, fever, and reddening of the eyes, and other similar conditions in various dispositions, it cannot be healed with doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see a controllable accident and hope for salvation, then the treatment begins.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the newborn vein comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it must be removed from the bone within four months that you can do so.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in stone, then you must remove the bone before the seventh month so that the surrounding tissue becomes corrupted and those accidents we have mentioned come about.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the bone crack comes just before the covering of the brain, then it is required that you split the fissured part in this way: and make sure to examine the pained area on the bone at all manners you can do so, and on the softened surface of the wound.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And if there is an evacuation of blood when discovering the bone or incision at the abscess, you must use it as required, and fill the wound with linen soaked in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And let the wound rest as long as the abscess pus is calmed down, and be assured of bleeding; then begin to remove the bone according to one or two methods of work: in one method you make sure that you cut off the narrowing part above.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then there is another larger cutting than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have many different incision techniques, some small and others large, with points and those made of iron, and work quickly so as not to cause more bleeding at the top.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and tough, it requires that you make incision through it so as not to harm the techniques with torture, but do not let them pierce beyond the bone'rances of the test; and have above the tip a margin or .i. circle, which does not allow the point to pass over the bone; and for this reason you must have several other methods: in each place on the edge of the bone, use torture for all tests.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality that determines whether you should heat upon the bone is that you apply it to the bone and turn it back in both directions until you know that the bone has been pierced; then remove the heating tool slightly afterwards, and thus do everything around it, then with your saws cut the space of the bone between the pieces, and do so more subtly as we have said, quickly, so that you bring the bone to your hand or to any of your tools like tongs, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or skull.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and cut it, provided that you resettle the appliance which is delayed by the bone onto every tool that seems similar to a scalpel, but it must be more gentle and subtler than the other scalpel.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And if there is no delay in small bones or scales, then treat the wound lightly with some of the tenting and ointments that we have said before.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of work which Galen describes as more salty; and it is very strong, and that is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It must first that you remove a part of the bone where the break is open and exposed, so that when you have found this piece, then place at the top of this lenticular scalpel as follows: since here it has its shape.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut from one side, and it is in two corners, so that the cutting goes towards the bone; then with a small mallet above, you shape the bone lightly all around, and be careful of the cloth that is undernee.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it has separated from the bone, then lightly move it, as the bone feels very bad and painful.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not pierce through the cloth, and the bone is cut so much upwards, and it has small pieces, then ensure that you remove the roughness of this abrasion subtly; and omit the scales with a fine rasor, as you must have various amounts for each place, according to the work done and the shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If before great rasors, and then with more subtle ones, and never stop doing this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other delicate cutting and breaking, it must be prepared according to its degree; and this is something that not even the one who has studied this art can replicate.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the skull is exposed, then it must be protected with a piece of linen according to the quantity of the wound, and you apply oil rosé on it and place it over the wound.
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	then take another piece of linen in two or three layers, and apply wine and oil rosé, and place it on the first linen; and do so quickly as you can, that you don'nant touch the skull, and not compress it, until the wound only.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And let it remain for a year or two, until the edges of the wound are smoothed out, then he removes it, and administers various medicines such as lily roots, flour, incense powder, astrolabe, and similar things; from these things makes powder, and puts it on the wound, and administers medicine for numbness again.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And make the wound thoroughly clean so that you do not leave any residue or apply a bandage, as when a thorn penetrates the brain's membrane, it can cause injury and convulsions; for when something sharp is placed on the sieve-like membrane, it often causes great harm to the patient.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed now that if any misfortune befalls anyone who receives this treatment, as we have said before, it is doubtful and uncertain in nature.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if no wound results from the medicine that was placed on it, there must be a part of honey applied to it, two parts of rose oil and one part of linen cloth, and place these on the sieve-like membrane.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let his method of healing be as you prescribe him until he is fully recovered.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Take note that there have been times when the two nerves above are cracked or broken individually, or one after another, for they are bones; and these below are cartilaginous in nature, and do not break easily, so as to cause swelling or twisting, and then heal.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two nerves is cracked, it must be treated with small doses or injections into the crack between the indicators and the sack beneath it, until the damaged nerve regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And perform this treatment, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the crack is in the upper part of the nerve and cannot be brought to the surface, it must be treated by placing a slightly larger iron rod at the top of its head.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the crack is in one of these parts, you must repair it again and hurry to restore its original state within a year, provided that it can be done.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not within the seventh or twelfth month when the edges of the wound are smoothed out, then at that time when the edges have been soothed, apply tent-like strips of linen to the head of the nerve if the crack is in a part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you may treat another part if the crack is there; and let the tent strips be large enough to fill the cracks in the nerves.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And they said that a restorative must coat the tent with bear fat and it should be made every day. It seems to me not good, but it must be made from bear grease and powdered molasses; then leave the tent until the bone is strong and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And it has never been done that goose feathers were placed on the tent linen cloth and if there is a crack in the bone, and he blows to the patient's skin; or make the wound so as you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And when a cut into an abscess appears on the navel while you work, then put charcoal or cotton soaked in rose oil, or in some drops of diatomic ions.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the cut into an abscess does not appear, then apply a plaster made of sile dust and powdered incense, mixed with wax candle wax, placed on lithe hot plates, and do not let it stick to the navel.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the navel break is small and it has been broken into tiny pieces, then extract similar stitches to what are appropriate for this case, open the wound, and treat with various charms and salves, and sutures, as with plasters and ointments suitable.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound in the navel, then treat with tent therapy and place hemp threads until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	about the treatment of the jawbone.
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is broken and there is no wound to be treated, and the break has been left undisturbed for so long that it's not fractured into two parts, but rather fragmented by protrusions, if one knows well how to handle gently.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is required if the break is in the right part of the jawbone; you should insert your index finger into the patient's mouth where it hurts; and if the break is on the left side of the mandible, you should place your right index finger there, apply pressure to the fracture gently with both hands, and massage with the other hand for a while.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jawbone fracture is displaced in two parts, it is required to gradually extend one part of the dislocation by pushing and moving it until it returns to its original position.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement of the teeth or dislocation, apply tension with a gold or silver thread, or silk, on the fractured jawbone and place it under a double sheet; put the sheet under a large well-made piece of leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, press it down firmly, and command the patient that he rests, and eat light meals.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the shape changes, let it recover in three days, and then put back what is changed; and place a poultice of fine flour with plenty of wax or sile dust after applying the thread on the fracture; and lay the poultice thinly over the poultice, and if the poultices change, let the patient's condition not change, as long as it is healed in three months.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a cut into an abscess appears, apply what we have described many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both fracture and wound together, take only one piece of bone that has been broken off in the stitches; if it is difficult to extract it, use suitable sutures.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge according to necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have gathered all these bone pieces, and it does not take any time at all if the wound is wide, and place on it one or two easily movable joints to tighten it, as long as it heals.
de la forcele	Of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps break several times in front of the shoulder blade, and the fracture occurs according to three manners: either it is broken and dislocated into two pieces, making it easier to restore; or there is a fracture with an open wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operations are as follows when the fracture is with an open wound: you must have two assistants, so that one holds the support that feels the forceps being broken; and the other extends the collar towards the affected area; then place the fracture at the appropriate location, making sure it forms as required without any signs or healing.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place the shoulder of the patient on a round cushion made of cloth or wool, according to your necessity; and hold the forceps gently in one hand, restraining the cushion with the other hand, so that you can position the fracture correctly.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the handle of the forceps backward because it comes apart, then it is necessary that the patient's skin under his hat be tightly bound on the head; and place two cushions over the shoulder area, instructing the assistants to support the shoulders so that the bone of the forceps becomes raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then position the fracture at the appropriate place, and if you find loose bone fragments, it is necessary to break them off; remove the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join for any reason, use one of the forceps' incisors on that piece; but make sure to keep this instrument close by to maintain its functionality.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and resembles a spoon, and is not too long, but wide according to the size of the bone and the patient's ability; it has two ends, one large, and the other thin, just like the shape of the wound you created when treating the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of the incision site, if it is a wound, and if the wound's size is small, then make the incision there; but if you doubt the incision site, cover the wound with layers of gauze and bandages according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if you make an incision in the skin, mix one layer of cloth with oil and silk, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	And the healing of the bone when it is with wounds and requires mending, is that you place a cloth on the bone covered with fine powder made from flint and ash, and place light weights over it, and put a round cushion underneath if you have the necessary knowledge.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very wide band of one palm in width, and place two heavy weights on the cloth, and cover it with the instrument; then take a thin stretcher that is 2.5 cm wide and long, and wrap it around the headband to keep its ends extended.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	depe parler. Iambale laire duodex. Aiie ices tiel apexiliefle theure awoarce laiet. Laifacek, ander:icule Aithesis.iage leucien ofere.ice: "maile jacex itacadex3bale. Jware.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	And let the patient lie on their back, and when he sleeps, a small strap around his shoulder, to lift the shoulder joint up; thus it alleviates the break of the muscle by aligning the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the collarbone so that no worsening occurs within twenty years.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then continue the dislocation treatment, if you see that it is necessary, and tighten and keep it in place until it is restored; and it is restored within twenty-seven years, but not to any man.
de la brisure de l’espaule	from the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It rarely happens that the shoulder break or swelling does not heal within a month, and it has no fractures except by touch; if you apply the bandage according to the shape of the fracture, and bind tightly following its natural form in all ways that you can; then put powder mixed with abundant flour on one double sheet; lay over a wide and thin board slightly wider than the shoulder joint, so that no movement occurs within any part of the shoulder, if you cover the bandage with linen fabric so that the board is aligned equally; and tightly bind it all around firmly, so that the board does not move from its place, and looks at the ligament every day. Every time he moves again, loosen the bandage and make sure the board remains equal to its original position if it has moved; and when this amount is completed, let him rest securely, because it's not bone that moves quickly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes and does not come out of the wound, make it up, and treat the bone, and do what we have said to alleviate in case of an abscess joint dislocation.
de la brisure dou pis	regarding the fracture
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The bone is never fractured in motion, but it happens occasionally; however, it often breaks when weakened over time. And when the bone is fractured, it tends to collapse at that point, and he feels great pain there, without any other indication, and sometimes vomits blood, which opens up the fracture site and causes a significant amount of pain.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the ouns desir au leu que il neveau: "Ii en .iiii aiguilliers leu veoir, siemplate defface :esme d'aid tolteinspoullers. Il itellate oftei cestat ceulxissance tauf (it ouns inccueilles and Ile’sage.
de la brisure des costes	il, aille.Ijfaire ilief. Iface :grafic asperce:ithaillustra. ia. Ilboutenerre. I'n theucclere ofsiclexentifera,sei. Eatire. Ait.
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Cuts that the shoulder breaker comes only after hitting the back hard, and in the middle, and do not go down because they are covered with moisture; and it hurts him very much to feel this injury.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the resetting should place it equally where it needs to be; and then apply a splint, and hold it with an iron bar if you have experience with it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the shoulder breaker is descending inwards, it hurts him terribly like with pleurisy, as the bone pierces through; and he also throws up blood and vomits a lot of feces, which is very painful illness, and they used great remedies for it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say it should be administered with foods that swell the stomach to push back the dislocation.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this at all; unless the abscesses are removed on their own, which does not happen here.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes, it's good.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say no one puts hot irons on the wound to suck out fluids and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the iron would draw away excess fluid from a poorly placed dislocation due to its forceful nature.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say nobody should cover the wound with a moist cloth soaked in hot oil and place straw between the shoulders to keep it levelled after dislocation, then treat for pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that cannot be endured because the bone pierces through; there is doubt as to whether it should fracture underneath the dislocated shoulder blade and place an instrument there to guard its movement; and then it must cut into the bone, draw blood lightly, and then suture both sides of the wound, if they are large, and treat with splints until healed. If a swelling arises where the blister comes from, cover it with moistened linens soaked in rose oil, and place them underneath the shoulder; and treat it accordingly while there is need to do that for the patient's shoulder blade which needs attention as well, until healed.
de la brisure dou col	concerning the breakage of the shoulder blade.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never occurs on itchiefs in froid. ous d’hors tans saufel. ounge deu tote la parole. In theignes.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens for any reason, and you see whether it will be healed or not, if you observe his hands are softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move nor stretch, and when you prick them with a needle, then they do not feel pain; know that it is mortal in various conditions, and if he is silent and feels well when we pull the joints and don't push, you know that the articulation of bone is safe, and that his illness will be cured, provided you treat him.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if it happens to the spinal vertebrae on the back, and you see whether he is healed or not, if you observe his legs are softened, and there are accidents in his hands, and under his back venturiation and discharge happen by their will; and when we have guessed upon him from above, does ejection occur at will. And if he is guessing on his back and wants to sit down, then he cannot. You know that it is mortal: if it does not work in its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come upon him, then the matter becomes lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that if he has an abscess, you treat it by applying oil on his spinal vertebrae or with fat of young goat meat, so long as he becomes calm; then place him on one of the comforting and supporting trestles, tie him up tightly, and command the patient to rest in a part where there is no pain until he has become well.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone loosens up, it must be covered with cloth; then you reset the bone, and if the wound is large, bandage it tightly, then heal it by douching in ointment until he is well again; and when his "kowe" (gouty) joints are broken, they are called "kowe's knees", so you take your pouch with your left hand, and hold it with the other hand for support, then place the restraint and the stand in a way that you know how; then tighten it, and if there is dislocated bone, you fix the bone and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It is rare that the hip bone becomes fractured, and if it does occur, it results in only a slight diminution at the head; then cut long and straighten out along the pelvis, come to the patient's foot, and cause him pain there with swelling, which has become fractured.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over the fracture as long as it remains in its natural form; and know what kind of break and the shape of it, and if the break is at the topmost part, then set it to match the natural form of the break.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it diverges within, let him lie down on his belly so that the restoration of that break becomes apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, place him on the anvil, then set it on a wooden or iron frame to hold the break so that it does not move, and apply pressure along his sides until the limb is level again.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command him that he sleeps on his healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess opens in the armpit, do not touch it until it is calmed down, and place it on what we have mentioned before; then return to the restoration and hold it as it must be done unless there is any unfortunate incident; this is how it should be done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the break of the shoulder joint.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is that which lies between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder; if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of these two methods: firstly, by placing a heavy piece of metal or wood in contact with the moisture-soaked area following this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And position the two joints as they should be, and raise them upwards, and look at how the patient feels on such a seat; then break his broken arm against the wood so that it bends to the side without pain, and place him on some sort of support or whatever is necessary to extend it outward until the break returns to its original state as it must.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is to make the patient lie on his back, and have the two men hold his hand near the break, and command the one who touches it to heat that area of the hands while the other man holds onto all parts of the arm; stretching each part individually.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the extraction is further advanced, restrain that part of the break near the break itself, and under it, and stretch each one from the hands in their respective places; if the break is close to the top of the shoulder, then you must place a piece of wood along its side beneath the area where the break is, and another along the collarbone above it at the site of the break. And similarly, if the break is towards the collarbone, you must gently pull that part in labor as long as the break remains level on both sides; then place the break back to its original position, just as it should be done, and restrain, provided there are no armpit abscesses opening.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an armpit abscesses open, do not restrain it for a few years; then place the arm on a low and covered with linen and oil, so that the abscesses be calmed down; then pull the shoulder joint, and hold it as it must be held in. Put the cloak upon it, and press it to the left of l'oil leu on the armor, etienne.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	joule'l 13xent: more. (English:cum it’sesu lessen: 'n entorse :
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	ghe tolceste.sse apeasure.ifresse ifnayrece tenture.urxent pointes: sose de laisse le feuledjaclexe.sementente.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	a.1oute 3presanssevangeluses tosusarevellexitueletifresse ifleursolet thees dejournolder so longaes:d<sainessheuelles, telle outoutheroiuntsautheufficeles
de la brisure du bras	of the arm breakage
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm consists of two bones, which are called the humerus, from where one is small and is that which teaches the socket; and the other is large, and it is that which is underneath the little finger; either only breaks the large humerus or the small, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small bones are broken, the treatment is light, and healing; and when the large one is broken, it becomes maladies and more grievous than if they were broken together with each other. If it's only the small bone that is broken, then there needs to be a quick extension, and equalizing pressure applied.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it's the large bone that is broken, he must extend it more forcefully; and stretch over one finger, elevating the socket of the hand higher than the others, and the smaller should be lower than the other two; then put his painful movements above himself on this finger, so that he suffers no labor at all, and then extends the ministers to the part underneath his hand, or along a line, and some others to another point above. And then place them in their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breakage there are pieces, place each one to its proper position, and if there is no discomfort that prevents you from grasping it again, then make some adjustments, just as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is a wound with the breakage, I spoke to this individual scholar about it; take the care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if the beginning of the repair sinks into the incision sites, place one strip of beeswax and paraffin mixed together, not too hard nor too soft; then attach it gently until the incision sites are soothed. Then apply the poultice with plenty of flour, put on the plates, and make the plate for the fracture more than others further away and slightly larger; and keep in mind that it should have two or three plates arranged differently: whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or both. Keep pulling above the fracture more than other places, as we said at the beginning of this scholar's discussion; and make sure the wax strips are not too hard nor too soft; and stretch the strip where it is elastic, with linen thread that is neither too thick nor too thin, just as we have said. And reward the arm and its joint after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if any unfortunate event happens to the limb, just like when itching occurs in a limb, he must soak the limb with warm water until that itch subsides; and let the limb not be contracted again immediately. Then resume compression, and if his ligament is loosened and the bone displaced, and as if something happens to him, then address this issue.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the patient's spasms cannot come to the member, puissance iten dousnece por les poins du cestres deusi .ii desimes dismes. Etteurment le mason mein:nteres estrepit inchene:meing theorocre parole ofthe following. Averges coment, eteris letres: iten theoreprems.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if only these things that we have said do not affect the patient, they will dissolve in no less than twenty years. Or perhaps sooner, then he loosens his neck and makes it equal, and protects himself against movements and stiffness, and sleeps on his back; and you know that this fracture is restored within 30 or 35 years, or sometimes even in 20 years, depending on the compositions and constitution.
de la brisure de la main	Of the hand fracture.
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You know that on the back of the hand and we often see little breaks occur, and it only results in many folds.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the hand bone is fractured or folded, it must be carefully examined and held straight in front of him similarly; then he places his hand on an extended towel, extends the broken bones, aligns them evenly so they are well joined; and applies a bandage and splints as long as there is no displacement, and then he wraps it according to the amount of the laceration; and it is covered in one layer of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is close to the bottom of the hand's palm, he makes a sling with strips of linen, and instructs the patient that he should wrap it around his injured palm; and then tightens a long linen sling similarly as one for the hand, and holds the splint securely so it is not too loose or small, like the hand's palm, and locks it firmly in place accordingly.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is at the back of the hand, it must be encased with a splint; and another one on its palm, so that the hands are lifted up and straight, then binds tightly around both sides.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes from none of these things we have mentioned, it's a sprain; you must make it equal, and bind with the palm, so that it doesn't move; and if the fracture is elsewhere in the index finger or one of the others, make it even, and tie it to the corresponding digit which follows; or tie them all together so they stay firm, or put on a splint as for a sprain, or place on a board, and take care during restoration and positioning that no further issues arise, similar to what I have mentioned.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the finger fractured.
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones in the finger are often fractured and well seen she turns it forward and backward; and recovery of it on one level above the breakage, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	"Sic, et deffort in thekes. Ce:or leu. Inferior. C'aictle onemaude demeantre en:eveintes le:eru andere :en: Alemongue en:era. Ipsum:entire :er laiere ail veinste,the.comancorne theorsecurlysente. The Frenchiraise:it'sage, as itens.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the root of the shoulder blade, then one ligament will be towards the point, and the others around the fracture; and also if it is near the knee, and accordingly so are the ligaments away from the fracture, and the extension upwards; then set the bone back to its two hands, in such a way that it returns to its natural shape, and then apply the crutch, and let the limb not move.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if it has been amputated, then let it be soothed first, and return to your work and care; the ligament is made in two ways.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is required that you wrap around the fracture: i. hard band made of two or three pieces, and after removing any excess, turn the leg so that the heel points to the root of the knee, and place a long strip between the shoulder blade and the leg, behind the thigh; then turn both the leg and the shoulder blade, and put supports on top of the fracture; then take eight pieces of cloth evenly placed above the knee joint; and as you move further along the fracture, reduce the tension, and when less tension is felt, approach to the three hooks that are above it, and bring them back down underneited pressure below the joint; then return to the previous position, where the band does not move from its original location, so let it remain in such a state, and if it does not present any swelling or other symptoms.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it deviates, and addresses the piece that comes out, as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone to be pulled, which can be done by anyone who can pull them; but if not possible, then divide the skin, and draw out firmly; and cure it so long as it is sound.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the shoulder blade braced in such a way that it has supports like in this splint and arm brace; everything else done in restoration does not cause additional pain to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the shoulder blade is restored within one year, or less if possible, or more depending on individual variations.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the groin of the thigh
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Know that in the groin area there is rarely a dislocation but it folds many times; and if it breaks, it's just a crack or puncture, and affects any wound, and feeling pain at any wound, so it feels quite well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	theodres lues apres leu:esme laissage duode. ether, sextoise. Si lesuns ofse desus français lesdolex.soule. voire lesmeuse ince devisi: lesemeenle (100susre lespearsentrois.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the dislocation of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Knowing that the leg has two bones, one called "mustelz" and the other "foscile"; and all injuries related to such dislocations are similar as they occur in the arm, for this reason restoration is carried out just like with a broken arm, and the procedures involved include...
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken together, turn the leg in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if one small bone is dislocated, turn it anteriorly.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is fractured, it causes great pain and he sees well; turn it around accordingly. Then gradually apply extension, positioning it evenly, but in any case, it must be noted that the fracture is ugly and there are many pieces, so the extension becomes smaller and lighter; and adjust according to its nature.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you have completed your operation: apply two braces made of wood that cover the leg one side of the leg from time devised in part of it, and put on such as hart laissameinjurer les paraphrase liere de l'ancre, et ail le.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the break of bones from its place
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	The ankle does not come from a bone break, but the bones themselves seldom have a break and yet we find many cases where only slight adjustments are needed; there is no serious harm done in such instances.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones of the foot suffer a break and you see these bones sticking out against each other, it is very ill to place them on the ground like that or if they were flying, then place your foot over his, lift up those bones so they come back into their place; then anvil and hammers are placed upon it, and a small weight of coins at .ij. cushions along the sole of the foot, then bind the foot tightly with bandages, and perform other necessary actions for which you have been trained.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when .iij. or .iiij. years have passed by, the ligaments will loosen, for you will find either straight bones or fractured ones, whether they are dislocated or extracted.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the two broken bones that need to be restored, as we have said about the splints for hands; then place a stick under each one according to its length and slightly wider, and put it on the small cushion I mentioned earlier, then bind tightly; and if there are .ij. or .iij., or more broken bones, then you will place a stick under each corresponding one according to their size, wrapped in an i. piece of linen, and press down firmly against the sole of the foot where it lies on top of the cushion; and leave this position well set for the bottom of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary to remember the other things that I have said about the various fractures that we mentioned earlier; and for each incident, do as it should require.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	from the fracture of the femur.
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	ses. (thoroughtexi.courge, tote aire, queeute les plainexent (theira: ittextrait. To:nous cesare:seautegles,ou laisseat.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the shoulder blade is broken, or of the woman, he resets it as we have said in the bone of the neck; and these subsequent fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and skill, and understand my book. For the breakage signifies several additional conditions for restoration: therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the vein, when it is broken, take an olive leaf and place it in the vein; then wrap with linen layers, and leave for two or three years until he becomes healthy immediately.
de brisure avec plaie	Of breakage with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is incumbent upon him who has a fracture with wound, particularly if it is large like the bone of the knee or shoulder joint or similar; he must be cured now, as the treatments we have mentioned testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healing well, and if you have not other resources, then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour or day when there are no arrows pointing towards it; otherwise, one more attempt may be made after some time has passed since the restoration was attempted.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if arrows point towards it, then let the restoration begin again in a new hour when the arrows are no longer aiming at it, provided that they have calmed down; do not touch it for another whole day or quarter thereafter, as you may provoke an unfortunate accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is broken and exposed, indicating that you must put it lightly with your hands, in a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not assist you in making your hands even, then the surgeon will use this instrument of iron that has .viij. or .vij. lengths long, and its width is according to the size of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary to measure .iii. or iiij., depending on what each time is needed in a particular treatment for fractures; and let it be heavy and thick enough so that it does not bend at all under pressure upon your workpiece, and loose-jointed beforehand, and wide apart in front, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palainge," so that the shoulder joints are placed on the visible end of the bone; and once he strikes it, as much as it retracts, and make them equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the splints cannot properly take hold of the bone, then you must coat the top of the bone until the splint maker has power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, with an instrument suitable for that purpose, either chisel or saw, in your favor; then return to what is left in the hard parts and fine fissures of the bone.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is brought back, and it gives great pain afterwards, you know that it is not in its natural place. Do so until it settles into its original position, then moisten one to two drops of black vinegar on a sterile cloth; and do not apply any ointment or other substance onto the wound that might cause putrefaction and decay; then dress the bone as you have restored it, leaving the wound exposed, and cover all of it with a layer according to the size of the wound, and be careful so that the wound does not stretch around the fracture. Many times this has been done by wise physicians, who have brought back the malformed or dead bone without corroding it; and splints for these more brittle fractures should be thicker and softer compared to other types of fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is large or painful, and you doubt that any accident may occur, as we have said; do not put anything on the dressings but wrap them tightly around the edge of the dressing itself with hard cloths and linen, then apply oil to it after one or two years when the bone has partially reduced in size at the wound site. When you see it shrinking back after a year or two, remove what was put on top of it and apply medication suitable for treating such injuries, like tincture potasscier and similar remedies.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you bend the limb for two times a day, morning and evening, until it becomes sound and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the members should be dressed in such a way that the shoulder joint moves freely without locking up or restricting movement.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if this continues for a year, and it cannot be healed but becomes brittle bone again, then you must try to cover the wound with cloth; and take all these loose fragments of bone that cause such pain, so as to bring back the relief.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	sainxent ceu apre, aurois demein of thees xlore desineux, and then:x itxere,cause, sentence. The250:
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Of burns which come from salt
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We come many times after the mending of a fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it's quite distressing to see the deformed figure of the limb; and sometimes one cannot make the limb perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care that it is fresh: if you administer stiff medicines like aloe, frankincense, myrrh, and caraway seeds, along with other things, either none or all together, and preserve them in earthen pots, keeping well-ventilated; and then separate the membrane from the flesh yearly; and renew another one as long as the bone remains ossified. For the property of the mass is that it keeps the joints above the limbs; if the dislocation has become hard like stone, you must remove the deposit over it, make any superfluous matter visible, or let it be treated by a barber until it becomes whole again and healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A limb that becomes weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored and becomes weak again after its limbs are delicate and sensitive due to various reasons: because it was too tightly bound, as if it had been bound too much; or because there were too many bindings, which prevented natural movements from occurring in the limb; or due to excessive manipulation; or due to overly large movements not taking place during its healing period; or due to a lack of blood within its body, leading to weakness.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is to feed the maladies, and make the joint tender as long as there are multiplied in it; you must administer baths, give him joy and pleasure; then apply pitch on the limb so that the pitch draws out the great noise from the arousing, and drain the water often with a heated cloth, until the noises return to its natural state.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	A twisted limb after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	medicine. theorcegut amore dise:sacre and itsilk theorice aicare (medieval. Whatrexmas fromuremecuace:age tocumacure. Foris:esume, as itaute of theègue, and thereinanfaire.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And there is no occasion for constant rubbing or prolonged rubbing of the bones due to wet hands; and either restrict any movement in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twist is hardened and worn out, like stone, and it needs to be treated with fire, so that the steel covers just the bone lightly under the incision; and apply pressure and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This marks the beginning of the book on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation does not occur at all, if steel now targets to bring back feeling. (Note: This translation seems less coherent with the original text's context and might be an attempt to maintain meaning from a different source or perspective.)
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if it delays, if the blood flows excessively, and perhaps by chance if it is set back to its place with pins in the joint; for there is no need that it be moved again where it has swollen: many times brought forth sputum and other troubles. (Note: This translation attempts to maintain a coherent interpretation while addressing multiple nuances of the original text.)
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	However, when this happens, if the pain is made lighter, then let it rest until the aposteme base calms down; then warm and oil the limb, then reset lightly, and care for each member as they heal in their place. (Note: This translation provides a coherent English equivalent of the Old French text while preserving its original meaning.)
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I ordered the chapters on dislocations according to the pieces in them. (Note: This translation interprets the original French text, potentially adjusting slightly for clarity and coherence.)
des mandibules	of the lower jawbones (Mandibles). (Note: The phrase "des mandibules" directly translates to "of the lower jaws," which could refer to bone-related content within the context of dislocations. However, without further text for full context, this is a best guess translation.)
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	There is not much that the lower jawbones are dislocated and in both cases of dislocation: either they consist of a few bones of their joints, and slightly loosen; or they are completely dislocated, and hang down towards the mouth' cvil, and withhold the saliva from the mouth so it cannot hold it or close its mouth, wrapping its tongue around speech. (Note: This translation is an attempt to provide a coherent English interpretation of the Old French text while attempting to maintain as much original meaning as possible.)
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by one or more arrangements. (Note: This translation captures a likely interpretation of the Old French text with an emphasis on translating "petite" as "small," which could refer to minor dislocations.)
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and accomplished, it must be reset without delay, and not for feeling. (Note: This translation seeks to interpret the Old French text in an English equivalent that maintains the sense of urgency from the original.)
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in such a manner that the minister touches both of the painful bones at the root of the dislocation within the mouth of the lower jawbone when the dislocations are half; and have other hands be prepared to move it, so as to make it equal; and command the patient that he softens his mandibules, and moves them from all parts. (Note: This translation attempts to preserve the meaning conveyed in Old French regarding specific actions associated with treating dislocated jawbones.)
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the master moves it, so that it returns to its place. (Note: This translation is an attempt to convey the action described in Old French concerning a treatment process for dislocations.)
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the dislocation is retrieved, and the mandibules are brought together, as we have said: le jussine demeurant d’aposteme esprevede aiguillez que il sottemelice in this sentence: si li mandible of ce tans.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	:entire. Levisage ainsene. Itacurlel'sarl itensinjurine. ignee. Allongue laissime sansilence leisse withoutly as : llayne of course.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And the great pain lies on his back, and his teeth are between two points, that they do not move to the right or left, nor does he try to ease it with any light food, but only until the pains subside and the jawbones are relieved.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then he washes what he wishes gently, and does not work at opening his mouth to eat or drink until the jawbone is well relieved and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be put back to their original position within an hour, and are not converted into their previous state, then he may come with recurrent fever and habitual digestive issues, and sometimes even suffer from stomach pains and vomiting pure emesis.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then you know it is a loss; and many times those who suffer from it die within seven years.
de la forcelle	of the forceps (used here in the context of medical instruments)
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot dislodge one side and the other at any time, and are never removed from its place; and he well feels it.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the malady sits comfortably on his back, extends his arms; then he presses the round object to your palm, and it returns; then places it under the stretrande (assuming "emplaustre" was meant to be a typo for "emprastre", which is likely an error as there's no English word that fits here) and binds the leg, and tightens.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the dislocation that is near his costal cavity cannot be displaced; if not, and it has never been displaced, then he returns its original position, as we have said; then places it under the stretrande (assuming "emplaustre" was meant to be a typo for "emprastre") and binds the leg, tightens it, and commands the patient that he rests until he is healthy.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And at this point, we are brought back the shoulder joint, when it is dislodged from its position.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder (this phrase would make sense in context as an explanation following the description of a reduction procedure)
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	He knows that the shoulder is dislocated only due to two reasons: one in which it is displaced from the shoulder blade part, and the other from below the shoulder part; and perhaps even above, but this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and it is not dislocated behind the shoulder nor in the nerves; rather, several times it is displaced towards the shoulder blade, mainly for those who have little strength, because this happens suddenly to them; for those who have enough strength, it jumps at points and returns to its original place.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes even happens to some people with percussion or fracturing, and swells the shoulder from an abscess, and he considers that it is displaced by that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It then prescribe that you be certain of it; and nowhere else begins the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is understood when the dislocation moves towards the shoulder, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find manifest differences between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	And you will find at the shoulder joint a pit, and underneath the shoulder joint to the tip of the shoulder bone, just as it would be with an oesophagus; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to its natural position or make any movement.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you will manifestly see it at the tip of the shoulder.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this type of dislocation is not just to bring back, when it is new or if the arm hurts badly.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the way is that the physician lifts the malaligned hand upwards, then places it underneoud the shoulder joint, and strengthens the dislocation back to its original position above the joint, and the physician lifts the hand again, and extends it upwards so he can put it back down; if done hastily.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it doesn't come as we have described in recent years, it must be that the patient is bathed in warm water; and he is prepared with softening and soothing agents, like decoction of aloe vera and fenugreek, and hot water, and then he is treated.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then press the patient's back where it hurts, and place a piece of linen under the shoulder joint, not too heavy nor too hard, then put the foot on the linen, and lift the shoulder joint carefully, and remove the malaligned hand.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	And other physicians may dye the head of the malaligned hand, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder returns almost immediately, and if you see it recovering in this way:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	And it is that you make present a home bigger than the malaligned one; and he should be placed on his side near the dislocated shoulder, and lift the shoulder joint upwards so that the malaligned shoulder hangs down. (This last part seems to describe an alternative method for treating certain types of dislocation.)
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And other physicians remove the malaligned hand towards the abdomen. If the patient is too heavy, then they do not put any weight on it, and the dislocation returns now. (This might suggest a treatment where reducing body movement or immobilization can help in certain cases of shoulder dislocation.)
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And also the recovery can be done in another way: and it is like fixing a long piece of straw into the ground, to which the shoulder joints are attached similarly to a pole, and it should not be too large nor too small. (This could imply using external supports or splints as part of the treatment plan.)
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then it is placed around the malaligned area but with soft padding undernee, and the shoulder remains long on one side; then the hand is extended to another part formingly, and the dislocation returns quickly. (This seems to describe a method involving wrapping or bandaging that supports the shoulder during treatment.)
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if it does not come back for all these things that we have said, then this treatment is to take: take a pole of great length and four feet wide, which will be inserted underneit through the dislocated shoulder joint according to this form. (This part might refer to an external support or splint in medieval context)
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	ge auge; the soigne (theire. Theodorce.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when she is in pain, whichever way it may be, it must be that you place on the aspillin a spindle of wool equal in thickness, then put the fire-starter apparatus with powdered millstone, along with incense and buffalo horn of bull, over the entire shoulder and armpit, then stretching under the aspillin, turn the ligament around the apparatus, and embrace her hand by her neck, and keep the hands moving in this manner.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it must be that he massages little, until the limbs are comfortable, for they will heal faster; and then massage more after 5 to 7 years or so, and move it; and if it is firm and not soft, then it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the dislocation is strong due to moisture that it has come or for another reason, it must be that you anoint three punctures in front of him/her, as a precautionary measure when performing cauterization.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and after 7 years the dislocation does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm upwards, then you know that the main nerve in the shoulder is compressed or stretched or softened; and you realize that the dislocation has never been fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation towards the lower part and the muscles, or behind, if it is made by impact or stretching of hands, and anoint other areas as well; and treat until he is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the healing comes stiffness to the limb, and with repeated movements, if it uses those maladies' baths many times until the stiffness is alleviated, and returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the double dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the double dislocation is evacuated from its places and comes back; and if it has been evacuated from all parts, mainly in front and behind, and the dislocations are not returned, because you can see them well and feel them well; and evacuate according to each case.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the maladroit dislocation with the healthy one, if it can be seen openly. Because the dislocation is compressed, and it cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder in any way.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it again so as to remove loose ligaments, because if loose ligaments were removed, it would be unfortunate to bring them back; and perhaps they cannot be brought back in their entirety, especially when at the rear; for these are worse than other dislocations, and often result in severe pain. And sometimes this leads to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	Vulgarlyens, et liere.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand towards his own hand, and with the root of the palm which has been reset.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not return to the original position, apply strong extension; and when both ministers extend his arm, and they tie his arm with both ministers so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from one side, and cover him with a double-layered and wide cloth.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when the patient touches the joint with his hand, he does not anoint it with any oil to soften the joint, then bind the joint firmly until it relaxes.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is back in place, put it securely on the anvil with a wooden hammer, and stretch it firmly, and hold the malformed arm at the elbow, letting it rest for some days before loosening it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its original position, loosen the ligament, and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, restart on the anvil and the ligament, letting it rest for some days until it is securely fixed, then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels crushed after the return of the joint, and it moves again, bathe and rub well until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a warm sheepskin, letting it stay for one day and one night, then let the doctor examine it or administer a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And when it sweats, rub the joint frequently, then replace the sheepskin and give baths again; doing this repeatedly, up to three times or three, until it is healed; if you see, put on a woolen cloth moistened with warm butter, and stretch it firmly; if it returns to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand.
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand'shifted, and its return is lightning-fast compared to other joints; it must be restored back quickly in my time so that it is dislocated again, either by stretching the fingers out or by pressing them into a hot place.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the return if you place the malformed hand on a table, and extend the ministers' hands, making them touch it equally, so that he puts his palm in front of the joint appearance, and binds it tightly until it relaxes.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Always, it is necessary for you to look if he returns well; then put the malformed hand's back on a table during extension and return.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then put the malformed hand's back to the table, and make him look at the appearance of the joint; if it returns now, that's good enough.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then apply an anvil-stretcher soothingly to the joint, and let it be for some time before repeating the procedure.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, do not put it back to its original position after some days, let the joint remain bent.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	se li malaide fuye de la mains les fustes
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	theu :enjoule laine alice. If it'sau. V2eilen. Aude aille'sans tollevensage:esmeasurement :aious :i'saincesil fromage.curexent. Thewinter.  igne, and:age 3re.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and it has no cracks, then heat from boiling water, and scour with such force that it becomes sound again.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Dislocations of the shoulder joints.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	They have never extracted his shoulder joint from any part, never from behind the palm or abdomen.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	And then it is the joint, and push the dislocation back into its pockets as long as it recoils, then support the head of the joint, and move it towards where it was joined.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	And let it remain for two years, and then make it again like before, as we have said, dislocate it again, allow it to move, and tie it up again, and do this often until it is narrow.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And also do the same if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the hand, and make it so as you have done before until it becomes sound again; and also do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Double shoulder or double hip dislocation.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulders or hips are dislocated in multiple places, and there is no treatment, because death comes to the patient quickly.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the movements come spontaneously without her consent, and she cannot hold them, and it happens many times with no limb remaining, or two fingers or his hand.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And there are many cases where the hip joint moves to four parts; that which moves backward is called "Gilbert's disease."
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is that if Gilbert's disease comes from childhood; there has been no treatment or healing for it at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which falls or is injured due to blows or similar things, according to the ancient methods of treatments they said by large words, there has been no great benefit.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have reinterpreted it according to my intention, and formed strigils in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in Gilbert's disease which comes at the hip front, there has been no healing or treatment.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also that which comes directly to the four corners, and there is no way to heal those wounds except for the ones that come straight at the back, as I have said.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And it is that the painful parts are spread on his face in one place sticking out, and have tension around them so they do not break.
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then place a firebrand at the head in the ground and form it on other places like the hips, joints, and dislocations of the painful parts, and also on thighs, knees, and ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	And two men separate the ropes, one for the head and others for the hips, among the various firebrands.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And keep them firmly closed as we have said, and heal the dislocation of the spinal column (spinal column.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	: theu. Textile.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And place the fingers on the other head of the tablet, and press well, until it returns to its original position; and if you see that he twists with his hand, then let him turn in the spinning wheel.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And do you stamp on the head of one malady with a finger of great strength, and on other fingers, and between each stain there should be a palm's width of distance.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And in each finger there should be .i. puncture, or the spinning wheel turns correctly, and the stain is firmly pressed into the ground so it does not move; and between these .ij. fingers there should be .i. little fingers that turn to make the spinning wheel turn because they turn together.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then tie the thread that is between the pegs on the top wheel of the chief, and another thread to the other wheels at the fingers, and each minister spins his wheel for the entire linkage as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is balanced, place a drying agent with an abundance of salt on the support, and then the fireplace, and then the tablet of .iij. palms wide that polishes the smoothness of the joint and the healthy part of the spinal column, and bind them together as we have said, and treat the maladies with subtle grumbling so they remain sound.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	And if no result comes at the end of the healing, it must be to administer soft and pungent medicines with the tablet we have mentioned before; and never once do I give a piece of stone.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And if the appearance comes in the back of the spinal column, and it must be considered as a dislocation; for the bone that opens, therefore one should not have any preconceptions: perhaps death would come by accident.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the hernia (Note: This line appears to be an unrelated fragment and does not fit with the rest of the text provided, which discusses a medieval medical practice.)
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The dislocations of the hernia and shoulder joints occur only as dislocations solely, not like other joints; the joint of the hernia is divided into .iiij parts: inwards and outwards, and forward and backward; further in this way, and more so in front and rear. (Note: This line appears to be an unrelated fragment and does not fit with the rest of the text provided.)
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation herein is that when one joins the maladjusted leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer and opens more in the maladies' joints than in the healthy ones, and it cannot double the angle at the fire. (Note: This line appears to be an unrelated fragment and does not fit with the rest of the text provided.)
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And it is the joint near the ankle that swells from incising, for this reason the thigh bone comes downward. (Note: This line appears to be a fragment and does not fit with the rest of the text provided.)
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of that which comes in front is contrary to these before mentioned signs. (Note: This line appears to be an unrelated fragment and does not fit with the rest of the text provided.)
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of that which occur in front, so it is; allways, and if he will not doubled his jointure: et de l’hommes qui estte a lais ales enveloigne .ij. ounge saillans (Note: Etricti unanjoure d'ailleurs: of the chief: in English paroles sallons aww:
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	:nage. Injur:
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The resetting of this type of dislocation requires that you acknowledge the dislocation exists, and it lasts according to its position, without any treatment; and it does not require any assumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in cases where the dislocation is fresh, it involves four types of dislocations, if you quickly return the joint to its position, and keep it there for some time and further, and move it towards both sides; perhaps it may return again, and does not require any other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return to this manner, then you must prepare one strong minister (procedure), and fix the leg firmly in two places or at an angle where the joint lies above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and other methods extend their hands above in a way that it pushes its hands down over the bed, then pulls with a strap under the thigh; and others hold the head of the strap on the leg.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they extend upward and downward each one time until the patient with the dislocated limb is raised off the ground at least once, and then continue to do so.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This way of extension is common to these three types (of dislocations), and if the dislocation has returned as we have said, it's good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If that is not the case, then you must apply other care to its type. When the dislocation involves a fracture of the shoulder blade (scapula), it requires treating the injured area above the chest, placing a strap under the root of the thigh, and tying the strap over the groin area; then the strap should be positioned high on the hip joint, and finally extended towards the front of the body.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and other ministers also extend their arms, and embrace the large part of the injured hip joint, and stretch it firmly: if this type of dislocation returns to its natural position; and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot bind the patient's malformed legs in this manner as we have said, then it is required that you join them together with a strong band under the feet and thighs, and extend the malformed leg further than the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then have the patient's malformed shoulder suspended from a beam, and also hanging down by long arms; then instruct one minister to embrace the shoulder of the patient, and another group of ministers should hang with the malformed patient, as they form a circle because now the connection has returned abruptly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is over, if there are maladies in it like we have said for that with spurs on the malformed leg, and straighten a strong band under the malformed leg itself, and also under the foot.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place nine spots on the shoulder and other parts of the body where there are pain points, then insert a pin between the shoulders to restore their shape in the malformed patient.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And plant moistened linens on the patient so as not to worsen their malformed condition, then extend each minister towards them and let the ringmen place it in the palm of their hand where there is the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, that's good. But if not, place him on a table and press as we have said for spurs in the malformed leg, and straighten the painful area of the body.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is before, it requires to extend the malformed leg abruptly, and according to what I have said; then let the ringmen place their pain of being on the malformed angel there, press with the other hand, and push the patient's knee downward.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is over, it does not require extending the malformed leg downward or lifting up from the ground, but rather making it like when our patient's hunchback was dislocated again afterward as we have said for lying on the shoulders.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And place it under his chin and extend the band like we have said before, and must press on the joint at the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	And when the malformed legs are extended and they become equal, then adjust the shoulders, and place a support under them, and tighten the bandage around his waist so that the hunchback does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if he rests for two or three years or four, then remove the support and put it back on, and if you see that they are equal again, tighten as before and let him go, for another three years; then take away the support and let his legs walk happily until the limbs are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	about the dislocation of the hip joint.
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The hips are displaced according to three ways: namely inside and out of the pelvis, backwards, and not in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you command the malformed patient to bend his leg at the hip joint, and if he does not do so, then you know it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all things is that you make the malformed patient lie down right and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on their hips.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	: il mea, and laissiere, en langue of itace theater. Ache: "Citations. Andromen's itexplain(ittere-ly.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And apply the plaster on it, and flare the leg to the knee, and bind them together firmly for either two or four years, then remove it; and not work much with him until his limb is secure again.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the member is not, if there's strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of hernia, until it is sound again.
de la dislocation dou talon	Of the toe's hairs growing long and unshorn until they stop growing and cease to grow.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The claws are never drawn out, and they are never fully released, and sometimes inside and sometimes outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs indicate that the knee is dislocated, and attempt to realign it before reaching the part where it was fully released.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The return movement if it is quick, and one must extend their hands quickly when they are drawn out solely.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is fully released on both sides, it must be that the patient lies down right, and you take him by hand above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then lead the patient to you with your right hand, and then with the left one twice, then lift him up, and let the patient's body rise again smoothly.
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	And do this twice, as we have said, lifting and leading the patient's body up; if it returns, that is good; but if not, then repeat the work, for it comes back.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot return in this way, then make the patient lie on his back on earth, and firmly fix a stick between his thighs, and cover him with cloth to protect the injured arm.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then hold the thigh with your ministers, and other ministers extend the patient's body to his hands or to another strip where he ties the neck of the patient.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then extend each minister equally, and let the stick be there between the thighs of the patient to hold it when you lift him.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then put the rings equally on his hands, and other ministers tie the healthy leg to the bottom, and the dislocation will come back sooner than expected.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at the point, then apply the emplaster and bandage on top of it, form the strap around the leg, and tie the patient's body to the thigh, and warn those nerves above the ankle that they are not tied too tightly.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then let it stay for two or three years if the strap loosens, then remove it after one year or quarter, and leave the patient's arm dislocated by four years.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if it happens before this term, it is not secure that it will no longer be displaced.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the arrows come out during dislocation, it must be that you calm him down, as we have said elsewhere, until he is healthy again.
des dois	of course/necessarily
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the dose is dispensed, they must be immediately extended in work, and it's an easy thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocations are in no part of the body on any side, it must be that you make the patient lie down on one side or on an upright table completely straight, and put your hands under those joints which open up, then press firmly with your hands until the limb returns to its normal position.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is even, andit nient, si met tres maundre deffendu, quand iles sur saillant les arme a .iij.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and of dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	Wounds come with dislocation, and it is sought to be restored many times, wherein the patient suffers greatly from pain:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you do not know the art and have used it for a long time, and if you are merciful and poorly tempered, never hasty.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And at the beginning of things that soothe, let the patient hold the hand of God if you do not see hope for health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, if you reset the limb now, so that it may rest at last after the dislocation.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is set at last, if you administer things that soothe and care for the wound as it requires, with dry ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if with the dislocation there is a break, and thin bones are displaced, if it is bones, do as we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	And keep from entering the path of fear, as I have said before, because it is given to you by your Maker, and for His wisdom in preparing your armor and heart. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	The explicit meaning of physical
