O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science together with its content, and I have made the end by its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is discouraged in our region and is entirely foreign, the science has been lost and diminished, and nothing remains of its essence except for small descriptions in books by the ancients that the practitioners have moved forward.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this came the errors and vanity, and intentions were closed off and the science was distanced.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I should revive it together with the regulation of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of cautery instruments, and other tools of the work along with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there are no good masters of the craft in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who engages in it must excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that they know correctly about the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and sinews and the number of them, and the movement and resting of veins, and their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, should guard against falling into error and harming people; thus I have seen many times those who meddle in this science and rely on their own knowledge and lack of experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a mad doctor who lanced an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut into the arteries of her neck; because so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another doctor who tried to remove a stone from an old man, and the stone was large; he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to remove it, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they cut into it he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another doctor who took care of the duke of our land who had his leg broken, and along with the break there was a wound; and the doctors, full of ignorance, set the fracture over the wound with splints very tightly, and left no cloth for the wound at all, and kept it like that; and commanded him not to loosen it; and remained in such a state that the leg became completely swollen and the foot, leading to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and hurried to come and loosen the leg; and when I had loosened it, he felt at ease and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But once corruption had already set in the limb, it could not be cured; and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the entire limb was lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another doctor who drained the embedded abscess and then burned it with the malice of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a sore, when it is full of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place where all the corrupted matter can be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for that reason, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two categories: namely, work where there is danger in many situations; and I will show in each place in this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Therefore, it is necessary that you take care so that the foolish doctor cannot speak ill of you. Take your weapons in readiness, and approach your patients lightly but firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you may reach salvation and be praised; and leave behind terrible diseases due to harsh treatment; and remove your weapons from those who cause you doubt, and act in such a way that you may come from this world to the next with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his warnings: "Do not concern yourself with harmful diseases, or you may be called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicinal hot cauterizations, and the chapter is arranged from head to feet; and on the forms of instruments, and tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping, and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapter is arranged along with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is arranged from head to feet, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, as we recall the work, it is necessary for me to say the quality of the aid and harm of each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are lengthy speech and subtle science and secret answers; and about this many wise people spoke, and agreed on it; and I suffice with a little of their words, for I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the cautery universally aids in every constitution where there is matter, whether it be two constitutions: namely, a hot constitution with matter, and a dry constitution with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In a constitution that is both hot and dry with matter, some argued and said that the cautery is of great help there; and others said the opposite: that the cautery is not useful for diseases coming from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat a hot disease with heat or dryness; and those who say the opposite claim that the cautery provides great help for a hot and dry disease that occurs in the body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body of the man and his moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be true on occasion through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in any case, let no one interfere except those who have tested it, and who know through long practice the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of temperaments of people, and their predispositions and causes of illnesses, and the outcomes and time intervals; we fear not other temperaments, especially in cold and moist ailments.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors gathered together and agreed on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that the fire cautery together is of the secrets of remedies, and of greater goodness than the burning cauterant medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and does not affect any part other than the limb that is being heated, and it does no harm to another limb if one can name it.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines spread from one limb to another, causing diseases of difficult healing in the affected member; and by chance they may kill the patient. The fire, due to its height and the goodness of its nature, does not do this, unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found through experiment and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is upon the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself for the length of speech, for it displeases me to take from you the secret which lies in the fire, and the quality of the work, how it removes diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on the time when the cauterizations should be performed, and chose appropriate days.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the harmful effects caused can be prevented by the aid of cauterization; and especially if the cauterizations are necessary for pains that cannot wait due to urgency so that no greater harm comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think, dear son, as foolish doctors do; for the illness that is cured by cauterization has no relapse; and they say it thus, but they are mistaken because cauterizations are nothing other than medicine that changes the complexion, dries up the humors which cause pain, and is better than medicine for hastening its value, and for the power of its work and sovereignty.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the illness comes sometimes according to the constitution of the patient and the place of the disease and its strength; and the excesses are accumulated in him by the consumption of food and similar things, except where there is little excess and moisture, such as cauteries for tooth pain and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort in medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth trying after other medicines, yet their understanding is false, for it is cauteries that are the last resort in medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any illness and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it proves effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterizations with an instrument of gold are better than those with iron, and they said this not because of the quality of the gold or its high substance; but they also said that the skin after cauterization does not become ulcerated, which is not true as I have tested it, and I found that it is true in some people; and cauterizations with gold are indeed better than those with iron, as they claim.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot tell by its color when it is hot enough, and it cools quickly; and if you heat it too much, it becomes damaged by the fire; and thus there are many hindrances.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use fire cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have ordered this chapter from head to foot, so that the way may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness affecting the brain, and there are two types made because of a disease called "soda," and due to various humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for numerous dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and especially for all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine cleansing the head for three nights or four, according to what the patient's constitution and age can tolerate; and then do behind the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then have him sit with his hands between your hands, and place his hands on his thighs; afterwards put the root of your palm at the root of his nose between his two eyes; there where your thumbs will be, let it bleed from there, then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", here is how to make it:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the marked spot with ink, and do by descending and pulling your hand little by little while turning; then lift your hand gradually, and examine the spot if you see a bone slightly protruding; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have said; afterwards take some pitch, put it in wax and soften cotton within, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; then apply moistened cloth in butter; and keep it on until the inflammation is gone; afterwards treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmakon", until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said that the longer a wound remains open, the more it purges itself; and for this reason it helps to move [the patient].
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some said that one should leave the cautery on until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that the cautery should be left on for so long and pressed so hard that it cuts into the bone as wide as a quill that women put in their ears to let the humors flow out; and the wound should remain open for a long time afterward; then it must be cleansed and treated.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem entirely good to me, except in some people where there is a danger of fear; and I think I should leave it as such; for the head [of the shoulder] is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other limbs; and even when the head of the patient is weak by nature, the first appearance of cauterization seems safer and more moderate to me, and from this one I practice with safety.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain comes to the whole head and lasts for a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills which are called "cochie," and perform purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if one performs the cautery that we mentioned before, it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the condition of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize below that area a little as we said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After cauterize each horn of the head up to the bone as we said before, and perform the cautery at the place called "vasselz"; there are places where suction cups are applied; move your hand lightly so you do not see until the bone: the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than with others, and I will speak about it later; and the cauterizations of the horns should be finer than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and here is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes to a part of the head and spreads up to the eye, and the head is purged with cleansing medicines, and all the other treatments that I have mentioned in the division of diseases have been done, and none of this helps: then I make cauteries according to two methods, namely with dry medicine and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery of dry medicine is such that you take a piece of cloth and remove the outer layer and place it in I cup with II chives, and then apply it to the temple where the pain resides in such a manner that you can place the piece of cloth under the skin; and when it is placed there, secure and press it well and leave it so for XII hours; then unbind and treat the wound outside the piece of garlic, and leave the wound like this II days or III; then put on a poultice soaked in butter until it can be removed.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to use some burning medicines that I have written in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The cautery of iron is according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery as described in its form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a bowl with a bit of curvature, and in the middle there is a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and turn the iron slightly, until half the thickness of the flesh over the heart is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and allow abundant bleeding.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After place cotton in bandage of thread, and put on the site for III days; then put cotton moistened with butter, and then treat the site with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this emigration with the cautery which is called "cultellare", at the entire point, and guard against cutting the artery in this emigration which is not old.
de emigraine	of swelling/inflammation
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat swelling as we have said before in the division of diseases, and it does not help, and see that the cauterizations previously mentioned from medicine and iron do not suffice for him, then you must heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and cut in this painful place a line half a digit long, and remove your hand once to ensure you do not cut the artery and do not reach the bone; and guard against the jaw that moves when one eats, and the nerve should be cautious so that it does not become mute and spasm does not come upon the patient, and guard against blood loss from the artery when it is cut, or cutting brings great fear even to those who are unfamiliar with it and who have no study and experience; but I will tell you how one stops bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauterizations do not help the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him on top of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you wish, administer the cauterization that we mentioned in the chapter about the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; and this cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain from coldness comes to the ear, and one has used medicines that dissolve and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery which is called "poins," here is its form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After puncture all around the diseased ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move away a little above the root of the ear after you have marked the place; and put ten points around each ear; then treat the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the treatment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	A torture that must be treated with a cautery is none other than those that are caused by phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not perform cauterization on similar conditions that come from dryness and nerve spasms.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this condition of a phlegm-related torture with purgings and gargling, if that does not suffice, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the base of the ear, another slightly outside the temple, and the third near the junction of the two lips; place the cautery in an area that appears healthy, and apply it directly above a bit below the horn of the head for the part near the ear, and another at the temple as long as a palm; leave the cauterization on until half the heart is burned; this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is like the example of the knife mentioned before, but it is a bit more subtle and the knife should be a bit larger; after treating the area as I said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is longstanding and the treatment does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make IV cauterizations: II on the two horns of the head, and I in the middle of the head, and I at the place which is called "vasselz" as we said before, and the last cautery above the stomach; and let them be performed as we have said previously.
de litargie	For litargia (foot ulcer or athlete's
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, give the patient large doses of iron and purifying pills for the brain; then anoint the head of the patient completely, and place the sinapi plaster on the occiput as described in the treatise on plasters; and this is the method of cauterization: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is well in this way, it is good; and if not, make III cauterizations between them on the head descending down to the neck, and have I thumb's width of space between each cauterization; and treat as with others, and if you wish to add more, and the patient can bear it, make I cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, II others above the II temples, and treat until he is well; and let the cauterizations which are called «olivare», as I said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleaned of dirt and what we mentioned before; then anoint the patient's head, then make a cauterization in the middle of the head and above each temple, and one at the back and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient can bear it, and the illness is severe, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and leave them until the softest part of the skin is burned, then lift your hand; afterward treat until he is well, and let the cauterizations which are called «olivare» that we mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Those with epilepsy must not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain from worms and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when the patient is large and suffers greatly from difficult medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot withstand this, give them gargling and chewing to modify the brain frequently with good meat; afterwards raise their head in the middle, and apply the cautery as we have said before, on the vessel and on each temple; and if the patient is strong and suffering, apply cauterizations as I have said for those who have paralysis and limb weakness, on the spine of the back and neck, and let these be olive cauterizations according to the method I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, perform the delicate cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy the excesses or moister humours are corrupted and phlegm is thick, then apply such cauteries as we have mentioned to one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the excess humours incline towards melancholy and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies the brain, according to what is mentioned before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After elevating the head of the patient; then make a bandage of well-made flax, like a circle, and place it on the head; and have the patient sit cross-legged, held securely from all sides; afterwards apply the poultice, using wool felt from an old sheep; heat it over a gentle fire until it can be comfortably applied to the patient; then empty the circle inside onto the head, and let it cool down; and do this for the patient once every week with other good management, until they are healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you wish to cauterize it, make multiple small punctures across the entire area to be cauterized.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterization moistens the brain excessively; then apply cotton soaked in butter and goose grease.
de l’awe des eulz	from the pain of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When pain first comes to the eyes according to the signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying for their head, and protect them from all moistures, and make them sweat in baths several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Afterward, command them to lie with their head back, and perform a cauterization in the middle of the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the pain descends to both eyes together, or one if it is in one; and cut through all veins and arteries that are below the heart throughout the entire cauterization area, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of excessive blood loss, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it as strongly as necessary.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and at the incision the caution how you will stop it; and sometimes a cautery or hot iron is applied between the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	from the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and habitual and are on the veins, then treat the arteries that appear on the head's surface; and if you see that it is due to cold phlegmatic excesses, then apply the cautery as I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter descending to the eyes: I cautere in the middle of the forehead, and II cauterizations above the two temples, and II cauterizations with a hot iron between the two bones; and if there is further need, cautiously cauterize above the eyebrows with one small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	from the body of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three nights' worth of drinks; afterward raise his head, and apply a cautery in the middle of the olive-shaped cautery; and make two cauterizations called "clavilis" on the two sides, a little below the hair; and be careful of the artery so that you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the white of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you wish to do two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrow hairs are; and do not let go of your hand except when a third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that points toward the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes grow inward and prick the eye, and one performs cauterization according to two methods: namely with fire, or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the patient in your care; after that, draw on the paper above the eyes a figure like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs; then apply cotton moistened with egg white and parsley juice to the eye, then heat the cautery as described here:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure you have drawn little by little many times, so that the skin is burned at those points; and the signs of the work being successful are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs rise to the edge of the eye; then remove your hand, and leave it thus for III days, then apply cotton moistened with butter until the burn has healed; after which treat with ointment until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hairs come after that, and the skin is softened, then restart the cautery on the same spot as you did before; and if the hairs have fallen out, cauterize until the skin rises to its natural level and becomes even, so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of burning medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a shape out of parchment like a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and hot vinegar, one ounce each, and grind them together well; and do this quickly so it does not cool down, then sprinkle on the form you have made as with a myrtle leaf, and place over the skin around the eyes; and if the patient has only one affected eye, work on that one alone, but if both are affected, work on both; and place cotton moistened in egg white under the eye of the patient, and press down gently every time the patient feels burning from the medicine, because they will feel it as if it were fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine at its proper time.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the biting has passed, then lift the area of treatment, and examine if you see the skin raised as if it had been raised by the constraint of fire or by cutting; and if it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then apply the medicine again to the area where it has not taken effect, until your work is even and your eyes are set properly; then place wet cotton on a piece of butter until the burned area heals, after which treat the ointment application site, known as "diaphanous" and other treatments, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you to be very careful with your work so that none of the medicine falls into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft after that, and the hair pricks in the eye, then reapply the medicine to that place which is softened by the paper properly, as you did before; treat it until it is healed; and this is the form of the mirtle poultice:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of people vary in size and smallness, and adjust your methods accordingly; and do not deviate from the proper course for those who study this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	for the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or turn; then apply a small piece of cotton soaked in egg white or persillie juice on the eye; afterwards heat the cautery which is shaped like this: it should be attached to the head like the shape of a feather from an owl, but if you wish, it can go from one side of the head to the other, and if you prefer, it can resemble a tent; however, in any case, the part that is attached will need to be moved for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, then work on it, and draw out the contents; afterwards apply a hot cautery, and hold your hand to the cautery above the eye, so that your hand does not do foolishly; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you proceed to the beginning of the cautery until the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then begin the cautery again once more, and do it another time if you need to, and leave it for three days; afterwards apply cotton soaked in butter, and treat with a desiccative ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and proceed according to what would come in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cautery for fistulas which some of the ancients described.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Attend to the fistula and cut it open; afterwards place in the incision some finely powdered substance of which this is the formula:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it in the quantity of one .3. of lead; and hold your hand on the powder firmly, and do not let the patient move at all, so that the melted lead does not run into their eye; and it is necessary to place over the patient's eye a cotton ball moistened with egg white or water: the lead thus seals the fistula, and heals wonderfully.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have described, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to administer a puncture with a knife, and to bring the fistula back into the body of the knife according to what is proper in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Cracks in the lips, which are called "hairs," often occur, especially in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it quickly in those cracks until it reaches the bottom; after that, treat the area with plaster until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the neck
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the neck or in the uvula, or at the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it becomes putrid and rotten and ages, becoming a fistula; then you cure it as we have said in divisions, but if that does not help: then it is necessary to apply the cautery according to the size of the fistula; after making an opening or hole in the fistula, hold your hand until the hot iron reaches deep inside and at the back; do this once or twice, then cure as we have said for treatments, until he is healed; if cured thus, it is good; if not, you must uncover the area and remove the corrupted bone according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	of the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and treating it with medicine does not help, then place the head of the patient in your lap; after that, heat the cautery according to the following manner: place a chain on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside it quickly, and hold it so long that the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; then lift your hand and repeat the cautery as you wish; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and let them gargle for an hour and rinse out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner, the tooth that was moving becomes fixed, and the softened gum is restrained, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from cold, where there is actual cold, and the remedies of medicine do not help, then it is necessary to use cautery in two ways: one by butter and one by fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery by butter is such that you take sheep's grease, and put it in a spoon of iron or brass; after this, take cotton and wrap around the tip of a tent, and dip it in melted butter, then quickly place it on the painful tooth and hold it until it cools down; and do this often until its effect reaches the root of the tooth, and if you wish, moisten wool and cotton in cold butter, and place it over the painful tooth, and apply a hot iron until the heat reaches the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The fire cauteries together are such that you take an iron or bronze rod, and let it be thick so the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient; then heat the cautery, from which the form will come after, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter during the urgency of this cautery, and then vigorously rub it; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And apply the cautery to whichever part you wish, according to your ability; and this is the form of the rod:
des scrophules	scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofulas are full of cold phlegm and do not respond to digestion through medicines, then heat the cautery as described below, and make two openings for the smoke to escape on the side opposite the cautery; place the hot cautery over the abscess once or twice if necessary until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it in place for three days; then put moist wool soaked in butter until the burn is gone; afterward treat the area with ointments and plasters until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cautery:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moisture overcomes the channels of the phlegm, and especially when it comes from cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first cleared by solutive medicines; after this, perform cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to reach the throat itself, but burn only a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After this, perform another cautery at the joint of the neck to the base of the spine, and let the cauterizations called "clavile" be as we have described their form before; treat the area as we have previously instructed until it is healed.
de la toust	for cough
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the diseases of phlegm are cold and moist, and the patient does not have fever or dryness, and the illness is old, if you perform one cautery on the pectoral muscles in their places; and another cautery between the breasts above the pit of the stomach; let the cauterizations called "clavile" be according to the form described before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you wish, perform cautery by pricking the entire area which is called "points" of which the form is described above in the disease of the ears; and let the points be up to XXX, or inquire around.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the area as described previously, let the cauterizations be three lines according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because the cauterizations are lighter, make three of them at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After the patient is laid on his back and side; then lift the shoulder that is within the armpit with both of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has two grooves as shown here:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the shoulder until it pierces to the side, and there would be four cautery marks in total; and for that one is made with a cautery which has three grooves, so the shape of the cauteries are six marks; and the nerves are as fine as a thread, and this is the shape of the cautery which has three grooves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve, which results in eight cautery marks.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After place the cautery pellets ground with salt; after make rest the patient, and let not move the limb for long time until it be well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which thing happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery navel, or many cauteries by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come coldness and much moisture until it strains its constitution, and are multiplied the catarrh to him, and by usual methods of cure it profits not, then it is necessary that the patient be suspended on his back, and stretch out his legs and his arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From those afterwards I make three cauterizations. One with the spoon of pitch in the amount of two doses, for the entire cautery navel, and two cauterizations outside each side until the shape of the cauterizations forms at three angles, and there is such space between one and the other that they do not join together when they discharge pus; and let the cauterizations be so deep that they penetrate both sides of the body, and let the shape of the cauterizations be according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you wish to cauterize with a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and for those who fear this cauterization, cauterize by pricking and cutting one point on the stomach as much as you want; then cauterize throughout the entire cautery which is called "points.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the care of the treatment that we had before, until he is well.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver suffers pain from cold and moisture and great flatulence, so that it is weakened from its natural temperament due to excesses; and if the patient is treated according to what we have said in divisions, and it does not help him, then the patient should be positioned on his right side; and apply three cauterizations according to this form and figure and size above the liver, beyond the hypochondria, where a man's ribs come together; and leave between each cautery the thickness of a finger; and let them be long in line with the body, and do not press too much on the whole cautery; and burn only up to half the heart, and let the patient stand upright on his feet; and if he cannot, then let him lie down, extend his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your will is to cauterize these cauteries of the elbow, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn all the flesh, for you would dry up the entire body; and let it not reach the eye, for the flesh is very delicate there, and you know this well.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too strongly; and if it is in the membrane, the pain is intense.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment is to be applied to the breasts, the patient must lie on their back with their head raised; then incise the area where the abscess is, and then heat the cauterizing iron which resembles a reed, as described in the form.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize until the wound is burned and reaches syphac, until all the pus is out; afterwards treat according to the treatment of boils until it is healed; and it does not suit anyone other than those who have studied extensively in the art of medicine, and whose hands these diseases have corrupted at some point.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he may boldly proceed with the treatment, although it seems to me that caution is better.
dou cautere de pleuresin	for the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should use cauteries made from the roots of aristolochia for pleurisy in this manner: take a root of aristolochia as long as possible, and it should be as thick and long as your thumb; soften it in oil, and apply it to the fire, then cauterize once between the rib and the neck, and two small cauterizations slightly downward below the beard area; and two cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclined towards the back a little; one cauterization in the armpit, another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, with two more on either side of the shoulder blade behind the one between the two shoulders; do not press hard but rather gently as if sniffing.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancient ones said that certain men use a cautery of fire similar to the razor, and they heat it and place it between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess; and thus the pain subsides, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear that the patient dies immediately, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	Of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it is ineffective, then they offer three methods of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of these one method is that you make three or four cauterizations along the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver cautery we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery area, and let the patient lie on his back; and another method of cautery is to heat the cautery with two edges, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the side where the mouse is located, or if the patient's illness comes from the left side, let the elevations you lift follow along the side according to the length of the body, and the cauterizations should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After inserting the two inflamed nerves until the heat is felt on the other side, and then draw out the cautery, and thus there will be four nerves. And if you wish, cauterize the entire cautery with three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has expelled pus for a long time, this is worth more than the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not effective for dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you must make four cauteries around the abdomen, one on the stomach, one above the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one near the kidney; and let the cauteries be close to the area of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery open to expel pus for a long time, do not leave the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and both intentions would be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the abdomen should be the key that we have shown before; and the one for the back should be olive-shaped, as it is set forth above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in one who is hydropic and filled with yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery as you turn.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, lest you go beyond the area of redness, and apply the cauterization as follows:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making two cauterizations on each leg at the point of the kneecap; and let the cauterizations be long, one below the knee in front and the other outside, along the leg; and leave the cauterizations open for a while without cleaning them, so that the wound remains there; then treat it with the other treatments we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of massage
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When abdominal distension comes from cold and moisture, such that the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be treated by usual methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of great strength, make one large cauterization on the stomach as previously described for the fire cautery on the stomach, a circular cautere; and four small cauteries around the navel, each as wide as one small ring-shaped cautere, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the humors abundant and the patient suffering, apply cauterization on the wrist, and one cauterization on each armpit, and two small cauteries near the stomach below the navel, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	on the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are in the anus, whether one or more, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we described in divisions but to no avail, then apply cauterizations: three on the spine at the back, placed apart from each other like two pots and one in a triangular pattern, and one cautery below the navel two fingers away; and if you think that their stomach is chilled and the food does not cook, and swelling of the face is observed, then apply a large cautery near the stomach as previously mentioned, and another on the liver, and yet another on the spleen for the entire clavicle length; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the area until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the flesh condition which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut into the thelul, heat the cautery until it resembles a razor, and then place it fully heated on the area where the thelul has been cut; leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein, from which blood will flow; do this once or twice, and if there is much thelul, cauterize each one as we have said; after that, treat with ointments beneficial to healing until it is healthy; and if you cauterize a large area on the flesh, it will provide greater assistance.
de plaie mal curee	of an improperly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will recount in its place, if such a disease comes that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula comes to someone and is inflamed and discharges pus and corrupted moisture, then you should apply a fine poultice at once, and be sure that the poultice is of proper depth.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heat the cautery which seems like a razor, and apply it to the fistula according to the depth that the poultice has entered, and continue with the cautery until the pus-filled and corrupted tissue is burned, once or twice or three times, as needed; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the bladder and intestines, be cautious in these areas, and do not make an incision except in soft tissue, and know that it is not safe; afterwards treat the area until it is healed, and if the place is infected, and the matter has been removed for a long time, then you know that the place is completely healed; and if the matter has not been removed, know that the condition is severe, and the bone at the root will be corrupted; and thus as one of those we shall mention in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and there is much gas, and it does not respond to female treatment, then you must make a fire cautery on both sides of the kidneys with the clavicle cautery that we mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and this will provide greater assistance.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and cold due to coldness and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then apply cauterization on the outer part above the bladder where the hair of the pubis begins, one on each side, and let each cautery be as long as a finger; and perform the cauterization outside the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauteries be shaped like a key according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	of the phlegm
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the phlegm is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to perform three cauterizations around the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations outside the back; and let the cauteries be shaped like a key, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous fluids descend to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and if the location of the origin is found, then you must cauterize the patient on the hip joint with a cautery resembling a circle, and cut in front of the area around the joint as it turns, so that the joint is within the circle; and let the cauterizations be such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauterizations are not present, make three large olive leaf cauterizations for him, and let the cauterizations be as deep as all the wounds; and treat until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the thigh
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the buttock of the thigh, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have mentioned in the division and the treatment does not work, and the illness is old: then you must purge the patient of thick humors with fetid pills or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After you apply the cauterization; and the method of the cauterization is according to two methods: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Cauterization by fire is according to many methods, of which one is as follows: that you cauterize on the buttock of the thigh three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them deep and large, and leave between each cauterization a space the thickness of two fingers, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped; sometimes one makes a cauterization in the middle above the top of the thigh, which then there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circular cautery that we mentioned earlier in the hip dislocation; but do it in such a way that the circle contains the entire hip, and all the ribs around the heart are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done for sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip and does not extend to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it extends to the thigh and leg, place two cauteries where the patient says the pain is, and one above the ankle four fingers away, on the left side; and let the cauteries be circular, or burn the thickness of the skin; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to three fingers or near the instep, cauterize there with a cautery called "points" three times or four.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, I will do more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, I apply the cutaneous or circular cautery, and take great care in all my cauterizations that I do not leave it burning so long as to burn the nerves and large arteries, and that I do not cause the patient greater harm and constriction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who applied a cautery to the ankle of the foot, and left it burning so long that the leg became swollen, as did the foot, and it was pierced and all the foot corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a belly remedy from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, apply cauterization to each one according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise ones said concerning the cautery of the thigh, for which this is the method: make it like an iron and let it be at the top as thick as one new penny, or slightly less, and let there be spaces between them, from one space to the other about the breadth of a finger; and let the spaces be covered on both sides, and let them also be as if knotted, and there should be one handle well made; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it is all red and sparks fly, then place it on the diseased thigh, and turn it over the healthy side; and the cautery should be applied once and left for three days; then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after that, treat with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this cautery little because of the fear associated with it in his regard, and few who use it; yet it is one of the best cauteries, which can be endured, and there where it applies.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cautery of burning medicine is such that you make the instrument with interlocking parts in which descends the margin of the door, and it should be made of brass or iron on one side long, and at its height have two sides, and between each have the thickness of a finger; and they should open outward and above, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Then place the hip joint of the patient lying on their healthy side, and press your hand firmly over the hip; then pour between the two circles of the heated awl which has been heated in the fire a little bit, and leave it for one hour of time, and let the patient suffer the heat and burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there is a burning sensation as if from fire; and when the burning has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the thigh gently, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until the part that was blackened by the burn falls off; and let him rest for three days so that pus may drain out; and this would be the last aid after the treatment of ointments until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, make for him an instrument that holds warm water as you did for the thigh similarly; and this is the method of hot water treatment, and I have written it in the treatise on the preparation of medicines.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, an equal amount of each, and grind them together, then put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	where there is a small hole for the point of a razor to enter; and place over that pot another lead pot well sealed, and put alkali and heat on it with water above, until there are two layers of powder which you have taken in your hand; and leave it thus until water drips and falls from the lead pot, then take all that water and pour it over heat and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very effective and is administered in various works of medicine and in cauterizations of other members Because it performs different tasks like fire, and there are other medicines with which one can well cauterize the hip such as tisane and honey anacardium and heat with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galien tells us of a cure where a nobleman was cured of hip pain and sciatic nerve pain, and he praises it much, and says that no other cure was applied, and that he was healed in one instance when this cure was performed, and he bathed as he teaches hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says in this manner that you should take green and dry litharge and grind it much with a little grease, and apply it to the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is, and bind it; and leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then have him enter the bath until his body is slightly refreshed, and then have him enter the bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one must use a cautery of such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of pus.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides stated that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat hair, it helps greatly; and the cauterization should be done in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take wool and grease it with old oil, and place it on the hollow that is between the big toe of the foot and the other one called foscile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking dry goat hair and heating it over fire until it turns to charcoal, place it on the wool, and leave it there until it is cooled; and do this again, and continue doing so until you believe by sense that it reaches up to the thigh, and the pain ceases; and this method of cauterization is called "goat cauterization.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or impact or due to excessive bloodletting, or from similar substances spread coldly, none of these cases benefit from cauterization, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary that after the patient has been cleansed with smelly pills or other similar substances, three lines of inch signs be placed on the back where the pain lies, and in each line five cauterizations or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cauterizations be made according to the cautery which is called "poins"; and if you wish, make three cauterizations or four at a medium clavicle cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This illness often comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have difficulty lying down when they rise up, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in what we call the appearance which comes upon the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and wish to treat it, cauterize it with the cold cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cauterization affects each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with the prickly cautery in lines of two or three, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treating the area until it is healed as we have said, and be careful not to apply a cautery to a lump that is in a nerve bundle.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain in joints is caused by moisture that spreads to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes in the feet, which doctors call "gout" properly, and when it is due to a cold cause and cannot be cured with medicines, then it is treated with cautery in this manner: make the cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let them be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need to cauterize on the sole of the foot, then make the entire cautery which is called "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, which happens often, make a cautery on each knee three or four times on each part, for the entire cautery olive; and if you need more, do more, but keep your hand only until the point of the skin is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and the back, let the administrator apply the cautery that we have described in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wrist two lines; and if there remains pain in both, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and provide good care for the patient and careful medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give it proper management and purge phlegm, then with God's help it will be healed.
de la routure dou syfac	of the fracture of the cheekbone
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a fracture occurs in the ribs, and the bowels descend towards the thighs, it is newly happened, so when you wish to treat him, he must not eat that day; and use things that loosen the belly, so that the feces come out of his body; then make him sit on your lap between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the bowels are repositioned, and reset them with your hands, and cauterize from beneath the fracture towards the bone of the elbow, and make a mark that resembles half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery according to this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until they are white and until they shed flakes.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their place; and hold your hand so that they do not move back; and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put under him one cushion and one towel over the thighs, and another under the buttocks which he holds with his hands; then apply the cautery to the mark with all your hand, and keep it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the bone does not protrude when you make the cautery; that you do not burn him; and that he does not die from this or any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size, and for adults also large according to their measure; after three days, cure the place of the cautery with butter until the burning subsides; afterwards treat with other ointments until he is healed, and have the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well sealed; it is necessary that his caregivers be restrained so that his eyes do not protrude when he tries to go into chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, bring him a well-made bandage and let him wear it for another forty days; and give him good rest, so that he does little work and guard against overeating and drinking, and excessive straining; and when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say hereafter the treatment of cutting in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other parts of the abdomen and are constricted, and you wish to prevent them from growing larger, apply the cautery according to its size, and let one-third be burnt; afterward treat it as we have said; and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-angled cautery in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the site and draw a line across the width above the rupture, and another below, and then carefully apply the cautery along its entire length.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being injured, and that pain persists for a long time, and medical treatment is of no use, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "points," and the cauterization should follow the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and strength and location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is healed by the first cauterization, that is good; if not, repeat another cauterization on top of it, for such is the custom that it must change to the limb that is nearest, therefore it is necessary that you continue the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of confusion
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The sick are sometimes helped by cautery with great benefit, especially those diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you see fit to cauterize, be careful if the illness is in its beginning stages, and if it is treated as we have described in the division, and does not worsen or remain static, and if you fear that corruption will spread throughout the patient, then apply V cauteries on the head: I one on top of the head nine times, and another at the forehead near the hairline; II on each temple; and I behind at the nape. And leave your hand long enough for the cautery to reach the bone so that the epidermis comes out as far as possible, allowing the vapors from thick humors to escape; and cauterize over the mouth according to what is stated above.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the mixture is spread everywhere; and it appears clearly, then you must cauterize with those cauterizations that we have mentioned at the beginning, and one cautery near the nose, and two cauteries on the neck vertebrae, and six cauteries on the back vertebrae, and one large one on the buttocks and another nearby, and two on each shoulder; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the heel, so as not to burn them; and sometimes someone makes a cautery on the bone of the thumb, and another on the bone of the stomach, and yet another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more cauterizations you perform, the greater the help and benefit for them; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, because their body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find them in the ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treating, apply flour of wheat with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then apply cauterizations on the limb according to its size; let them penetrate somewhat into the thickness of the skin; then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cauterization is done on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; yet none should intervene unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of nerves that move the body.
de albaras	of bandages
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is advanced and medicines are ineffective, then cauterize it with a cautery slightly deep, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes; then treat it with flour of vetches and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and pheasant's blood and lark's blood, one part each; and mix everything together, and apply it wrapped in a cloth until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of a ulcer by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When an ulcer appears at the beginning and you wish to stop its progress, then cauterize it with a cautery that resembles a circle, all around the edge of the ulcer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet the wise say that one should perform cautery in the middle of the ulcer; and yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen several times; and a more prudent thing is to cauterize around it, with the cautery called "circulus," as we said earlier regarding various cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot be reduced
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it lingers due to the excess it produces or because of the age of the patient when they are infirm (that is, too old) and have little blood, or because of time; and you wish to hasten its resolution: then cauterize around with many small cauteries by piercing; afterwards leave it as such.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to kill.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you wish to pierce it completely with the cautery, then heat the cautery as follows:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of the illness called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and make the cautery such that the patient feels it externally in such a way that the course of the corruption is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until he is completely well.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cautery with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another type of illness called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a member eating condition, for it consumes the members as fire consumes dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this illness in a place that can withstand cautery together with fire, then heat the cauteries very small and large, according to what is needed for the location of the illness; afterward cauterize from all sides until you reach all the corruption, and let nothing of it remain, so that everything that is corrupted be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and put on the treated places a mixture ground with oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment with ointments that generate flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that no healthy flesh is growing, it is good; and if not, then restart the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted areas.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this meal was sometimes treated with a cold medicine instead of fire cautery; but still, fire cautery is much more helpful, and I have already said the treatment for the cold medicine in the section: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of blisters that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times a disease called "clos" according to our understanding arises on the feet from outside, and it is a swollen thing that hurts the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	The fire cautery is such that you heat it as if to burn hair like a feather of vulture, and it should be made of good iron in the measure that it can penetrate the nail on all sides, and there must be fine edges; after placing it entirely hot upon the nail, turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; leave it thus for III days until it begins to discharge pus; then make a poultice of wild mallow crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the area with an ointment that promotes flesh growth until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted from outside the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, then you must administer hot water cautery to them; it is done as follows: take a chain of brass or iron, or a feather of vulture, and place it over the nail and althea leaves, which are used for warts; then place the chain so that it penetrates all around, put a little hot water on it, hold firmly with your hand, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the chain reaches the root of the nail, and thus allow the hot water to penetrate deeply to the root; let the patient endure the burning sensation of the hot water for one hour; then leave it as is, and it will be uprooted entirely from its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Do this one after another until you have treated all those who are on the body, then cure them with ointments that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	the treatment for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone trembles from cold, neuralgia, or quartan fever, or some other condition, you should perform IV cauterizations on the spine, one between each vertebra; and one on the thigh, and one above the stomach at an olive-shaped cautery point; this will stop the trembling and hasten recovery from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	the treatment for foul pus-filled sores
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	At times, baths or foul pus-filled sores appear on the surface of the body, which come from large corrupted substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	It is necessary at first when they appear that one should make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a fine cautery from a branch of myrtle, whose point should be heated by fire, or from a long root of artemisia, or a lentil-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow any further, but the excesses from which they come are destroyed, and they are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great outflows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound coming from outside, or from incising an abscess, or from a cautery on the limb, and similar things; and it is very difficult to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, hasten to place your thumb on the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the blood is stilled beneath your thumb, and no more droplets emerge; then put in fire the olive cauteries many small and large until they are all red; then take one, either large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery runs, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your thumb, and keep the cautery there until the blood is restrained.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it spurts out when you lift your thumb off the vein, and the cautery goes out, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing this one after another until the blood is staunched; and be wary that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well staunched directly when the artery is large, unless it is done by one of the four methods we have mentioned: either by cautery, or extraction when it is not tied off, or by tightly binding with thread, or by applying medicines which have the power to stop bleeding; and let it be bound and compressed accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will cover the stench with tightly wrapped cloths or by placing burning substances on them, or other similar things, if it does not help when applied otherwise.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and there is no doctor or medicine present, he should place his thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and spread it well until it is covered over the wound and over the vein; and do not move the hand, but moisten it with very cold water frequently so that the blood cools and thickens and clots; and make a fire ahead for those who need cautery and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about every disease in which it is necessary to use fire cautery or burning medicines, and their occasions and causes and instruments and forms of cauterization; and I placed that chapter from head to foot, and I will proceed in this chapter along the same path so that those who wish may more easily find what they seek.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin this, it is necessary, dear reader, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	There are those who become so troubled by their illness that they act rashly due to the insanity brought about by their disease, and from the severity of their condition; one must fear these people.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those among them who regain their senses and say: "Wait, I am cured"; yet the illness is still severe.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You must not agree with those who come to you with such behavior, but place more honor in your integrity than in your desire, and do not act foolishly but wisely regarding those about whom you are certain and from whom you can gain respect and praise; use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients for their recovery; this will help you acquire a good reputation, glory, and lasting praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear child, Our Lord grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to breathe in the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into sections, as it is before the chapter on cauterizations, which I have discussed from head to foot, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, and when the midwife grasps the child's head too forcefully; and sometimes it happens for a reason that is not known.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those whom I have seen were seized by death quickly; therefore it seems to me that it is best to abandon the treatment in such cases.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head swelled each day so much that he could not sustain it; and the moisture increased until death came, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone on the siphon, between the heart and the bone; and if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should cut a slit in the head as wide as two fingers; and it should be as long as two fingers so that the moisture can flow out; and here is the form of the spatumile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the swelling is away from the bone, and you see the seams of the head open on each part, and when you press inside with your hand, the liquid jumps out, and this does not respond to you: then it is necessary that you cut three incisions in the middle of the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the swelling out.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After cleaning the incisions with cloths and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave it this way until the fifth day; then remove the dressing, treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and allow the head to drain evenly, and give the patient dried meat for food with little moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look at the opening of the abscess and the assembly of the fluid; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Incise then at the opening of the abscess and where it is filled with fluid, and cut according to what you can; be careful not to cut an artery; if blood flows, the patient may die from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone suffers from a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or at the worst, and the illness is long-standing, and medical treatment does no good, then the last resort is cauterization with that which will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is therefore necessary, when you are to cut the veins, that the patient lie with his head back; then rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries become visible, then press the patient's neck against the cloth tightly; then look where the veins run, and their locations are behind the ears, and they rest there; then mark the points of incision, then cut both veins with a sharp knife from two sides, to the bone, until the carotid vein is reached, and this should be done along the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you wish, insert the knife below the artery and cut above it, cutting as you would through two layers.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, blood will continuously flow outwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open upon feeling, then measure the quantity of space of III digits, then cut through the skin to the bone; and what must be of blood to put outside is VI cotes, and perhaps a bit more or less, according to what the patient can tolerate, and the fullness of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point of syphace, then cut it so that abscesses do not come, then press the wound and bind, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	For migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes with a sharp catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and an ancient diseased socket and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medicine and all this does no good, then we extract the arteries from the temples and use cautery, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient part their hair at their temples, and listen to the artery which appears in the temple, for it beats clearly, and can be felt except in some people who are too cold; and if it can be felt, then the patient should squeeze their neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and pour hot water on the area until the artery becomes visible clearly; then take the spatula of which here is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then trace it up to the incisions, and carefully separate the tissues from each side; and if the artery is delicate, then turn it with the tip of the hook, then cut that part according to the size of the two heads.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, the blood does not flow entirely throughout.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out the blood from six fingers' width, up to three; and if the artery is large, you must tie it with a double thread of strong silk so that no corruption comes before the healing of the wound, and prevent further bleeding; then cut away the excess that lies between the two ties at the same time, and then, if you wish, cauterize the cautery to the bone until the head is cut off; and this is the main work, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cauterization is help to stop moisture: it is of greater aid against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, one should fill the area with old cotton and place well-made tents over it; and when these are removed, treat with medicines that promote flesh growth and use tents until it is healed; if there is no cort present during the artery extraction as much as you work on it, hasten to cut using cautery, filling the area with vitriol and pressing it in your hand until the skin is sealed; and if you do not have this available, place your own deed over the area so that the skin freezes, and rinse the area with cold water until the skin tightens, and press it as necessary; and what is more mild and easier in the extraction of arteries is to cauterize the vein from this cautery, cutting across both sides, but ensure the cuts are well spaced to retain their heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too cold, it holds less of its heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be a space of one finger's width between the two knives, and when you have marked the place with them, put the hot iron on until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and these should be apart between the two bones because they are not joined throughout by this cautery; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes come down from the veins that are above the forehead of fire, and it does no good to treat with medicine what is done, and you see the face of the patient redden, and feel on the forehead trembling as if shivering; and where the eyes are cold and moist so that the hair on the eyelids falls out, and the eyelids are hot and scorched by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And the ancients called it "cure contuse", and you make the patient who has this disease shave his hair on the forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead equally according to its length; and let one of the cuts be as two fingers wide in the middle of the forehead going down towards the nose, and the other two by each temple above the eyebrows, and beware of cutting into the arteries that are at both temples above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and let each wound be the width of three fingers across; then prepare a piece of sponge and much cloth to dry the blood, and place the spatumile sharp on both sides as shown in this form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision which is above the temple to the second incision; and scrape off all the flesh that is between the two cuts to the surface of the skin which is on top of the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second incision, and then pull out this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Insert into the first groove the instrument called "cultellaire," and it is very well sharpened on one side, and on the other side it is smooth, not sharp, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge towards the flesh of the chest, and the smooth side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle groove.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous until it reaches the one near the chest, and then make another incision in the middle groove until the other side; and then draw out blood evenly, and press the area for blood collection; then place a piece of old cotton in each groove, and put on damp cloths made of wine, oil, and honey, and guard against abscesses; and on the third day loosen the bandage, and administer plenty of hot water, then treat with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds, until he is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the rheum of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When cataracts come frequently to someone, and you see the eyes swollen and small, and the sight weakening, and the whites burned; and the hair falls out, and in the head there is a cold pain, and the patient sneezes; then you know by these symptoms that those matters and that catarrh do not come from but many veins, and if there is any remedy to be used, this is it.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient behind their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another on each side of the pit.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating; and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then separate between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton there, and cover it with linen strips; then bind over with cloths moistened in wine and oil, and be careful of hot abscesses; when they are removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with things that excite growth, which cause flesh to rise.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour, and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice; and apply it to these wounds to promote flesh growth throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the obstruction of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Whatever falls into the ears is one of the four things: grains, animals, or stones from mines or similar things such as iron; seeds, such as lentils, beans, peas; or flowing substances such as water and pus and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When a stone or any other substance that does not fit into the ear and does not grow in the ear falls into it, place the ear towards the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see a stone, then let a few drops of violet oil or sesamum oil be administered for extraction; and make them sneeze with something irritating, and plug their nostrils when the sneezing comes, and place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and extend the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Often force comes from this treatment; and if it does not come by force, then administer the extraction with fine tweezers, of which here is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out by the tweezers, that is good; if not, then administer extraction with a fine needle of thin double thread; and if it does not come out by this, make a silk thread and insert the tip of the thread into the ear canal tightly, and plug around the thread with soft wax so that no air can enter with the thread; then pull firmly outward, for often it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in such a manner, take some bird glue and place on a small instrument suitable for this purpose, wrap a bit of cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull outward.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she cannot avoid all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut the ear as for an abscess to come down and spasm; and the manner of cutting is that you make the patient bleed from the cephalic vein, and extract blood according to her strength, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and cut a small opening at the root of the ear in the fat or hanging part; and let the cut be as crescent-shaped, until you reach the stone, then take it out with all your might, and suck quickly into your mouth; and treat her until she is well.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if this grain is inside and it swells, then proceed with its extraction; and if it cannot come out, then apply the following subtle spatumile according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	And administer an incision of that swelling.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think the swelling is moist due to moisture from the ear, until you have made many incisions; then extract it with fine forceps and by suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case of water that falls into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze forcefully first, and then stuff the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lie down on that same side where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it comes out because of that, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many stones according to the length of your thumb and light ones, and heat them slightly on the fire; then put one stone in the patient's ear, and let it out from under his foot on the other side, and strike another stone over the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this with stone upon stone until all the fluid comes out, and thus it will come out completely; and if you wish, take a reed, and put one end of the reed into the patient's ear, and burn the other head with fire until the softer part of the reed is burned; then do the same with other reeds until all the fluid comes out, as we have said about the stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the creature, if it is small like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, extract it with tweezers; and this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and in treating distillations, and if the treatment is not effective, then it is necessary that you examine the ear in sunlight: if any worms are visible, remove them with fine forceps, and if none are seen, use this formula:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And insert the finer end into the ear according to the severity of the patient's pain, then gradually form it throughout the entire formula; do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, plug around the formula with cotton as I have said for stones; and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective against worms, which you will find in the treatment of distillations; and then distill your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, whose form is as follows as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And let there be a narrow sieve of silver or brass above the small holes, and over it cover with cloth for dripping; and to press inside the distillation use an instrument of brass well made for this purpose, and if you wish take a razor and wrap around the tip carefully cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you want of your medicines in the tube, and let the tube be in the ear; then stuff thoroughly within the razor all the cotton, and press with your hand gently until the oil is distilled to the bottom of the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillation be a little warmed by fire as you distill into the ear; and beware that it not be too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stuffiness of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with a hole in their ears; and the same thing happens to adults due to stuffiness from a wound, or foreign matter inside the ear, and sometimes this stuffiness comes completely within the ear, so that one cannot see it; and at other times the pus comes out of the hole, and then one can see it clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes completely inside and cannot be seen is difficult to heal in many cases, and when it can be seen, you should put the patient's ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see pus present, then perform this spatulation as described in this form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be sharp and cutting in front and behind entirely so that it does not split the ear; if the growth is of flesh from the body of the ear, hold it with fine forceps, and cut lightly until all the flesh is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the growth is deep in the ear, take a fine razor and warm it slightly over fire, then apply it to the flesh of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the growth where the patient feels pain in the ear, pierce it lightly, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then place a dressing in the ear according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this on some day until the wound is healed, or take a tent (surgical dressing) and moisten it in rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on top; and if you see an inflamed ear, then you must draw out the tent and move another tent moistened in cerate made of rosin oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then cure it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, then dip a sponge and cloths in cold water, and place them on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding which are used to treat hemorrhages.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of papermakers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This althethium that comes from the eyes when they are moist and dry, you must stretch with pliers and forceps, and cut a piece from its root with a scalpel; then apply ground vitriol to the site.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if any remains unremoved, cauterize it with a fine lentil cautery and then incise to remove the remnants; and often they need repair because some part of their roots remain; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	from the hailSTONE (or depending on context, if referring
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times, things that resemble hail in form and hardness come from the eyes, and for this reason, this disease is called "hail in the eye"; it is a collection of thick moisture in the membrane. The procedure is as follows: observe if the hail moves from side to side, which is easy to know; then cut around it widely, then gently peel each part, then take it out with forceps, and cut it away.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cut it without piercing the skin slightly, do not harm the patient; and if the wound is large, sew it up with a stitch, and treat it until it heals; and if it is small, do not apply force, for the ointment will heal it quickly and regenerate flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grain is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn over the skin and extract the grain with tweezers, and cut and press from both sides; and if the skin is moved by incision, it does not harm; and when the grain is removed, lift out the wound with salt water, and treat the area with a flesh-regenerating agent until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the grease of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is generated in the membranes above the eyes, and this happens more often with children than with some people, and it greatly troubles their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes; and for this reason they lie down on their faces immediately, and sleep like that, and their membranes below their eyebrows are moistened by the exinach which appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press that place with your two fingers and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of work is that the patient puts their head on your lap; and then take a piece of linen, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity it contains of exinach from each part, then place it over them; and press with both hands from one side and the other so that the exinach is gathered within the circle; then cut an incision through the moisture with a sharp spatula, no wider than the opening made for phlebotomy; and cut the skin properly until you reach the exinach; and in many cases, the exinach comes out from the incision, resembling a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Pull it out then in one piece of torn cloth when you remove it, and move your hand right and left until it is spread; and be careful not to insert anything into the wound, do not bring all the spatumile up to the eye, do not injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the excrement does not appear at the beginning of the wound, gently enlarge the wound slightly until it appears; then pull it out as we have said, then moisten cloths with oil and water, place them on the site, and extract bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And there are such people who grind salt and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to a hot place, then treat it with plasters that alleviate until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	the hairs of the eyelashes
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow in the eyes other than those naturally there and they irritate them, they cause various ailments such as habitual tears and inflammation of the eyelids and conjunctiva, to the point that it leads to the destruction of the eyes; and the cure follows four methods: either by cautery with fire together, or by medicine according to what is mentioned in the chapter on cautery before this one, and is done through incision and suturing, or by cauterization, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand; if it turns over, that is good; if not, insert a needle along the entire lid margin where the hairs grow among these hairs, and stretch the lid upwards to the razor; then cut into the part below the eyelid, below the inserted hairs, reaching from the main tear duct to the auxiliary one; then remove the thread, and place beneath the eyelid a small pad of cotton and gauze, then sew onto the eyelid a figure resembling the leaf of myrtle, and regardless, it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you wish to elevate the eyelid which is planned for.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is one who needs that the paper be cut in great quantity according to how the paper is softened; then make on all the spatula along the II lines which you have marked, and start from the large tear up to small; and let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the needle in one of the II angles of the kerchief, then peel it off entirely; then sew together the II lips with a stitch of one thread of fine linen, and wipe away the blood, and arrange the superfluity of the threads over the II eyebrows with some sticky things if you wish to do this; and if not, take no care for it, then leave the suture and the threads up to III days or IV; then cure the wound without a suture made of drying and binding materials, because the paper rises immediately at the moment of the wound and its assembly, but the suture is cumbersome (as the ancients say), and this work is without fear; and there is another way: which is that you mark the paper with a shape that is as the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, to III needles apart according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut those which rise above the small areas evenly according to the shape which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the things are not even, then take a needle with a thread, and place it in the figure; and attach another thread near the large artery, and the second thread near the small one, and join between your two threads evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin on which you have marked, as we have described, then join the two edges of the wound by suturing, and treat it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes from your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments; but sometimes the hair on the paper is turned: in such cases, use what we have said about the incision; however, the suture in both cases requires more skill.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of the canthi is according to this form: and it is that you turn the paper and cut into it as I have said, and then make two canthi by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatumile are; and attach them to the two corners where you hold the threads; then join one and the other finely on what protrudes from the paper of the eye, and pull the two canthi from both sides firmly; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin which is pulled will die off and heal and grow back, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, then cut it with force, then treat it until it is healed; and when the wound is closed, and if the paper is raised, and no hair will grow there anymore; and this is the form of the two canthi that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity in length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is such that you take a fine needle and put a thin silk thread through it; then join the ends of the hair and tie them together finely, and let the length of the threads be one palm long; then arrange another fine silk thread in the comb briefly, and knot the ends of the thread; then have the patient place their head on your hand; and let this be done near the sun so that the work is clear, for it is a subtle and delicate task, then insert the needle through the hair root adjacent to it quickly as you pull it over the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the comb, and put into the comb those hairs if there are one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand until the hairs become visible throughout the comb with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hair is treated and does not come out with it, pull the hair to the root along with all the thread you have attached to it until the hair comes out from its follicle and you can see it by sight; then pull out the hair and the thread, close the eye and leave it closed for two days or three, until the hair hardens in its place and the flesh grows up; and if the hair is short, attach one long hair to the natural hairs, and lift it with the one you left behind, until it is pulled out.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the pus of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or pus comes to the eye, there are two ways it can occur: one naturally, and the other unnaturally.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly by a wound, or from cutting, or from cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of treatment is that you should split open the closure, separate its edges, and place linen tents inside, keeping it apart until it heals; and it is not appropriate to use in its treatment things that dry out and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the illness will return worse than before; but use things that soften it, such as fenugreek; and prepare a lotion with water or ale and flax seeds boiled, and apply ointment made from melted wax mixed with some oil, and wrap a bandage around it, and treat it with these.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you guard against it not healing according to the form it was before; and these works which we have said are nothing other than remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is called "axacrati" in truth, and it is natural causes and accidents.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accidents come from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; and the method of treatment is that you take a needle, with which there are two threads, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear duct to the right, so that the thread comes out in two places on the flesh; then stretch the flesh over all the needle, and cover it with a patch about one span wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is needed, it is good; if not, take the scraper and place it in the fissure, and turn the paper, and make two cuts on either side within the paper; and let the ends of the two cuts be at the two corners of the incision that you have made, and make them form a single angle so that when they are joined together, the figure is as if the letter has the name «I griesche»; then remove that flesh according to the acuteness of its sides beneath the paper, from what lies under the paper, then join the two separated parts with thread; then apply the treatment of what we have said concerning softening medicines and tents until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a fissure or seam or cautery, it is necessary that you make a full cut beneath the hairs of the paper skin, and according to what has been said before; then separate between the two leaves of a tent as I have said; and one should perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters prepare ingeniously with all their power how to return the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what requires work and instruments in various situations.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the sudden swelling of the skin
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this swelling occurs in such a manner that the skin above is swollen with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you should insert the tip of a razor under the skin, and lift it up; and stretch it with forceps, until you cut away what adheres to the delicate spatumile, which must not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient cannot bear a razor that is too sharp and does not irritate the eye; and your incision, by which you peel off this assembly, should be lightly made, so that the skin returns to its natural form; and heal completely this assembly, and sometimes put salt water in the eye, and lift it with fresh water; then place between the skin and the eye a linen patch, and apply moistened wool over an abundance of egg white; and after three days use poultices and soothing remedies until he is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail is according to two manners: one is nervous and similar to hard skin, and another which is not nervous, but is like frozen white moisture, so when one touches it with iron and thinks to remove it with pincers, it cannot be done; and both kinds begin near the large tear duct, and grows little by little until it covers all of the vision and all the light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of the incision is that the patient places their head on your lap, then you work the eyes; and lift the membrane with your hand, then coil the nail with pincers gently, and lay it above; then take a needle, and put horsehair, or deer hair, or ox hair, and strong thread; and double the tip of the needle slightly and insert it into the nail, and pierce through completely with the needle, and tie the nail with a thread and lay it above, and cut along all the hair on the side of the nail that covers the pimple and the silk to the top, then trim the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with the fine spatula and small forceps, and leave the natural flesh of the tear duct so that by the incision tears do not come out habitually; and sometimes lay the nail only on the little finger, and on the thread as we have said; then cut along all the underlying membrane according to this form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And guard that the sutures do not touch the tender flesh and break it, and that the stitches are not pierced; and after the incision, pour a little ground pitch into the eye, and make an application from litharge, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as is necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not loose and you cannot insert a needle, and the forceps cannot enter, this kind of nail condition is often treated with various medicines; it grows as I have described in the division, and if you wish to cut it, proceed carefully with the patient's eye, and take the suture gently according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the nail gently from above, and if you see that it is thinning and the tissue around it is tight, then drip from your mouth into the eye an application made of litharge and red litharge and ground pitch, and plug the eye until the next day; then continue with the work according to this same method until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If anything is contrary in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then treat it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume work as before, until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh from the eyelid harms the eye by great injury, then suspend it at the nail, and cut a part but not all so that no tears come forth; then drop into the eye red chyle which is made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In some people's eyes, red flesh sometimes grows and covers the pupil, restraining it from moving and turning it outward, resembling a blue anemone; and the treatment is that the patient places his head on something firm, then works on the eye, and coils all that flesh with appropriate hooks, supporting it firmly; then cut the first layer of flesh and proceed to scrape until completion, taking care not to injure the eye during work; make the incision according to what we have described in cutting nails and for removing small particles, as illustrated later in this chapter; when the incision is completed and all the flesh removed, apply the eye with ground seed or drop red chyle and similar corrosive medicines, then place cotton outwardly coated with egg white to ensure it does not develop a hot abscess; if anything remains and a hot boil appears, fearing an abscess, treat it with things that soothe a hot abscess; return to your work until it is healed, and thus proceed when such flesh adheres in the eye by this method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary that you treat each weak eye by the natural way; and by the accidental way, with iron work; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member can bear that work.
des voines des eulz	the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Red veins that cover the eye are visible in their work and weaken the eye all day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, first you must check if the eye, in which the disease is present, is healthy except for this disease; then treat it in such a manner: instruct the patient to place their head on your hand, then suspend those veins along the whole eyelid according to your wisdom, and let the eyelids be delicate double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let two needles be placed at intervals on the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then, when you coil the veins gently with forceps, and wipe the blood hour after another, until you see those veins coming out of the eye; and be careful not to strike the eye with the points of the forceps, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your work so as not to miss any of the veins; and when you have done this, then drop into the eye a green and red collyrium to dissolve what remains of the sore.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you are unable to collect all of it at that hour, then apply a poultice to the eye with soothing ingredients to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain subsides and is assured of a warm abscess, then restart according to this manner as described above until he is healed; and this is the form of the procedure:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The physician calls this type of fistula "arissati": when you treat it with cautery and hot medicine as I have said before, and it does not heal, there is pus that you must cut open where it needs to be lanced, and drain all the moisture that is inside until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, remove it with all the instruments as described here; it is called "aspre chief," and should be made of iron bent into a head like a file, as shown in the current form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands and press gently until you know that the corruption has been removed; do this several times, then restore the area with drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the tissue is adhered and flesh grows there, and the body of the bowel is adhered, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not renew itself and is not inflamed, no bad accident happens, then know that he is well; if not, you must return the fistula to the anus according to this form: and open the bone a second time with an instrument, and by using dry medicines, and when it is opened take one probe according to this form, and make the head of iron at three angles, and the shaft should be slender up to the point as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone near the lamina, and move your hand from the eye one finger's width, then rotate the entire probe until it pierces the bone and the patient feels wind if they hold their hand over their anus; then restore the area with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when flesh grows and toughens the tissue, let the matter go to the anus; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye is completely open and there is no disturbance or reduction in vision, you must bind the patient; then cleanse it, then apply suction cups without striking to draw out impurities, then place on the eye a plaster made of cedar, aloes, incense, and myrrh, and then press the eye; and cover with bandages and cloths; the method for the cloths is that you should take soft cloths and double each one four times, and then place them one over another according to the size needed by the eye; then press it firmly under a hard bandage; and again apply suction cups without striking; then remove the suction cups and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the plaster becomes loose, you must tighten it much; then remove the dressing after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, restart the application of plasters, cloths, bandages, and suction cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the tearing of a woven cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a disruption comes in the woven cloth, then it is opened up, and forceful paper strips are applied like resin grains, and it is frightening to see; then if you wish to repair it, work as if you were inserting a needle into the root of the part below until you reach the one above, then insert another needle where there is double thread from the eyebrow part; make holes and leave the first needle according to its position; then cut the area with double threads and tie one part of the cloth tightly around it, squeeze out the needle and put on wet wool soaked in plenty of egg whites; let it be until the thread falls off with the cloth, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; sometimes the wound is restrained by a circular bandage of cloth from each side until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eye appears swollen, pierce it with a fine spatula that comes in line with the eye, and draw out the cloudy moisture and let the eye descend; then extract until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the socket of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is nothing but a swelling in the eye that resembles an aqueous discharge, though it is not actually an aqueous condition; and the manner of its appearance is such that you make the patient sit on a properly arranged and straight chair, then take his head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the swelling come to the top towards your eyes; then if it remains there without descending and obscuring the light, know that it is an aqueous condition, and if the descent of the swelling does not appear as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Seat the patient between your hands, then take the spatula and cut through the corneous membrane at one point along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneous membrane and the corona, until the bow comes out; and when it has come out, drip in hot honey mixed with honey, or water boiled with fenugreek and honey, then treat it further until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye's waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have described the appearances of the waters in the division, and what is necessary for piercing them; act according to the health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You should seat the patient between your crossed hands, away from sunlight, and hold the healthy eye firmly; then place the paper of the affected eye in your left hand if it is the left eye, or in your right hand if it is the right eye; then take with your right hand, if it is the left eye, the instrument called "almagda," or with your left hand if it is the right eye; then place the tip of the instrument next to the corona by a thickness of one hair on that clear part of the eye near the lower tear duct, and then insert the instrument called "almagda" vigorously, turning your hand until it penetrates the clear part of the eye, and feel when the almagda reaches an empty space; and it should be that the length of the path of the almagda is perfectly equal to the distance from the pupil to the end of the dark area; this is the corona of the eye; you will see the bone on the paper through the clarity of the corneous membrane, and then place the instrument where the water is, then press it out one path at a time.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water flows now, let the patient see before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting briefly, if the water rises again through the second passage, apply force with the instrument, and when it is firmly placed and it does not rise, gently extract almagda by turning your hand little by little; then add a bit of powdered gemstone to the water, and lift the eye from within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place outside the eye plugs made of linen soaked in rose oil and plenty of egg white, and bind it with a healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, apply it mixed with plenty of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some people who have eyes that are too hard, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Then pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then insert the almagda as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient a dormitory in which they sleep on their back in a dark place; and be careful of all movements, and give them light foods, and do not move their head to right or left, and bind them according to their disposition until the third day; then unbind them in that same dark room, and test their vision, showing them some things, and then rebind them until the seventh day; and it is not necessary to do this during the hour of treatment or immediately after incision, but you must wait because the fluid rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If abscesses form, that you should unbind the eye before the seventh day, and direct it to him who treats abscesses; and when it is alleviated, then loosen the sight and place on its face a patch for several days, and let it be in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leave the house little by little, and resume his duties; and know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they perform almagda piercings, to which one attaches water, but nevertheless I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the likenesses of the forms of almonds, for those who do not recognize them; and they are properly of brass:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the heads of these be of the same subtlety, and the rear in three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh on the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes flesh growths on the nose appear in various forms, some of which resemble many-legged scorpions; and there are such cases where the flesh is swollen with red coloring, and there is healthy flesh of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In the case of this flesh that is healthy and not swollen, you should seat the patient between your hands facing the sun; work his nostrils, and apply a lancet to those growths, and draw out the pus; then proceed as much as you can sustain with a fine sharp spatula on one side, until you know that all of the flesh is removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any substance that cannot be cut, treat it with the finest instrument gently, so nothing remains; and if pus overflows from the abscess, carefully clean it as is appropriate; and if these are malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize until the pus is dried up and all the flesh is removed, then apply fresh water or vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If urine flows and moisture reaches up to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not flow as it should, know there is flesh grown on the bone above, which the instrument cannot cut: then you must put a thick linen thread in it, and tie knots with your hands, leaving at least one space between each knot; and place the patient's finger in his mouth to pull out through the nose until it comes out of the mouth; and many times children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for those who wish to do it; then hold one end that comes from the nose with one hand, and the other end that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and pull one after the other carefully as you untie the knots.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you know that the new tissue has corrupted the old flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for III days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh; and then place a silver chain in the nose for some days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, where one distills oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And whether it be of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a chain, and the conduit should be similar; and if you wish, make a closed chain, and let the instruments be full for purging the head; and have I handle at the top to hold when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh upon the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" is born on the head of the nose, and it grows and becomes large until it is visible to the eye; and for this reason, you must cut it at the beginning, remove all flesh from it, then place the cautery or burning medicine upon it. And if one delays in cutting it when it is large, beware if it is hard, of a bad color, and lacks sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an embedded abscess, for when you cut it even once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is soft to touch, not of a bad color, and you see that all can be removed, then empty the patient's body and cut it without fear, and treat the area with dry and constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity comes to one of these cartilage works, there is little benefit, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then when this happens to anyone, look to see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips in one seam, and treat it until it is healed; and if the lips are torn apart on both sides, you must scrape all parts of their edges until they bleed, then bring together the two lips in one seam, bind it, and put powder on, powdered dragon's blood and ground incense; and apply a piece of hot or other adhesive plaster over the powders, and leave it until it peels off by itself, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of stitching is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the abdomen; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In some people, hard abscesses appear on the lips, resembling grains of wheat, both small and large; then you must turn the lips, cut into each node, grasp it with forceps, and remove it in each part; then fill the area after making an incision using broiled vitriol until the blood is congealed; and then clean the wound with a dressing, and treat the area with dry remedies until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often a piece of flesh grows on the gums that the ancients called "albulus"; you must hold it with forceps and cut it at its root, allowing the pus or blood to flow; then apply vitriol powder ground up, or other powders that are constricting and drying; if this flesh returns after cutting, which often happens, cut it a second time and cauterize it: it will not return after cautery; these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of dirtiness/discharge
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes there are assembled in the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, crusts that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth become black, yellow, or green, to such an extent that corruption reaches the gum, and the tooth becomes foul-smelling; you must have the patient sit between your hands, place their head in your lap, and remove the teeth or crusts thoroughly until nothing remains; do this for the blackness and greenness, and the yellowness and other stains, until they are clean; if you extract what is there at first, that is good; if not, start again on the second day and third, until everything has been removed; and know that teeth require various forms of instruments to remove them, according to what the work reveals, because the tools used to extract teeth from their sockets have different shapes than those used between the teeth; these forms and others should be prepared for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth from its pain that you delay drawing it out as much as you can, for no one should do this; for it is a very high substance until there be no excuse for pulling it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained to draw it out, you must be certain of the tooth that needs to be pulled.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain deceives the patient, and they believe it is from a healthy tooth, pulling out a good tooth; yet the pain does not depart by this means until the bad one is extracted, as we have seen many times with these patients. And when you are certain of the painful tooth, you should thoroughly char around the tooth for about two phalanges strongly to protect the gum from all sides; then pull it out gently using your fingers or fine forceps little by little until it comes loose, then firmly secure the forceps; and hold the patient's head between your knees so that they do not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extract the tooth directly without breaking it, and if it does not come out forcefully, take any of these instruments and push on each side gently, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is perforated and decayed, you must fill it with strips of cloth where the hole is; and carefully pull it out with pliers so that it does not break when pulling; and you must very skillfully work around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be very careful that you do not break it, and leave a part behind, and return to the patient due to the mischief of the root greater pain than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be careful that you do not act as ignorant surgeons do, who because of their haste and boldness sometimes break the tissue, and do not properly treat what we have described; but instead they often cause great illness by touching the roots or tissues that remain, as we have frequently seen; and when the tooth is removed, wash the area with wine or hyssop and salt; and if bleeding continues, which often happens, fill the area with powdered vitriol; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments with which one moves the teeth first should have long points and thick handles, so that they do not double when you extract the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should have thick parts so that they do not bend when extracting, and they should be made of well-forged iron, and should be toothed to hold the grip.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains after extraction, it is necessary to place cotton moistened with butter on the site for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the wound is softened, then you can insert pincers called "algefri," which resemble a bird's beak; and they should be made inside like a file, and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not come out completely with these forceps, you must uncover the flesh all around the root and place the instrument called "althali," which is in fact a plane, here is its form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps from this, it is good; if not, then help with all the instruments, of which the forms come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument that has two prongs, here is its form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments which are mentioned before in the reason of teeth, and of this instrument which seems like large forceps, here is its form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be such that it cannot break, and know that many instruments of bone exist; and also other instruments which are not mentioned; and the wise masters subtle find by themselves their instrument, according to what their work and the illness shows them, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument due to the diversity of cases; if one breaks the cartilage or other bones, it may rot, so seek among the instruments that I have told you about, and help with gestures, of which here is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and well-fitting to hold the bone so that it does not escape, but can be held and removed; then restore the place with medicines appropriate for this, and if there is rot in the bone, and it is small, remove it with all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth does not appear according to its natural position in the body, and the form is ugly, especially in virgin women, then you must know if the tooth has grown after the other teeth, and it is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or ground down: then cut it; and if it grows crooked with respect to the other teeth, take this instrument whose shape is here described, and resembles a small beak, and let it be made of sharp iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And cut it a little at a time over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so as not to move the others, and if it appears that you can file it, then file it with a tool like this one whose shape is shown:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is like the file used to make needles; and file the tooth little by little over several days lightly, so that it does not move until it breaks off; then smooth it at the end with any rasp, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then you must file down the roughness until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or impair speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth lock
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front teeth become locked together, whether due to impact or falling, and the patient cannot press down on what they are eating without it causing them to defecate, and you have treated them with constricting medicines but this has not helped; then you must restrain them with a gold thread, for silver wire turns green and rots, but gold never moves; and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the size of the space between the teeth; if you wish to straighten the teeth, take the thread and place it double between two healthy teeth, then put the knot between any one or more loose teeth until you carefully reach a healthy tooth on the other side; then continue covering until you return to where you started, and pull your hand subtly and carefully so that nothing moves; and let your tying be at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the teeth of the wire with pliers, and join them together, and place it between the healthy tooth so that it does not injure the tongue; and then leave it as tight as possible for as long as it can remain, and if it loosens, or the wire falls out, tighten it again with another wire; thus it will endure and serve in this way throughout its life, and this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and of the two defective ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, replace it in its place, fresh with fresh, as we have said; and do not interfere with anyone who is not wise and experienced, and sometimes one makes a form of a tooth from bone of a fish, and places it where the defect is, and tightens it as we have said, and it will endure and serve for such a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cut the bandage of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	There is this bandage that comes from under the tongue either by nature at birth; or due to an accidental wound that has healed; and the procedure is such that you work on the mouth of the patient with their head in your lap, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous bandage widely until the tongue is free from its attachment, and if there is hardness or a knot, which is from the sudden healing of a wound, then insert a hook and cut it open widely; and be careful that the incision is not too deep, for the artery lies beneath; and when you have done this, wash the area with rose water and cold water, then place under the tongue a dressing of linen; and each night change the bandage so that the wound does not heal over.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, place over the area ground vitriol; and if it weakens the blood, cauterize with a gentle cautery, which is good for this; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see it colored black or hard and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a carbuncle; and if it inclines towards blanching and there is moisture, pour in liquid silver and cut it with a fine scalpel, and release it from both sides; and if your work weakens the blood, place ground vitriol until it congeals, then return to your work until you have treated all aspects; then lift the area gently and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	At times, lumps come into the throat which are called "godath," and they are properly known as the two tonsils; and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and if they are not healthy, be careful: if these abscesses are hard, slightly sensitive, and of a dusky color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they are red and the root is swollen, do not touch them with iron, nor for bloodletting; but leave them until they turn black, and then you will remove them, as they would naturally break off; and if they are of a pale color and the root is delicate, prepare the instrument to cut, but first check whether the abscess lies at rest and is calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then have the patient sit facing the sun, and his head in your right hand, and open his mouth and grasp the tongue with both hands below with all the instrument, which is of this form; it should be made of silver or fine brass like a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	As you press the tongue with all this instrument and see an abscess, take a lancet and insert it into the almond, and draw it out forcefully above as far as you can; then pull some material from the tissues with it, then cut around the area with the instrument, which is of this form, resembling forceps; and nonetheless, the ends are curved, one opposite the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, cut it with pincers, of which here is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And let it be cutting on one side and named on the other; and when you have cut one of the glands, cut the other in the same manner, then after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and warm and soothing liquids, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with hot water or cooked pomegranate rind, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stilled; then treat him until he is healthy; and sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two glands, so cut them as you would the two glands equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that had formed in her throat, specifically the tonsillitis; and I found it almost completely obstructing her throat so that she could not breathe through the blocked passage, nor eat or drink, and she would have died if she remained like this one day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high that it had two fingers' width through both openings of the anus.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened then and inserted an arrowhead into one, pulled it out forcefully, and removed a large portion of pus; then I did the same on the other opening of the anus, and operated on her mouth and pressed her tongue; after that, I inserted the arrowhead into the abscesses, and some part came out, but only a little blood; thus, the throat passage of the woman was cleared, and she now began to drink water and then wine, and I did not stop cutting this abscess for a long time; the abscess kept growing quickly, filling up the place that I had emptied until it became very large again; then I treated it and cauterized inside her throat: thus, it stopped growing; and I left these parts, and do not know what God did with her after me.
de l’uve	of the eye睑藏详情可见之处似乎没有
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When rheum descends to the eye and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is detached, large, and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the diffuse abscesses are alleviated, and it is subtle, then you must cut it; and if it is round and assembled and is not elongated; and it is bloody or of dusky color or black, then you must avoid cutting.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, based on its blueness and length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument of which we made mention earlier; then insert the lancet into the uvula, and draw it down, and cut at point I of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two tonsils.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut beyond the excess that lies outside the natural boundary; for if you cut more, you will harm the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said regarding the incision of the two tonsils, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient is afraid of cutting, then it is necessary that you use an instrument for the cautery to calm their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the method of the cautery is sharp and acute.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient place their head on your lap, and then press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and cover it with sharp vinegar, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and apply this instrument to the affected area, here is the form of which:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place on the head a container where the medicine is applied, as much as would fit in a spoon, and apply the instrument to all the medicine over the eye; and let the patient lie on their side so that saliva and mucus run from their mouth into the medicine without it going down their throat; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour until you see it darken and the medicine's irritation subsides; if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument with the cotton on top of the eyelid, so that the cotton adheres to the eye; do this often until the cautery is complete, then let it dry for four or five days. If you need to restart the application of the medicine, then start again after the cautery, wipe around the eye with cotton wrapped in butter, and clean what remains of the medicine; then rinse with cold water and gargle as needed until they are well.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more effective than incision or cautery; if it is treated by fumigation according to this method, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and gather them all together or any of them in one pot, and add salt, and boil it; and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the pot have an instrument pointed according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be made of silver or brass, and place one end of the instrument in the patient's mouth until the vapor rises to the affected area through the vein, until the area is necrotized; after this, repeat often, until the area dries up, and beware that you do not perform this at the beginning of the onset of a hot abscess, for many things happen then; and do not perform it unless the abscess is declining.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a chain and put an eggshell inside the head of the sick person so that their mouth does not become too hot; for the eggshell does not let the vapor weigh down the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with safety.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a bone or thorn from fish gets stuck in the throat or something else; you must then extract what you can see, and press the tongue with sunlight across all the instruments so that you may detect the object; and for what you cannot discern and is lodged in the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit as if the food were cooked in their stomach; perhaps this will expel the foreign object by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of sponge, or seaweed, or lettuce root, or dry bread; attach a thread to the sponge and then guide it down; when it reaches the site, it will catch hold, and then pull out with force; if these methods do not work as mentioned above, take an instrument made of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high; and beware not to touch the epiglottis, lest breathing be obstructed, nor push in the bone; and move it so that the patient puts in the instrument, so that it moves where the thing is loose; if you push down, or pull out completely, equally, until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes the blood is treated, as I said in the division, by curing it with medicines; and when this does not help, then examine the patient's throat in the sunlight, pressing their tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, draw it out with a small hook or fine forceps.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that does not work, take a hooked cane and insert it into the patient's throat, then insert a hot iron into the hook of the cane, and do this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is covered in water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full jar of cold water and pour it into the mouth, and have them swallow it down; and move their hand frequently; as soon as the blood feels the water, it will flow.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not flow as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida using the instrument I mentioned for the fumigation of grapes; do this many times, for it will fall without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot with live coals, and cover it with a perforated lid, through which passes the tube of the instrument; then you throw in your fumigation, and have the patient place his chin on the tube, and close the mouth, so that no smoke escapes but goes up to the blood; and now the blood will flow, and if it does not flow, repeat the fumigation several times; and allow the patient thirst, and eat salty and sour things, and do not drink water; then it will be necessary for it to come out forcefully by this management.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which one treats the blood, when it can be seen, resembles curved tongs for entering into the throat; and it has the appearance of a bird's beak, and there are rough edges like a file, so that what it grasps, it cannot let go; see here the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many types of abscesses, according to what the memory brings forth later in this and that chapter, and they differ in perforation and size; and there are two ways in which one is similar to its own type, and from those it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the places where they are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and abscesses of the flesh area are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And there are abscesses that one must not pierce until the swelling is complete according to its fulfillment; and there are such as need to be pierced when they are hard, and do not die off according to their completion, such as abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and it is left until it is fully rotten, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint may be corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	When the abscess is near a principal limb, and you delay puncturing it until it is dead, it will harm the principal limb; when it is near the fundament, puncture it as soon as it becomes dead; and it does not behoove to pierce an unripe abscess before complete digestion, except for one that is near the fundament, so that it does not rot completely, become elongated inside, and a fistula develops; and cannot heal in a long term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the time of puncturing an abscess that has become dead according to its completion, and this is when the pain is alleviated, and the fever subsides, and there is a decrease in pain and redness, and hardening and sharpness at the top of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you perform puncturing where the abscess depends most, and where it appears pus; and let the puncture be along the body, and if the abscesses are on hands or feet, in joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere equally where there is no pleurisy.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In cases of bleeding, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the flesh, it is better to wait until it is confirmed to be in complete resolution before proceeding with puncture, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you puncture it before then, the body of its venom will be elongated, and it will be full of much filth; and by chance the lips and depth of it may harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is an abscess that needs to be punctured according to the width of the body, according to what the limb requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you should treat small abscesses with small punctures; and large abscesses with large punctures, and many incisions according to the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses where it is necessary to cut deeply, and to excise; when they have become as hard as leather and are swollen, you should treat them as you would boils: and there are some that are divided into three angles, and there are others that are excised like a myrtle leaf, as with shoulder abscesses; and there are those where a round incision is made, and other incisions and similar excisions.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who do not have a head, such as a superficial abscess, you must pierce thoroughly; and when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at that time, but draw out part of it; then plug up the abscess until the next day, then draw some more out again; do this little by little over many times, until all the pus comes out; similarly if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or young children, or old men who are decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the breath sometimes stops when the pus comes out, which might cause the patient to die, and you would not be at fault.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound, and check if the abscess wound is small; and if it is a wide opening, use pieces of linen or old cotton; and if there are large abscesses, and there are many openings, place a piece in each so that they come together against one another; and if you have cut into the skin around the abscess and sewn it closed, fill it with dry cotton or flax shavings without moisture, and leave it bandaged until the third day; then remove it and treat it with ointment until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs during your work, administer cold and soothing water, and wet the cloth, placing it repeatedly on the bleeding area.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, administer regulation and treatment, and use the powders I have mentioned earlier in this book. If it is winter and the area where the abscess is located is very nervous, you must place tents and cloths soaked in wine and warm oil; and if it is summer and the area is fleshy, you should place cloths soaked in water and oil or cold wine and oil until the third day as we have said. Then open the abscess, clean it, and treat it as needed until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this one must know universally in the treatment of abscesses: I have told you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	Of sweats
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	For small abscesses in the head come in various forms, like the spots on a gooseberry, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and contain moisture like pus; and there are others that are hard and stony to the touch, and there is no doubt if the artery does not oppose it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work on the waist is such that you must test all the instruments called "entromissoire," of which the forms come next, and what they contain.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if there is moisture, then cut it above the long.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is emptied out, then scrape without leaving any part of the skin that contained the moisture, for it returns quickly if anything is left; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and vinegar, and apply to the wound, and leave until the next day; and those who remain from the night will heal.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then restart with the cotton as before on the second day, and the third, until you know well that nothing remains from the night; then treat the wound with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds onto fat, cut it according to this form, longitudinally; and throw out all your ounces, and skin it from all sides, and put all your effort into draining the pus where it lies; and if the artery opposes you, do as I told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And do the same for an abscess if it contains stones, cutting and scraping as I told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when you incise an abscess containing stones and it is moist, it is easier to treat, as there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if some of these abscesses are in the head where there is no moisture, and among them were the abscesses that I incised on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and if one had struck any part of it, it would have caused a wound like striking a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming to the head, whether those that come to the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the incision should always be made as far down as possible, so that the pus may exit; and treat them as is appropriate.
des scrophules	scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	These abscesses often occur in the neck, and sometimes they are seated elsewhere, and become inflamed, and at times they appear in other parts of the body, and are very painful, growing one upon another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its own area, as the knot and the head abscess are, as we have said; and there are many similarities to these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In the one then that you see to be well disposed for touching, and it resembles the color of the skin, and is soft on all sides and is not hard against the neck veins or arteries or conduit, and is not deep; you must cut it from above, and peel off the skin from each part, and stretch the two lips of the wound with needles, if you need to, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and cut little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, and let the pusumile not be sharp or cutting, so your hand does not slip, and do not go too far, lest you cut what should not be cut.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work on it, place in the wound vitriol ground into powder, or some powders that constrict blood, and hold the wound; and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and then begin to dress it.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the blood is constricted, return to your work until you complete it; then search with your proper tool if there remain any small scrofulas, and cut them out and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, it is not right that you should cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with double strong thread, and let it fall from there without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the whole scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, since there is no excess tissue due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	Then you must focus on cutting the root of it, pulling out the force, and sewing as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that hold excess tissue, pierce there where it appears to die; and pierce them as previously mentioned, depending on the situation, then administer treatments with ointments and similar things, so that they corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, treat it with ointment healing flesh until it heals.
de squinance	of squeezing
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and wrote about the incision of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is their writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have squeezing, it is necessary to remove the fold in the throat which is called "epiglottis"; and one should not provide assistance by this means, because all the veins and the phlegm of the patient are affected by hot abscesses in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the two tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the phlegm, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the danger of choking.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we make a small incision across three circles or four, between two circles in the thickness of the mucous membrane, not in the cartilage; and those places are suitable for cutting the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from end to end.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the neck to its full length, then cuts the windpipe until it reaches the tracheal rings; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut the mucous membrane as we have said; and this is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm in the part that has been broken, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed from which one fears strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew it all up without the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, and the need arises.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he will breathe through the wound, and thus is saved from death; and for this reason, the ancient ones commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, which takes three or four days, and then they ordered it stitched up and cleaned until it was clean; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young lady took a knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the windpipe; and I was called to heal her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I examined the wound and found the blood that had come out, and I knew well that she had not cut a vein or main artery, but rather the wind was coming out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and sewed up the wound, and treated it until she was healed; and the only consequence for the lady was that her voice became hoarse, and afterwards she returned to her usual state; therefore I say that there is no need to fear in cutting the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called a "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess in the color of jet, and it occurs frequently in women; and it happens in two ways: naturally, and accidentally; a natural one does not have an abscess root.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental one happens in two ways, of which one is similar to fatty tissue, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear, and it does not befit to operate except on the small one, and examine and search throughout the interior: if you find it as fatty tissue, and cannot reach any vein, then cut it out like cutting fat, and remove all its covering, if there is any; and quickly investigate thoroughly, and treat it appropriately until it is completely healed.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	We have many ways, of which I will describe all the similarities; and now it is necessary for me to tell all the differences that exist between us and them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that when it is fever and heat holding on, until the boiling is past, and the putrefaction is complete; then the fever and the heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With us there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a swelling, which is its own sac and matches the color of the skin, and begins like a boil; and they vary in consistency, being either hard or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when you come to the treatment of the nose that you first examine and inquire about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire," according to their form which will appear in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of examining abscesses in the nose is that you take the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers back and forth, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, according to the size of the abscess; then withdraw the entromissoire, and be careful not to use excessive force.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture continues to flow out when cut, regardless of its color, proceed as I have said for other abscesses; and if after the entromissoire no more moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, then make a cross incision, take it with forceps, and lightly scrape from each side while taking care of the coat where it lies so you can remove it intact with the nose; and if you cannot remove it intact, cut it into pieces so nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if anything remains within it, the pus will return many times; and if some remains a little bit, and the blood does not hurt, apply to the wound some corrosive powder, and hold open the wound, and place hot poultices on the abscess, and treat with other remedies until it is healed; and if the pus is great, sew together both lips of the wound, and heal by that which generates flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein resists or is contrary to you, hasten and apply the place with ground vitriol, and let it lie for two days or three, until the wound becomes putrid, and allow the boiling of the blood; then return to cleaning what remains of the pus.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the forms of instruments for probing, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three squares which are called "albaret," and one that is called "breb," and they exist in three ways: large, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses of fistulas; and they are also like the needles used to sew boils, and are made of brass or iron or silver, and those which are yellow are more valuable, and for encircling bends of fistulas, solid ones are better than hollow ones; and they exist in three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of lancets are very diverse, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are lancets that have two curves in three ways; and there are lancets that have three curves, and they are also in three ways; and there are lancets with two curves, and lancets with only one curve, and these are also in three ways; and all of these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The tip of these instruments that are used for cutting is sharp, and there are some that cut only on one side to avoid cutting the veins or nerves; and among those introduced, the lancets are held in handles so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of abscesses; and they come in three types: large, small, and medium-sized, as you see; and these are used only in soft tissues such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar areas; and sometimes one makes another instrument smaller, resembling the bark of a fistula, according to this form, for which one stops blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is sometimes placed at the site that corresponds to the cutting of veins, and arteries, and sometimes follows this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the testicles of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, swelling so much that they seem like women's breasts; and remain deformed and swollen, and if one wishes to treat them, it must be done according to this form from line b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat and apply medicine that heals flesh to the wound, then sew together the two edges of the wound, and treat it until it is healed; if the testicle descends downwards and becomes soft due to its size as happens with women, cut it into two halves above through two similar incisions, so that one end joins the other, such that the larger part contains the smaller according to this form from line b to the line g; then scrape off the skin between the two edges, remove the fat, and proceed as we have said about suturing and powders, and whatever else is necessary for treatment until it heals; if it does not heal or the incision is not fully made because the patient refuses to rest or due to excessive bleeding, you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in a caustic ointment; leave it until it consumes the remaining parts and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	abscesses of the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come under the buttocks are hard types of scrofula with edges, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. to the line .g.:[\]
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus inside the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat it with ointment as needed until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles a scrofula, cut it as we have said about cutting scrofulas, and if the wound contains pus, treat it with cauterization as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sealed, there are often abscesses that form; similarly, this happens with a swollen vein and an abscess. And when you recognize it as being from the artery, the abscesses are long and profound; and when you feel them with your fingers, they feel constricted; and when it is from the vein, it appears soft and diffuse; and it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially if it is under the armpits and in the angles and on the neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary to avoid treating with iron, and one who has it on the head should also be avoided; in one swollen from an artery cut above the skin lengthwise; then work around the area with tweezers, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it is uncovered; then insert a needle underneath, and pierce it to the opposite side, and tie off the artery with double thread at two places as I have taught you in extracting the two arteries in temples; then prick the area between the two ties with an intermitter so that blood comes out, and release the abscess; then treat according to the prescription for bow water until the ties come loose; then treat it with a suitable ointment until it is healed; if the swelling is from a vein injury, you must apply your hand to what can be reached of the abscess across the skin, then insert the needle underneath where your hand touches, and pierce it, there should be double thread so that you pull it out on the opposite side; then tie off the abscess as I have said with one of two parts of both threads; if you doubt the thread will come loose, reinsert another needle along all of the abscess under the first needle's incision, and tie off the threads in four places; then cut open the abscess until the excess matter comes out, then cut away the excess flesh and leave what is tied; then place a moistened cloth with wine and oil on it, then provide treatments with tents and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses occur in the artery and vein, abscesses also affect the nerves when they are injured, or from excessive labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often in the shoulders and elbows, and in all places where there are joints, and these are serious abscesses, and their color resembles the color of the skin, and they cause intense pain; and when they are pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not deep within the flesh but beneath the skin; and it does not move forward or backward, nor side to side, and one who has an abscess in a joint should not be cut with iron: for fear of causing contraction; and those on the head or forehead, cut the scalp at the suture.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and cut it at its root; and if it is large, incise it with an ounce instrument, then scrape it, remove it, and suture the wound until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	big hanging pots
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes it happens in the abdomen and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" by its resemblance to such things, and its root is subtle, and the growths are large; and there are both small and very large ones; and I saw one person who had two of them in their abdomen which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, and they had fine roots, and moisture would rot them quickly.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I weighed them and found one to be eighteen ounces heavy, and the other six ounces, and in the work of incision you should observe if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is white and moist with a fine texture; then cut it with a broad spatula, and have the cautery by fire ready at hand.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For when cutting, there are often excessive hemorrhages, and if the blood comes against you, then hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient frightened and afraid of the iron incision, take a well-made linen thread and tie it around the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then retie it, and do not stop tying the linen thread until you cut the artery, and let this be done with caution; and if the roots are thick, there is fear of cutting through to the belly, but you may safely cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not regrow; then treat the wound, and take care not to cut the tendon which is reddish in color and poor in texture and milk-like.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an embedded abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers shortly thereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the swelling is strong
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the swelling comes from a cautery wound or a cut on the surface, and it is on the abdomen and some boils are present, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what precedes, or from gas; and if this is due to a rupture of the surface and from the exit of pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the skin, it is not painful, and has various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if this is due to the exit of the intestine, then it becomes more varied, and when one presses on both sides it swells up, and then returns, and perhaps it is contracted, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and with hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and you can easily tell when you press it with your hand, there is no resistance; and if it is due to blood, it is evident by these signs of large and hard abscesses, fixed according to a certain quantity; and if it is due to windiness, it is soft upon touching, and the work consists in observing whether the appearance is due to arterial or venous blood, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear about it, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, you must instruct the patient to hold their breath, lie flat, and then bleed around the site; then command them to rest quietly between your hands, then work all around the area where you bled, spreading it out with a large spoon; then stretch half of the abscess above the cloth, and tie it tightly with strong thread or thick silk rope so that the wound is tight against the dressing; then work on the stretched half of the abscess over the dressing, put your middle finger inside to find the intestine; if you feel it stuck in the dressing, untie it and pull out the intestine from the belly; if you find the bowel, take it by the clamp and cut off excess parts; if an artery or vein opposes this, proceed gently around, then return to work with two needles, place two strands outside in a cross shape for piercing; then stretch the abscess over four points on the needles, if needed remove the needles when they have done their job, leaving the area to decay and let dead tissue fall off naturally; cut away the decayed parts when they become thin and rotten, then treat according to what is necessary, heal the abscess as described earlier; extract any blood or moisture you find, then treat the site appropriately, and seal it.
dou chancre	of the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division about the similarities of ulcers and how one should treat them with medicine, and how one must avoid treatment with iron; and we say that an ulcer often worsens in a place where it is difficult to cure, and the ancients stated that when ulcers are in places where they can be scraped out, such as those found in the breasts, on the thigh, and in similar areas, you should remove them entirely when they first appear; but when they are large and old, one must not approach them, for I have never seen anyone heal them successfully.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment, when it is in a place where it can be removed as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile at times; then make them sweat if they show signs of excess retention; then position the patient appropriately for the procedure; then apply your forceps or hooks to the ulcer and remove all crusts from every part without leaving anything behind; allow the blood to flow freely until it stops, and press the area well with your hand or some object; if the bleeding is contrary to cutting an artery or vein, cauterize until the bleeding stops; then treat it further until it heals.
de ydropisie	Of hydropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already discussed in the division the appearances of hydropsy, and how the gathering of water is formed, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure which is done with medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is called 'eclites' only; and one should not touch with iron in these two appearances: namely, tympanites and yposarche, because it is a deadly thing; therefore when you treat this appearance of hydropsy which is called 'eclites' with medicines, and the cure does not work, then look if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides hydropsy, such as coughing and purging of the bowels and similar things; do not touch with iron, because there is doubt; and if you see that the patient is very strong, and he has no other illness than hydropsy only, and he is neither too young nor too old, then act thus: lift the patient up straight in your hands, and the assistants press the belly by pushing out the water to the lowest part of the thigh, then take the spatumile according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be cuts from two sides.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And at a point, it should not be so deep that it can reach the intestines when inserted, and it cannot be bent; then observe if the hydropsy is inclined towards the intestines: in this case, you must cut above the navel three fingers width directly above the pubic bone; and if the hydropsy is due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the navel three fingers wide; and if it is due to the spleen, then on the right side, but the patient should not lie on the incision so that excesses do not flow to a weak spot; then perforate all the skin with the instrument, and apply it, and lift your hand over the spatumile between the skin and the tissue as much as in flaying about one inch or around this size; then puncture the tissue until the spatumile reaches the appropriate place, which is where the fluid is, then pull straight out, and insert this instrument of which here is the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a thin silver chain, and is made of brass or light iron, and has one small hole in the middle part; and on one side, three holes; and two on another side, and one on another; and the head is shaped like a feather, and this is the form of the incision that the writer cuts into the feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the alembic, so that when the instrument comes to the liquid, it now descends upon the instrument; empty then half or a third of it, for if you empty more than what is necessary at that hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of their spirit due to fear, or fainting, or approaching death; but empty according to its quantity and according to how the conditions of the patient's strength indicate, and their pulses; then draw out the instrument and retain the liquid, and it is now retained because the heart stops up the hole that is above the surface, about which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then resume the instrument another day if you see the patient suffering from it, and draw off a small amount of liquid; do this on occasion, and guard against foolhardiness so that there remains only a little liquid.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave much water in them, cure with the grave or hot sand, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and make him abstain from drinking; and treat with drying medicines until he is well, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	about the congestion of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born who have no opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary to pierce it immediately with a very fine spatula according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place in the passage a fine cloth plug, and bind it there for three or four days, and when he wishes to urinate, remove the plug, let him urinate, and then replace it; and perhaps it may not be necessary, because the urine that comes forth does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	He whose passage is small, if he is treated with the cloth of linen as we have said, it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the passage in its place are deformed, for some are born with the passage at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis up; and they cannot copulate because the matter cannot reach the testicles, and this is a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of the work is that the patient lies supine on his back, then place the tip of the rod under the head and make it as thick as a goose feather, so that the aperture fits precisely, as is necessary; and be wary of bleeding which often occurs, and if it happens, stop the blood with what stops blood, and treat the wound until he is healed.
des pustules de la verge	pimples on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these blisters appear on the penis, and they have an unpleasant appearance; there are both harmful and harmless ones among them; you must pierce them with a fine lancet, then clean and dress them all, then apply cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; afterwards cure it with diafinicon ointment until he is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of foul color and spreading, then you must apply cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it, and if the ulcer is in the shaft of the penis, with part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the part that is inside first; and when it is adhered, treat the part that is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it all at once, there is no certainty that the shaft of the penis will not be perforated, and blackness and corruption come to both the penis and the scrotum; so it is necessary to remove everything that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made of pomegranate rind and linseed mixed with honey and flour, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cauterization according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery is useful for two conditions simultaneously: namely, bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must insert a lead tube into the urethra through which the patient can urinate; and when hair grows on the head of the penis in those who have not been circumcised, whether it results from a wound or an abscess, then you must cauterize with a sharp instrument until the band is loosened, and release the head of the penis completely free; and if it is difficult to describe this, then cauterize with a spatula at some points on the head of the penis and skin, then carefully separate them, and place a fine strip of wet linen between them.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a disconnection of continuity like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this work by our will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best work and the least harmful to their well-being.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they did not practice it in their law, and we have no more than what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons who perform circumcision around the age of one year, and sometimes forcefully, and with a new knife; they act cautiously because there are two layers, and by chance one might cut through the outer layer while leaving the inner intact.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now it needs to be cut, and the pain is doubled, and in the treatment of the stump there is no certainty about the tip of the limb; and in treating the nail by chance the tool slips, and ruins the work, and many times they are born such that they do not need treatment as I have seen.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the treatment that is done with force to the entire limb of thread, I have found through good experience, for the force cuts precisely both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, you cut equally in one single moment; but the thread should be tight around the skin. And the manner of the first treatment is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around his penis just once, and then you make him laugh in all ways possible; then hold it straight between your hands, and pull the threads between your hands or feet where the child cannot see them, nor any of the instruments; then place your hand on the shaft and breathe upon its head, and draw it up until the head of the penis is inside; then clean well from the accumulated dirt, then bind the spot with a doubled thread, then tie below at each joint; hold it by two threads to the pouch and the second index finger, cut between the two joints, then lift the shaft quickly and pull the head of the penis; then let the blood flow drop by drop, for this is slow; and put powder upon it, and over the powder apply a small piece of cloth glued with an egg white diluted in rose water, mixed well with fresh rose oil, and leave it there until the next day, and care for it with another treatment until he is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the force for cleansing is thus: the two edges should be sharp and even, and the edge as wide as the handle evenly.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in cleansing is when the pus inside flows to the incision; then it is necessary that you extend it with your nail, just as one does for an abscessed boil; and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, hold it with forceps, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they pass three days, and that which is below the shaft is swollen, let it be until the abscess is sufficiently abated, and gently scrape it; cut it as much as you can without harming the part of the shaft, so it will do no harm to him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat then the wound with powder, of which we have spoken in the chapter on powders, and if one cuts into the heart too much, and it goes beyond measure, it will not harm; treat it then as we have said, until he is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	from the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to the presence of a stone, or congealed blood, or bladder inflammation, or dead tissue, or similar things, as we have mentioned in the division; and if the urine does not flow freely, and you see that the retention is caused by a stone which is lodged at the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be seated on his knees; and place his feet on his back, and stretch out his belly above the part behind the back, and urge the patient to strain as much as he can; and then it compels the neck of the bladder to expel the stone upwards, thereby freeing the urine; and if this does not happen, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, you must administer extraction with all the instruments called "syringe", here is its form: it should be made of fine light silver mesh, like a bird's feather; and the tube should be half a palm long, and should be fine at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the method of urination is such that you take one double thread, and tie at the head a bag of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe; then cut the excess wool and put it up to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk; then make the patient sit on a seat, and massage the bladder and penis with moistened olive oil and cold water; then gently place the syringe in the penis until it reaches the base of the penis, then fold the penis back towards the body; then push the syringe forward up to the bladder, and when the patient feels it coming out empty that is not done according to this order unless where it conducts is twisted; then stretch the thread on all the wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and let the urine flow; and repeat with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient feels relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When pus or blood comes to the bladder, and putrefaction is gathered there, and you wish to introduce liquids and medicines, use all the instrument called "clepsydre," and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and has III holes: II on one side, and I on the other, as you see; and the place where the medicine comes out should be such that it stops up well the tube without addition, so that one can draw the moisture, and push when necessary; and when you wish to introduce your medicines into the bladder, put the head of the keuster in the moisture, and pull with the puller which is inside; thus you will draw the moisture to the keuster, and then press firmly the puller inside; thus the moisture will go inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle enema by which one administers an enema to the bladder: here it is:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or reed, and the head is higher; and behind the chest where the cord falls; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the liquid you wish to use for enema, then tie it between the two breasts with a strong double thread, and heat the pot containing that liquid over the fire; then place the tip of the enema into the penis, then squeeze your hand on the bladder gradually until the patient feels the liquid has reached the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put the thread firmly through these holes, then join the circle as one joins a sieve, and place inside what you wish of oil and liquid and water, and tie it to the instrument; and proceed as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand gradually until the liquid reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed in the division the methods of stones and their extraction along with medicines; and I have explained the difference between a stone formed in the bladder, all the signs, and in which stones one should operate for removal; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is formed in the bladder happens more often to children, and this is a sign that the urine jumps from the bladder similar to acute inflammation; and it becomes cloudy, and the patient's penis itches, and he frequently urinates, and then restrains himself; and many of these cases are fundamental; and healing for children up until they are four years old is lighter, and is very difficult in the elderly, and is moderate for those between youth and old age; and the treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes obstructs in seeking to remove the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and raise him up and move to the back so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes from a higher place; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be behind his thighs, so that the bladder is completely tilted downwards; then seek it and feel inside; if you sense the stone in its space, now quickly cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall upon touching throughout, moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is male, or your middle finger, if the patient is a fully grown female; and put it in its fundament, and seek the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, push it to the neck of the bladder; then press upon your finger, and push it out where you wish to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to stretch out his right hand towards the groin, and with his left hand remove the skin which is underneath the groin in the part where the incision is made; then insert the scalpel cutting according to this form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make an incision between the groin and the anus, not in the middle but on the side of the left thigh; it should be straight over the stone, with both ends close to the anus, and the opening wide enough so that it is broad at the top and narrow below according to the size of the stone, so that the pressure might cause the lower part near the anus to open without effort; and know there are some stones with angles and edges: these are difficult to remove; and there are others that lie deeper, like a thorn, round, from which removal is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	For those with angles and margins, make the incision larger; if it does not yield, then you must clamp with tongs that are like a file at the top to move the stone so that it does not escape; or you place beneath an instrument curved at the top; and if you cannot manage it thus, then widen the hole, and if the blood clots, then constrict it with vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, first remove the largest to the neck of the bladder, then proceed above, then draw out by force, and the smaller ones afterward if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then you must wait and make a larger incision.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes quickly so that the flesh cannot heal; but still strive to draw it out, or crush with tongs piece by piece; and when you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, and compress it, and place a moist cloth over it in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then suspend the patient on his neck, and do not loosen the ligature until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, wash the area very well with oil and water, then treat it with diafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if pus and corrosions come into the wound, and coagulated blood in the bladder, which causes retention of urine, so that it is mixed with the urine: put your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder; then wash the wound with water and herbs and wool, and help him in all ways you know until he is healed; and every time you treat him, tie his two thighs together, and apply medicines to the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis, and lodged there, and the urine cannot come out; then treat this as I say, that you cut it many times, but refrain from cutting for this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already tried this method.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take an iron fork in the shape I describe and have three prongs fixed to one handle:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot move back into the bladder; then gently insert the fork into the penis until it reaches the stone; and turn the fork with your hand on the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; urine will come out soon, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is immediately fractured, and urine comes out with the blood, and the patient recovers; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie a thread below the stone and another above, then cut the penis along the stone between the two threads, then extract the blood, untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It rarely happens that a stone occurs in women, and if it does happen at any time, the treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a knowledgeable woman who will reveal herself to doctors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more deep-set than the stone of the man, so it requires a deeper incision, and there is great fear. And if need arises to do this, then you must take a midwife well knowing, and with much effort find one, and if you cannot find one, by no means seek an ordinary doctor; and present her a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command that she perform what you command regarding the inquiry of the stone; and look very carefully whether the woman is a virgin: then she must insert her finger into the fundament and seek the stone; and if she finds it, constrain it under her finger, and advise her to insert her finger in the place where the patient is, and search and press her left hand firmly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, she must gently move it from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until she reaches the root of the thigh; then cut above the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the anus where the stone is lodged and feel for the stone in that part; and do not move her foot either above or below the stone, and make the incision first small; then insert the probe into the incision, if you feel the stone enlarge the wound until the stone can come out freely, and know that there are many kinds of stones: that is to say, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and with edges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	know the signs to understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood flows, then place vitriol powder there and hold it for an hour until the blood stops; then return to your work until the stone comes out, and have the instruments I told you about for extracting stones from people to assist in your work; and if the blood flows, and it is from the artery that was cut, apply the powder to the area and bandages of linen and strips, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and do not extract it, as the patient might die by chance; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the swelling subsides, then return to your work, until the stone is out.
de hernie carnouse	of flesh hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aqueous retention is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white matter, which is detached from the heart of the testicles, contained within the egg; and it is called "white matter," and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, so one thinks that it is another egg; and this is the skin of the testicle between the white matter we have mentioned; and such a thing does not occur without a pouch.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this retention is due to weakness that affects the testicles, and this matter spreads out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: where it declines to yellow, or is without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more; and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is in the white pus that we have said, then the abscesses are round, about as long as an egg's shape, and do not appear on the testicles, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the proper tissue, then the abscesses are round with a part like an egg, and because of this, people think it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white pus, one can feel it well; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, examine thoroughly as described above, whose form is mentioned before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what follows the introduction, judge what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, the patient must be seated according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then lay him on his back on something slightly raised, and place many cloths under him; then sit on your left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the rod along one of the two ribs near the groin area; take the sharp knife, and cut through the skin over the affected area from the long part down to the joint, making a straight incision until you reach the white flesh, and carefully peel back the skin as much as possible; then puncture the area full of fluid with one large hole, and drain all the fluid out, and then apply your forceps, and stretch the tissue upwards; do not touch the groin organ itself, but only the tissue above it; cut around all sides in a similar manner carefully, for if you do not cut properly, the fluid will return; and if any flesh moves during your work, reposition it once you have completed the work on the affected area; then stitch together the two sides of the groin organ with one seam, then treat it as other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to tie the vessels that are suspensory, fearing the loss of blood; then cut the cord completely suspensory, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the fluid is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two roots; then cut the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe the blood, and put into the wound linen moistened in rose oil; and place another linen moistened in wine and oil over it, and place over them doubled cloths, and tie it all up according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths and wrap them with linen strips according to this appearance and sew them together at the waistband of the breeches, one reaching from the buttocks up to the back, and the other to the groin part; and let both ends be tied in a loop on the belt. Sometimes this root is treated by cautery instead of iron cutting, so take a fine knife-shaped cautery, cut through the skin around the cords, heat it as we have said, until the white pus-containing layer is exposed; then use this cautery according to this form and pierce that layer with small incisions using this hot fine cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And cut in all ways that you can until everything is clear; and guard against the fire touching the eye; and know that this work is safer; and move carefully to prevent blood loss, and perform your work with precision; and if anything opposes you, whether an abscess or blood loss or something else, treat what opposes you as stated before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this work due to its horror, then perform puncture as I tell you, and when you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that aqueous fluid is there, make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess at the underside throughout the entire span of it, making the perforation long along the body; and let the opening be wide so all the fluid can flow out freely; then place cotton over the area, secure it, and allow the remaining fluid to drain; if the white cloth does not allow the fluid to exit from the wound's mouth, you must insert a quill or the instrument used for treating the water of hydropics, as described above; enlarge the hole in the wound, and know that the fluid will return after six months or thereabout, and when it is collected again as mentioned before, the patient will live their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the section of this branch there are many fears and positions, for which it seems better to leave it as is; and I will tell you about the work and similar cases of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses occur in the body, especially in the testicles; and this happens in many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is known to be due to sour and sharp superfluity spread in the testicles, or from impact; and the color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the skin; and there is no pain, and it is a severe abscess; and sometimes an abscess can be fearsome and stony, with a reddish color, and occasionally comes from damage to an artery or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is due to an artery, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it must not be touched.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	One who is suffering from a swelling of the vein is known by its disposition and the expression upon touching with fingers, and one can easily treat this condition as well as others; and it is that you cut the heart of the groin, then place the egg above, and draw out the white substance, and release the suspensory from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already hard with these new tissues, then it is necessary that you draw out the egg and cut it; and if it is adhered to the white or within the vessels, then it is necessary that you release all of this tissue and cut it completely round.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is at the rear end, then you must cut it all away, and remove the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, apply the wound with moist wool in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a covering similar to the scrotum, with inflammation of the testicles, and the patient suffers greatly when it moves; and the treatment for this illness is as dangerous as the one before, yet we will tell you how to treat it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you seat the patient on a raised chair, then place the suspensor of the testicles down to your hands, covering all the vessels close to the penis, and hold them masterfully, stretching them firmly; then cut with a broad cutting spatula along the vessels until they are uncovered, and then skin each side as we have described in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples; then insert a needle where there is double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein has come, and tie it again to the other end; then cut straight through the middle according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture; then treat the wound as with others involving bowe, so that some vessels may fall off that nourish one of the testicles; for by this no harm comes, and if all the vessels come together in a vein, it is necessary to drain the testicles from all the vessels; so that the testicle does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the fracture of the cheekbone
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The occurrence of this rupture is through a section that comes from the cheekbone, or an extension on the abdomen in the area of the groin, causing the intestines to descend from this fracture into one of the testicles; and this rupture occurs either from the cheekbone itself, or due to its extension, and these two manners come from many causes: from a blow, jumping, lifting, carrying heavy loads, and similar things; and the signs when it is an extension of the cheekbone are that they occur bit by bit over a long period, and do not happen suddenly; and the abscesses are equal up to the base because the cheekbone presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs when it is from the section of the cheekbone are that they cause sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear differently, near the skin, due to the exit of the intestines and the body withdrawing from the cheekbone.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the hernia descends with the intestine, and it is retained inside, causing great pain for the patient, especially when it is compressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments there is fear, because of which it is necessary to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the method of work is that you instruct the patient to push his intestine back into the wound with his hand if it can be reintroduced; then tie a string around his neck between your hands, and lift his thighs; then stretch the heart above, and cut all the skin from the groin down long; then insert hooks under the flaps of the abdomen according to what you need to open the wound, so that the white fat may come out; then peel off the surface that is beneath the skin of the groin until the hard white fat is exposed on all sides; then put your middle finger into where the testicle is, between the white fat which is under the skin of the scrotum and the second layer of fat, and cut away what is behind the testicle and in between the second layer of fat; and then move with your right hand inside the heart of the scrotum, and stretch the hard white fat up to your left hand, and lift the testicle towards the abdomen on top of the skin; instruct the assistant to pull the testicle upwards and undo what is tied behind; ask them both if any part of the intestine is wrapped around the hard white fat, and if you find anything, remove it from underneath; then take a needle with one thick thread made of ten threads, and insert it in the back part of the fat layer, which is after the skin of the scrotum; after the waist, cut the ends of the threads so there are four threads left; then arrange them one over another like a cross, and tie up the fat layer, of which we have spoken as being under the skin of the scrotum, with a strong thread from two sides; then wrap the threads of the stitches together tightly on both sides, so that no foreign matter can enter and cause an abscess; put back the bandage according to the first long bandage twice its width; and after these two bandages leave uncovered one finger's width of the fat layer under the scrotum; and then cover all the rest following the roundness that the testicle forms; then cut in the part below the skin of the scrotum, as much as the groin and the bowels, as we have said before; then apply moistened flaxseed oil to the wounds, and place the bandages as we have described.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white tissue that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and let the ligament fall by itself as it should; and if it delays in falling, soak it with hot water, and place what we have said on it until it falls naturally; then treat the wound with another method, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of flesh hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I have never seen anyone dare to treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made like the condition where the intestines are involved, in such a way that you bind the vessels, above the navel lightly towards the back; then cut into them, and treat the abscess with what we have described, until the vessels release; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the groin area, as we have said, and it becomes apparent; and no part of the intestines descends into the scrotum, but if they do descend, it is an emergency requiring constant care; and yet if it remains too long at this point, the wound or rupture will worsen, causing the intestines to descend; and this happens due to the extension of the groin area as we have said, because it becomes extended, then softened and swollen, and apparent; and the treatment for this is by cautery, as we have previously mentioned; sometimes it is treated with a knife in this way: the patient lies supine on their back between your hands, then cut around the swollen part of the groin to an extent of three fingers' width; then extract the tissue below the skin that follows, and take the thread and place it over the apparent area of the groin tissue; press firmly against the belly, then sew both sides of the apparent areas of the groin tissue onto the head of the thread, and sew one to the other; then remove the head of the thread, and do not cut any more tissue or stretch the egg or anything else, as I have told you in treating the rupture of the intestines; finally treat it according to the method for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, mend and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The tissue is constricted, and there is no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is ineffective in this place, and closer to being harmful.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the genitals
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	The skin of the genitals often becomes softened in some men because the tissues inside become softened and milk can be seen; and when one wishes to treat it, have the patient lie on his back, and cut the soft skin over the natural skin; then stitch together the two lips at one seam, and if you wish, sew the excess soft skin along three or four seams firmly; then cut between the seams, and treat it as other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	of the punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You know that castration is prohibited by our law, and for that reason I would prefer not to speak of it in this book; but it is necessary for two reasons: one is that the priest knows how to respond when asked about it, and knows how to perform the treatment; and the other, because we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say then that castration is performed in two ways: either by traction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method we perform by traction, we make the animal sit in hot water until the testicles become soft and hanging down; then hold them with your hand until they are retracted and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the castration of animals: you should anesthetize the beast, and press the skin on its testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory bandage, and cut each testicle in one stroke when they have been well flayed; and leave some of the fatty tissue and the delicate fat that is over the vessels; and this method of castration is gentler than that which is done by traction, because with traction there may be left behind something from the testicles, which makes the beast desire lust; then treat the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	Regarding hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	A hermaphrodite is in two ways among men: one is that between the two testicles it has the appearance as the figure of a woman's nature, where there is hair, and sometimes encircles the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is for women, and tie it around the wrist like a rod with two cords.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for a man and a woman is that you cut away all adhering tissues, and treat them as other wounds; in the second method, for men whose urine sprays on the skin of the genitals, there is no specific treatment.
de la tentigene	of the examination
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tentigene is a tissue adhering to the genital area, making it very unpleasant to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is how it is treated.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you remove the excess of the tentigene with your hand or scissors, and cut it lightly; do not go too deep, so that no blood comes out, then treat it like other wounds until it heals; and for another tissue that appears at the entrance of the vagina, remove it, and sometimes it may bleed, and it resembles a horn, and because of this, the ancients called it "horn disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary to treat it as we have said about tendinitis, and care for it until it is healed.
de erratique	erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	It is erratic when the nature of a woman's body is not perceived, or when the passage is small; and it is by nature from birth, or due to illness that has occurred; or because of added flesh, or thin or thick tissue, and is formed perfectly in the womb, or on the sides, or inside; and it prevents conception, childbirth, and perhaps menstruation; and knowledge of this comes from examining the part.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If constipation is apparent nearby, I desire it to be treated with your two fingers or with the right [instrument].
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a subtle syphilis and it is near the two books, hurry, and proceed thus: place your two fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then stretch the two books firmly, until the subtle syphilis lies flat over the swelling; then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and place it on the site, and let the woman rest lying face down each day, so that she cannot sit.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the syphilis is hard and thick, then you should scrape it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is of flesh growth, suspend it and scrape it; and have medicines that staunch blood, such as hawthorn berries, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with a large amount of egg; then apply a poultice of flax wide enough so the wound cannot heal over; and in this manner treat it for a long time, and apply a dry bandage of linen; then continue treatment with other methods until he is well.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when flesh is corrupted in a wound, it must be cut according to this manner, except for deeply seated abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For in the deeply seated abscess which is in the wound, one must not cut it open.
des emorroides	about hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are protrusions of veins that often occur without proper care, and when hemorrhoids become old they turn hard; we have already mentioned in the section the appearances of them, and the signs, and here I will say those which respond to treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and hard lumps, when they are perfectly formed in the wound and do not appear to the touch, cannot be cured by cautery.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who have the mouth of the ulcer, which can be felt, are those who can be treated by cleaning.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Then you must place the woman in a cold house, then stretch the altar with tongs, and cut it off at its roots, then sprinkle medicine that restrains blood, such as oak bark and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then put her feet against the wall for an hour, then immerse her in cold water; and if bleeding occurs, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rind and gall nuts and similar things, and then take oatmeal, and boil it with honey and oil, and use it to make a plaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, have the patient undergo cupping on the back and breasts without injury; then take wool, and soak it in juice of plantain or agrimony with old wine, and apply to the area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess rests, treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and what is called "albathir" is red and resembles a hard head, so it must be cut as I have said about the thulul; and then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	for abscesses of the flesh
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses occur in the flesh, such as cankers and stony abscesses and herpes and ulcers and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is necessary then that I speak in this treatise about the hot abscess which comes in the armpit, which is not of the kind that are found in the bowels; and if you wish to know the work of iron, look whether the abscess is sharp at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Do not hurry to pierce it, but let it die down until the pain subsides; and then have the patient sit on a chair, and give him two small chairs where he can recline, and support his back and bring his legs together behind the thigh; and keep his thighs spread, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage; then place the basin towards the right side, and there administer the instrument used to work on the armpit, of which the form follows hereafter; and it is necessary that when you are about to administer this instrument, you insert the point first to know the depth of the armpit, so that what enters inside the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then cover the depth of the armpit with cloths, so that the instrument does not cause pain; and you must place the horn part of the instrument on top, and keep the instrument moist.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is apparent and one opens it by hand gently, then it must be cut at the top, in the spatumile area; and when the pus is emptied out, then you should place in the wound moistened cloths in rose oil or green oil; and put a cloth over the wound and on the bandage linen that is cleaned in water or mulberries cooked; then treat after two days of ointment application as needed, until it is healed; and sometimes lift the bandage and the wound by enema of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lilies and yarrow boiled; then return to applying the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is placed in the bandage, then you must avoid heating with iron, but treat it as we have said in the section.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is necessary first for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs thereof when you see a woman press down with her abdomen, and desire to smell the air: then you know that the child hastens to come out; at this point you understand that this birth is according to the natural figure, and its exit is under its head, and the afterbirth comes with it; and when you see these signs, you should gently press her belly so that the child comes out quickly; for when it descends by its head, the afterbirth follows with it, and the woman is purified of her superfluities through good cleansing; and those who come out otherwise do not do so naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For there are times when it comes out on its feet, and the body or head faces upward, and the hands come out first, or it emerges above its belly, or behind, and it turns around by chance over its neck, and in other bad positions; therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these matters, and wary of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as to how one should assist them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out naturally above its head and the woman gives birth with great difficulty, and if her strength is weak, then let her sit on a chair or stool held by women; and give her something to drink made from oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then place between her two nostrils a small piece of cloth in this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and cut the membrane, and cut it to the nail so that the moisture inside comes out; and press the woman's abdomen until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then a suppository of fenugreek with sesame oil must be used; then make her sneeze from a mixture of condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: the child will now come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands issue forth forcefully, it is necessary to reset them gradually bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair, and lift her feet upwards; then raise the chair off the ground, and steady the woman so she does not fall when standing up; and if the hand cannot enter, and the child dies, cut the hands with the knife that is placed here beforehand, extract the child, and reset it equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of delivering the child onto its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes out on its feet, it is necessary to lift it up; then turn it gradually bit by bit until it is upright; then take one of its feet and stretch it gradually.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	When it jumps to the thighs, instruct them to catch it, and make it sneeze from conditi; if it flees further, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not go as we have said, turn it little by little until it is in its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it moves lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come out as we have said, take muscillage of aloes, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar; then place the woman's nature inside and outside this ointment, then make her sit in warm water up to below the ribs; when she is moistened below, apply a poultice of myrrh to her and let it stay for an hour; then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her abdomen, for now the child will jump.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the issue of the child upon its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, place its hands little by little; then support it on its neck, and let the feet hang down, and have it lying on the bed; then bend its hands little by little, and then take hold of its hands above the belly, and remove the cushions underneath, until it is prepared to go down; and if the child does not jump, take its feet and move them apart, then lift up the belly, then put your hands in; and bring out the child little by little; and instruct the woman to pull herself as much as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child that comes with one hand hanging out
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary for the midwife to return the hand: if she cannot return it, make the woman stand and walk; if she cannot walk, have her lie on the bed with her legs straight; then administer the mixture that I have described; and if she does not give birth, have her sit on a chair, then study how to return the hand; and hold the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to grip firmly until the baby comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the exit of the child upon its neck, and let her spread out her hands, and her face turned towards her mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary for the midwife to hold the child's hand, then turn it little by little, and place it gently; and when it is even, apply the natural mixture of honey and oil as we have said, then instruct her to move little by little; and when you have done this, have her sit on a chair, and tell her to grip firmly; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner for the entire second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to applying force in this manner throughout the second stage, cut the perineum at your fingernail until the moisture is emptied; and if the child can pass over its face and neck, cut from the mouth so that it is not held back, and deliver the child; then insert the child as needed, and instruct the woman to push several times: then gently extract.
de l’issue des gemelz	on the outcome of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	You should know that twins often come into the world, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, though it does rarely occur.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are strange things, and do not live, if one can name them; I know that they multiply, and are separated by the surface which divides them, which is attached to the body; and sometimes they emerge as naturally as other parts, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they emerge severely, treat them as we have said, and let the hand be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what it does; and do so as is needed for their health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the month I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or even up to XV, and are completely shaped like a child according to the measurement of the wise sage, and it is necessary for the hand to be careful with all this, because similar things may happen; so do as is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman of the dead child in her womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with your hands; it is necessary that you know if the woman is healthy and has no accident where she fears death; it is necessary that the woman be positioned on her back, and her thighs inclined downward, and her legs raised; then the assistant holds her in two parts, or she lies on the bed so that she is not stretched out during the descent of the child; then rub her mouth with oil mixed with muscillaige of hellebore and fenugreek seeds and flax seed; then apply these oils to her hands and these muscillaiges; then gently put your hand in the oil, and seek one place where you can apply the hooks that are suitable for this purpose, and watch if the child is prepared to descend headfirst; then insert the hook into its eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or on the forceps or near the sides, and if the descent is by feet, fix it in the heels and at the middle of the ribs; you must hold the hook with your right hand, place the curve between both fingers of your left hand, gently press with your whole hand, and insert the hook into any of these places we have mentioned until it comes out empty; this is the form of the hook:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then insert against the other hook, or a third if you need it, so that the extraction is even; and then stretch it evenly by moving from one side to the other, to make the hooks emerge, and let the hooks be toothed to hold the flesh, as shown in this form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if any part remains, anoint the sides with some of the oil, and place it in that part, and draw out the other part; and if there is anything left, place this hook or higher up, and do so until it all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other and he cannot bring it back for grasping, you must wrap it up on the finger until it all emerges; then cut at the joint of the knuckle or the side, and likewise you must do this with the other hand, and with both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and it is tight at the birth canal, where there may be a fever gathered in the head, you must insert a spatumile between your two fingers, cut open the head, and extract the fluid; or shave it with an instrument called "almidach," whose shape comes with the instruments in the chapter that follows this one; and do likewise if the child has a large head naturally; then pull out the bones with pincers, and if the head remains stuck and is tight against the forceps, cut them as needed until the moisture which is inside the birth canal can come out; and if it cannot come out, cut it piece by piece as much as you can; and if it swells in the belly or beneath the ribs, then you must pierce it until the fluid runs.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the adjustment to the mouth of the socket is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if he is tight in the belly or breast, then you must stretch him with one hand wrapped in cloth; and cut open the belly or chest until the moisture inside has been released; and if another member has been removed and the head remains, then put your thumb or two fingers into it, and pull firmly; and if the mouth of the socket is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has come there, then you should not work on it, but rather treat with moist and fatty substances; and the treatment as plasters, and seep in water that softens and moisturizes.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on its side, and you can make it level, then treat it as we have said in the case of a living child; and if one has no power over it, then cut it up piece by piece, and leave nothing of the membrane behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, treat it as we have said for large abscesses that come with pain; and if blood discharge occurs, put it in water to constrict, and treat it with other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whom the fetus in her womb had died, and then another was conceived after that one, which also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came in her throat, and it swelled so much that it burst, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I thought long about it, and could not stop the bleeding.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied an ointment of strong attraction, and out came a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled greatly, for there are no bones in the belly.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it must be the bone of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I explored the wound and pulled out many bones until the woman was at a much better point; and I tended to the woman for a long time in this way, and she would occasionally discharge some fluid from the area; and I recall this chapter only because when masters find something strange, they should seek help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to return the joint to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Here follows the form of the traction device, which is used in the books; and for two turns at the two shoulders of the two arms.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horns should be finer than the traction device, and should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the shaft should be two fingers wide, and the margin of the wood one finger thick, and a length of one palm and a half; and between the two limbs there should be two fittings of this same shaft, which are firmly attached to each other, about half a palm long or slightly more; and these two fittings are inserted into the mouth of the joint to open when the two horns are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony wood or boxwood according to the likeness of pliers; and have at both ends two attachments, as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide; then when you wish to open the fist with all the instrument, make the woman sit on a bed, feet hanging down and legs spread apart, then place the two attachments together in her fist, and hold the head of the instrument under between her thighs; then work your hand on the whole instrument as you did with the pliers equally, according to the quantity that you wish to open the mouth of the fist, until she turns it as she wishes.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all designed at the top, and their appearances are varied; and when the doctors have them prepared, they work more quickly with them, and they appear larger to people according to their size.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument because you have not prepared it, for their need is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze forcefully, while holding your hands over her mouth and nose; if she jumps because of this, so much the better.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take a pot and make a hole in its cover, then place herbs that can open the mouth of the woman giving birth inside it, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, savory, and centaury; all these herbs or some of them should be boiled or cooked in water over the fire; then put one end of a tube into the pot hole, and the other end in the mouth of the woman giving birth, and hold it while steam enters her; then make her sneeze as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	The second joint jumps quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment and does not move as desired, instruct the patient to moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or mastic of althaea, and then place it on the affected area, and seek the second joint; and when she has found it, take hold of it and extend it slowly straight, so that the malady does not fall during extraction; but you must move it lightly to the right and left, and then pull; it will come out and dislodge.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the malady is tightly sealed, we have described the cure of sneezing and fumigation with herbs; and if it does not move despite everything we have said, be careful not to overdo it in pulling; but you must bind what is at the mouth of the malady to the woman's thigh, then give her a clyster of tetrafarmakon ointment; this will purge and reset, and she will recover; however, when it purges if there comes an unpleasant odor to the stomach and head, and discolored the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, appropriate fumigations are necessary for these cases: some of the ancients have tested fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain her flowers and second menstruation is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is made of glass resembling a tube, and place the fine tip inside the body, and the wide end over the fire; and let the fumigation be above the coals, and continue until the material is consumed, and then start another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the fundament
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the fundament pierced, instead it is blocked by a fine membrane: therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that membrane at its proper place, and she must not pierce it too sharply, and be careful not to damage the surrounding area; then apply wool soaked in wine and oil, and subsequently treat with ointment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you fear that he will not stay still, place a chain through the hole, and leave his hands restrained for days, and remove it when the child wants to go to chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this obstruction comes from a sudden closure of a wound or an abscess; then it is necessary to cut that closure: it should be treated as we have said about the chain of lead.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the anus
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from behind the anus are nodations, and those that come near the anus to exit, or in the space between the two parts, may have one fistula or more; and when this nodation is old, it works, and still retains moisture, either white or subtle blood, and sometimes these fistulas are perforating; they are recognized by what comes out with stool or flatulence when the patient defecates, and perhaps a worm comes out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate to the bladder, and to half the shaft of the penis; and they reach to the knee joint, and to the root of the thigh.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows whether the fistula penetrates to the fundament, and does not penetrate: it is that you insert your index finger into the fundament, and insert a fine needle of silk or iron into the fistula when there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is curvature, then insert a fine thread of wax or horsehair until you feel the thread or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and no discharge, wind, or odor comes from the opening, as we have said: you know that it does not penetrate; therefore hurry to treat it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula reaches to the bladder or to the urethra, then he urinates through it, and cannot stop it with medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it reaches to the joint of the thigh, then the swelling comes up to that place; if there is no tortuosity and pain around the area, then it will become a bone bow immediately, and neither medicine nor binding with ointment helps; and in these perforated fistulas there is no cure except for surgery, and foolish doctors who intervene are in vain.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the case that is not perforated and is not old, there is hope for healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is done with the patient lying on their back; lift the legs up to the thighs, and bend the knees towards the abdomen; then insert a probe of linen or metal if there is tortuosity, until you know where the probe reaches.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the fundament, then you should place your index finger there; if you then feel that the tent has pierced through; and where you feel between your finger the surface or flesh, then you know it is perforated; do not work on it as it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	It is said that one can often heal some, but this happens rarely; and the help one gives is to heat the cautery finely according to the width of the fistula, as was mentioned before; and insert it very hot into the fistula, until it reaches near the fundament; do this twice or three times, until you know that the unhealthy tissues are burned, which look like a feather of a bird; then treat with moistened tents in butter, until the flesh is restored, then cure with an ointment that promotes healing and unites.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus well, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If that cannot be otherwise for him to be well; and if the fistula enters, and does not penetrate up to the bottom which is at the foundation, and there is a thick covering of flesh or fatty tissue between the bottom and the fistula, and you see the fistula in him who has under this covering of the heart; cut from the beginning of the fistula, and push forward the tent, then apply the cautery afterwards until it reaches the head of the tent; he will be delivered from the tent, which will fall off; then cleanse those corrupted tissues that resemble a bird's feather, and leave none behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood fails you, and it cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or with a hot medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery assembles two good things: that is to say, the healing of the flesh adhered together, and the stopping of blood and drying of moisture; then treat with wet cloths in butter or ground substances, until the wound weeps pus, and let the flesh be burned in the pus; then treat the wound with hot applications of hardening medicines, and these medicines are dried.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes to the deepest part of the anus and is distant from the body, pierce it there at the anus, and examine it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and it is between two tissues or flesh, where it is near to piercing, there must be no hesitation with trust and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods: either cauterize it as we have said, or cut it down to the bottom, or if you can place tents and treat as first; do not go too deep so that you do not cut the tissue holding the anus, and let the excretions come there willingly; then treat it as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or remove that covering and clean it after it has been cut near the anus, either with a tent or another appropriate instrument; then cleanse the damaged flesh in the wound as much as you can; then study to restore the wound and to stop the fistula in a part outside the anus: this is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes there are fistulas in this manner: and when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is at the bottom of the foundation near the skin above, take a probe perforated at the tip according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And insert the thread in a curve from I to II, and insert the probe along the entire length of the thread into the fistula until it reaches the tip.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is perforated in the margin of the foundation inside, then withdraw the thread from that hole, so you place your finger on the foundation; and pull the tip of the thread, and bring the two ends together, and hold them to each other, and leave for one or two days; and tighten it occasionally, until the thread cuts through the tissues between them and they close; then treat the wound until it is sealed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open, pierce it in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not proper to make an incision too deep for the displacement and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spinous process where one makes the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and not so on the other, because one should not cut what should not be cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	for hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: those that are inside the anus, like seeds of sesame, and there are small and large ones, and they contain blood; and some are near the anus and at the head of the anus; but those that are farther away have less moisture, and may contain a little yellow water or a little blood, and their color is like flesh. The treatment for those inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit down so that the hemorrhoids can protrude, and allow the child (the prolapsed tissue) to appear; hurry then, grasp them with forceps if you can hold them by their moisture, or use a finger, cloth, or piece of cotton; pull them out with your two hands, then cut them off, and sprinkle hot powder that serves as cauterizing agent on them; cauterize them as described in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other methods until they are healed. If the anus cannot protrude, administer a sharp and harsh enema to wash out what is inside the anus so it can come out freely; when this happens, if the hemorrhoids have already come out of the anus, the treatment is easier; grasp them with your fingernail or forceps, cut them off, then treat them as described until they are healed, and beware of cutting with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So it is necessary that you manage the stitching according to this manner: take some twisted thread and put it on a needle, then pull the thread from above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and do so loosely; and tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do this for all others, leaving one to allow the excess blood to flow; then place a foundation with a piece of cloth moistened in rose oil or cerate, and place it as a base, and instruct the patient to rest; and then leave them until they excrete, and when they are released, treat them with ointment and other care, until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	from the dryness of the bowels or base
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often there is dryness of phlegm in the intestines, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary that you cut with the point of a spatula or your nail on the surface above it, without letting it moisten; then treat it until it hardens as needed; and if it does not harden, then shave it more vigorously than before, until it bleeds much, and becomes scabby; then treat it until it heals.
dou fremit	with trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	A flea is a small flat insect that bites very deeply; and sometimes the cold affects it, and one feels it as if dead from trembling, and it spreads throughout the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the treatment is that you take a quill from a goose's feather or a strong vulture's feather, and place this quill over the swelling until the circles perfectly encircle the swelling; then turn your hand around the entire quill so that you cut all around the swelling, and bury it deep, and dig out the swelling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you wish, do this with a wire of iron or steel according to this form, and make it fine below and grooved above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce it, to hold the hairs in place and press them, And if you wish, cauterize the swelling as described in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes an enema is made of silver or sorrel, or of melted silk or barley; and sometimes these instruments are made small and large, according to the needs of those who receive them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who are treated in the care of children and those who are weak and suffering should receive small doses.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large enema is as follows, and the belly is bound in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and there should be a spacing where the belly is bound as you see, and the end should be perforated; on one side it has two holes, and on the other one; and the belly in which the medicine is placed can be made from an animal bladder or parchment, and should be perforated all around with small holes, leaving one digit of space between each hole, then insert a strong raw thread twisted ten times around or more into these holes, and secure the belly as you would a goat; when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread before clisterizing; this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with a poultice of oil or oak leaf juice, or something similar, then apply it gently; then press the patient with both hands lightly, until he is fully relaxed, then remove the poultice, and lift the patient's legs to the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, let it flow as much as possible; and if he sleeps a whole night, there will be greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you administer an enema in a case of diarrhea and the medicine comes out quickly, then repeat it until he is well.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament or an abscess, then let the enema be as fine as for a child; and this is the form of the fine enema in which the skin should be stretched:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already discussed in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments with hands and medicines, according to the completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are through falling of stones, and cutting with a sword or knife, or spear or staff or arrow, or similar things; where they are made according to the places on the body, such as a wound that falls upon the neck, or head, or foot, or belly, or liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is from falling stones or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound large, and you suspect the possibility of a hot abscess: then I do immediately cauterize with cephalic treatment if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the dressing be on the opposite side of the injured part; and avoid the patient an excess of wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to cauterize, then let his food be light, and do not drink wine or eat meat; and put on the wound, if hot abscesses come, cotton soaked in rose oil only, or in astringent wine; and if there is no hot abscess, then apply to the fresh wound that has not been exposed to air, powder which I will mention shortly; and if it becomes inflamed due to exposure, then apply some ointments until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar ones, and the lips cannot be brought together by tents, then sew them together as I will explain for belly wounds, of the suture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is uncovered bone, and it is loose, holding only at one point, then cut it away; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat thick meats, such as brains and cooked wheat, like porridge, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find on the skin putrefaction that adheres not to the bone, then cut away all the corruption and apply a poultice, then treat it; and if there is an artery or vein in the wound that cannot be staunched by medicines, seek out the vessel, and if you find it dislodged, tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: it is that you put in this powder which seals as soon as the burn has peeled.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is as follows: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live charcoal three parts, and finely powder it, and apply to the wound, and press firmly, until it adheres well and joins with all its blood; and then bind it tightly, and leave it unloosened, unless it swells; for you do not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one uses only charcoal when there is no incense or dragon's blood available, but the burn has peeled the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has moved, especially in summer, do not put this powder on it; but apply some digestive ointments, or poultices made of barley flour with water and honey until it discharges pus; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the fracture of a bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps; and I will tell you about head fractures hereafter.
de la plaie dou col	of the neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference compared to one on the head, but if the neck nerve or artery is severed.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerve, there should be no other treatment than to leave it untreated and not apply anything constricting, for this harms the nerves and makes them retreat; nor place on the wound anything cold, as the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be warm, such as hot water mixed with rose oil, and mallow leaves also washed in sweet water, and other minerals according to this method, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then stitch and bind it with bandages, then treat it until he is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and infected with pus, then pierce it at the lowest point; and if an artery is cut, causing blood to flow, then open it, tie it off, and cauterize it if necessary; and if the spine of the throat is cut or the passage where food goes through is injured, sew the wound on top of the windpipe, but do not touch the throat itself, only realign it according to its natural form; and then bind it appropriately, and leave it for a few days, then treat it with drying ointments until he is healed; and if the wound has pressed into the bone, then graft it; and if there are pieces of bone, then remove them all if you can, but leave those you cannot reach so that the wound may become pus-filled and be drained and its passage cleared; and if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on the powder I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is an abscess, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, then look to see if there is air bubbling out of the wound: you will know that the wound is mortal; but if it is not deep, and fresh with all its blood, do not put powder on it at first hour, nor bind it for fear the blood might clot deeply and reach the heart, killing the patient; instead apply a drawing ointment, and bandage it twice daily. If you have no ointment, place old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and let the patient rest with the wound covered for three days, or four, or more; this will prevent spasms, heart palpitations, or strangulation of breath; and when you see good signs, know that the wound is safe.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat her with bandages and other treatments until she is healed; and if she cannot be healed, and you operate, then you know that there is an abscess; treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, whether on the front or back, treat it as you would for someone facing forward; if it is large, suture it; and if it is small, apply powder, and if it is pressed against the bone, and pieces have been severed, then clean the wound, and draw out any loose fibers that are detached; and if they are not detached, let the wound heal by itself, which will ease the extraction of foreign bodies; and for other wounds on other limbs, follow the judgments as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupture of the abdomen is great and medium and small; from the large wound sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines protrude, for which there is an incision of forceps; and the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a smaller wound is worse than a larger one because if one does not frequently replace the intestines in place, they will adhere; because the intestines swell quickly when exposed to cold, so they enter less easily, and for this reason it is better to treat smaller wounds, because one can more easily return the intestines to their proper place compared to other II And know that there are four types of abdominal rupture: two common sutures occur in the suturing of the abdomen, and the sutures for other wounds of the body are two other specific ones; yet they are more specifically used with the suturing of the abdomen, and I will explain each one separately.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and something of the intestine comes out, and it is a difficult thing to replace, this can be done in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in such a manner: wet a sponge or a piece of cloth in hot water only, which you boil with vinegar and cypress and spikenard, and wash the intestine until the swelling subsides; and sometimes use wine that constricts to do this, which is mild to help reduce the swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water in which hellebore and mallows have been boiled, for this gradually opens the entrance; and if it cannot enter, make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids; and the first treatment is such that one should not cut unless there is great necessity for it; and here is the tool for making the incision: cut inward into the curvature without going forward, and see here its form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, place them back in their natural position if you have the power to do so, for this is better.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the back part of the abdomen, you should have the patient lie on their back with their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the front part of the abdomen, raise the head and feet higher than the middle parts; and similarly, if there is a rupture in one of the two sides, ensure that the injured part is higher than the other; and thus should be treated what I say about large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds apply what is suitable, then hold a minister in your hands who holds the entire wound with one hand and brings together the edges; this is the common method of suturing, which involves taking one or more needles according to the width of the wound. Leave about an inch from the beginning of the wound, and insert a needle where there is strong thread; pierce both sides of the skin with both ends of the suture, which are inside the skin, until you have pierced it from that part, and bring together the two outer edges of the suture in four places. Then pull double thread around the needle on both sides, then join the two edges of the wound gradually, and leave another inch and insert another needle; tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue doing this according to how many needles you need until the entire wound is closed; let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and thick, because fine needles cut through all the flesh, and too thick ones cannot enter properly: thus they should be medium. Do not insert the needles too far from the flesh and skin, so that they do not injure the wound before it heals; then trim the ends of the needles so they do not hurt the patient when sleeping, and place small tents or cloths on top of the needle ends to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed. This method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because only one or two are needed. The second method of suturing is also common, which involves bringing together both sides of the skin and both ends of the suture on a needle or strong medium thread; when you have pierced these edges all four together, pull back the needle to where you started in the way that clothes are sewn; leave about an inch between each stitch. This method is known by people, and I stitched up a wound someone had in their abdomen, which was cut with a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide, and intestines were protruding two palms long, and the wound was deep inside the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned the intestine to its place after it had been outside for twenty-four hours, and the wound was sealed up until fifteen days, and I treated it, and he was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the doctors had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicines; and I placed old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching: take the needle, and pierce from the outer part to the inner; when it has pierced the skin straight through, hold the head of the suture where you have inserted the needle, and make it pierce again from the inner part outward; and the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as tailors do with skins, and leave once the suture on one side, and take it up on the other, until the entire stitching is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of suturing, which Galenus describes properly, is as follows: some do it by bringing together the two parts naturally and joining one end of the suture to the other in such a way: insert a needle at the nearest point of the margin, piercing only that spot while leaving the two ends of the suture; then turn the needle and pierce from the outer part to the inner part through both edges of the suture; then pierce one and the other from the outer part to the inner part through two points on the opposite side of the wound margin. This is the most suitable method of suturing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galenus says this and some attest that one should suture the abdomen with two needles, each having its own thread; and one should insert one needle from one side and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew belts; and note that when the rupture is inside the abdomen, the suturing is more difficult than in other areas of the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is like the judgment of other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as if the flesh has been peeled off, then reset the intestines and sew; then put on a powder to heal flesh, and if the flesh has been peeled off, apply some ointment that is present until the wound drinks in the treatment; then stitch the wound as you would others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, apply old cotton as soon as it begins to discharge pus, twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not need other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will affect the principal limbs, it is necessary to moisten fine wool in warm rose oil or warm olive oil, and apply it around the armpits and below the shoulder blades; and if there is pain or putrefaction in the bowels, which often happens, then administer an enema of boiled black wine, especially if the putrefaction reaches the intestines; and pierce inside, and know that when it affects the large intestine, it heals more easily than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is pierced, and this is due to the smallness of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the spleen jumps out of the wound, put it back in as you would with the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has turned black or dark, then you must ligate the area that is black so that no blood flows from it, because there are veins and arteries; then cut between the ligature, and suspend both ends of it hanging below the wound until they fall out to ease extraction when the spleen falls, and the wound will heal.
de la routure dou boueil	of the fracture of the eye socket
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, it can sometimes be restored in some people, as I saw a man pierced in the abdomen with a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became infected and turned into a fistula, from which came evacuation and gas; I treated it according to what I could, and did not stop suturing until he was healed, and the flesh closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it healing, I feared the patient might have pain in his abdomen; but he had none, and remained in better condition, eating and drinking. And some experienced practitioners said that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be treated as follows: take clamps with large heads, then bring together the edges of the wound, and when the clamp opens its jaws, place it on both lips so that they hold tightly; then cut off the head, and this holds securely so that it cannot come loose, then place another clamp in the same manner as before, until the entire wound is secured; then suture the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the head is embedded in the intestine and causes no harm to the patient, one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that matches the intestine of an animal as follows: take the tip of this intestinal thread and strip it bare, then twist a thin linen thread around its end, put the thread through the needle, and sew the intestine shut, and pull it tight at the wound; and this method of stitching is not unlike that of trust and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the major intestinal tracts, there is no remedy but subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of an abscess wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it begins to discharge, is generally called a "fistula," and especially when it is deep and enters the body cavity.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the truth a faulty and hard knot, where no pain is felt, and it is also drawn out like a bird’s feather; and sometimes it becomes clear fluid, and other times thick; sometimes little, and other times enough; and I have already spoken about in the division of wounds that every wound which is not healed, and there is no flesh, can only be due to one of the IX causes: namely, by the smallness of blood or body; or because it is malicious; or because there is hard flesh inside, and on the edges, that does not allow new flesh to grow; or there is too much fluid; or the place is rotten, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine used in treatment was not good; or because the corruption is like a pestilence; or due to the nature of the region being slow digestion, late healing, swollen naturally; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, signs, and medical treatments in that division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I shall make known to you the treatment of fistula which is performed by hand work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or on the surface, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in some ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet; and such as come to the property of the principal member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not reach the places I have mentioned, and you have confidence in the cure, and you wish to know it, take a probe of iron or brass, if the fistula is straight, then insert it; and if the fistula is curved, search it with a delicate probe made of lead, because lead bends around the curvature; and if the fistula has several openings and you cannot properly explore it with probes, then irrigate it through one of the openings, for moisture passes from one opening to another, and clean it; then feel carefully as much as you can, whether there is bone or nerve, and determine its exact position, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when pressing his hand, and where he feels it; and when you truly know where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or a vein, or in any of the places I have said, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove all the diseased flesh that is inside; and then cure until it heals, and if the fistula is deep straight ahead, you must cut as deeply as possible, then put wet probes dipped in astringent medicine into it, up to the top of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes any excess material remaining at the bottom; and then apply ointments that heal flesh until it is healed; and if it does not heal through this method, cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is diseased by the fistula, remove it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve does not trouble the principal members as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, remove it until all corruption is gone, then treat the wound with healing substances until it is healed; and if it is not healed, and returns to its previous state, know that you have not reached deep enough: uncover and search until you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the area; and if it is thus healed, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; there is no other remedy but to leave it to nature; and if there is any small corrupted bone which can be pulled with forceps, remove it with suitable instruments, and if there are many bones, pull them all out without leaving even one; and if the moisture (pus) obstructs you and there is no error or fear, cut away both pus and flesh, and release the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them at once, place on the wound something that will generate putrefaction, and leave until the flesh around the bone is rotten; then they will have more easily the bones. And if it is a large bone, such as of leg or thigh, remove only the corruption until the blackness be all taken away, then restore the wound; and if there is much of the corrupt part coming to the bone marrow, so you must scrape and cut all up to the corruption, and then cure it until it be healed; and I will tell you of a fistula which happened in a man’s leg, that you may take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man about thirty years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came within the body, until the matter reached the leg and it swelled with an abscess; there was no reason to let it out for incision. But through their foolishness, the doctors operated on him so much that they opened the abscesses and removed a great deal of matter, and it became a fistula, and many openings appeared through which all flowed out as pus and moisture from the body. Many doctors treated him for two years without any skill in the art of hands until I was called to see his leg and the medicines that were being used on him, and what was flowing out through the openings with great volume; the young man’s body turned red and had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that they came together from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then hurried and cut into one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, which was corrupted and perforated; the corruption reached to the inner bone. I removed what appeared to be corrupt bone, thinking there would be no further corruption beyond that which I had taken out; and began to treat the wound with internal medicines over a long period, but it did not heal. Then I started again and cut into the bone as before, finding the corruption continued in the bone, so I removed it, and worked on healing the area; however, I could only cut around a palm's width of the bone, and treated it until all its flesh was gone, then treated it with medicines; and it healed quickly and closed up rapidly, but further work was not necessary except for the patient's weakness, which he could not endure, and because of my fear that he would die.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood often occurs, but he was entirely healthy, and in place of the bone grew hard flesh, and he was well disposed and had no harm or contraindication at all, neither going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated as follows: take some linen, and stretch it over the end of the bone that is visible, and have someone hold it taut; and place another piece of coarser linen under the skin covering the bone, and tie it so that you pull the corrupted flesh inward, and expose the flesh where you wish to treat it, so that the dressing does not injure the flesh; and put a splinter or a small plate under the bone to help cut away the corrupted flesh; and one must continue treating until the corruption can be seen and felt no longer, and repeat treatment as necessary.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and it does not appear clearly, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then uncover all the flesh; then place a coal underneath, and spread the corruption from one side to the other, spreading the flesh along the length of the corruption as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, cut the corrupted joint, and suture the bone on the other side; and if the corruption is at the continuation of two joints, there is no remedy but to cut; and if the corruption is at the finger of the hand or foot, it is very serious, yet you must inquire about that corrosion as it appears to you; and purify in all ways possible, but do not let veins or nerves oppose you; know that the instruments for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bone and its appearance, and its thickness and fineness, and its size and smallness, and its hardness; therefore prepare each kind of instrument for each type of work; and know that the task will show you the tool you need based on the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so consider the tools you need according to what is appropriate.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head may rot from within or due to external causes; and when you have treated that corruption with medicine but it does not improve, then it is necessary to amputate the limb up to where the corrosion begins so that the patient escapes death by this means, or from the greater evil of losing the limb; and the sign of this is that the limb turns black as if burned by fire, and then the rot spreads after the blackness, spreading corruption through each limb until it reaches throughout the body; therefore hasten to amputate, and if it is due to the bite of venomous beasts such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar, if the corrosion is at the head of the hand, then amputate it, and do not give it space to spread further.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes to the hand, cover at the joint so that the corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it comes to the arm, cut with a knife; and if it passes the knife, death is certain, and no remedy will be of use except for the quantity of its virtue; and do this in exactly the same way when the corruption reaches the foot: if it reaches the first joint, cover at the next joint; and if it reaches the foot, cut off the entire foot; and if it rises to the leg, cover at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the patient die; and the manner of cutting or sewing the limb is that you bind above and below, and extend one minister down from one end, and another up from the other end, and cut away the flesh between the two ligatures by a span wide until the bone is exposed; then cut or sew, and place a piece of linen on each side so that the wound does not touch healthy skin and cause further injury or abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs when you operate, cauterize the area quickly or apply some powder to constrict it; then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the injured limb with an appropriate bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in such circumstances: he was afflicted with a blackness that seemed like a burn from fire, which corrosion first appeared on his foot's toe, spreading throughout the entire foot; when the man saw the corruption, he hurried to amputate his foot, and became well; after much time passed, the corrosion returned to his hand's thumb, and it came to me, and I applied things that would cause regression after purifying his body, but could not stop the corruption; and he vowed that I should cut off his hand, but I refused, hoping to cause a regression of the material; and also feared that if I were to amputate his hand, he might die, as his strength was weak; so despairing, he returned home and hurriedly amputated his hand himself, becoming well again; and no other case has been satisfactory for me except in situations where such a different approach is necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Sometimes an abscess appears in the flesh and remains for so long that it collects a great amount of pus; then it bursts and drains, leaving behind a cavity like a vessel; and the skin above is as thin as fine linen, not reaching to the bone or nerve, such a condition is called "sinus"; it is not called "fistula"; but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone entirely, it is then called "fistula"; and the skin is such that you should cut around it entirely, just as when it is thin like fine linen; and it does not heal because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you trust that the skin will heal and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then cleanse it with an enema thus: check if the breast is large, and the pus coming from it has a foul odor, then give an enema of Egyptian medicine made like this: take myrrh, oil, and litharge in equal parts, put them in a container over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey; then take what you need according to your necessity, mix it with water and honey, and give it as an enema to the breast, and hold the passage tightly; leave the medicine inside for two hours, then release it gently while pressing; do this many times until the breast is cleansed and the foulness removed; sometimes if that medicine is not available, you can use water from ashes: take ash from grapevine wood, pour water over it, strain it, and give it as an enema until you know the breast is well cleansed; if the patient cannot tolerate these remedies or they are unavailable, then give an enema of water mixed with honey and a little litharge powder ground up; or use an enema made from honey and wine mixed together, where honey has the property to cleanse and wash, and wine helps heal the tissue; once you have done this and trust that the breast is well cleansed, give an enema to promote flesh growth: make a diaphoretic plaster with rose oil and in wine; or use some medicines and ointments whose properties I mentioned when talking about ointments; if the passage of the breast is small and the tube cannot enter, then widen it slightly with a metal probe, place a cloth soaked with Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is widened; and if the wound is too large, sew up most of it leaving only one spot where an enema can enter; if the pus passage is above, cut it lower down where there is less pus.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the wound is deep, it does not allow flesh to regenerate; and if you cannot cut below the breast as you wish, prepare in such a way that the pus runs to the lowest place where it is, for when the wound is deep, it does not allow flesh to regenerate and if you cannot cut below the breast as you wish, prepare in this manner: so that the pus flows gently downwards, leaving nothing of the pus; then take consolidating medicines to put on the healthy part, and stretch a linen cloth covering all the healthy part; then cut at the forceful place the opening under the breast one more wide than the first, then spread another layer of ointment according to the size of the opening, and place it over the wound opening to lighten the pus, and do not remove the large cloth until after several days; and that which is on the wound opening, remove often to remove the pus, and check if what flows from the pus is venomous or little or moderate, or digestible, or undigestable; and take heed if the patient feels pain or no, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been extended in this manner and you see the nature that rises over the wound opening, then know that the breast is healing already, and approach health; and then untie it in the morning, on the third day, and when you unbind the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the stomach throws up undigested food after many days, know that the stomach does not settle.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle venom strikes after a long time, do not despair of recovery, for health is near.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are those to whom delayed treatments of flesh in their wounds are suitable, and others who benefit from the opposite; and if undigested food comes up from the stomach after many days, know that the stomach does not settle; and if the stomach is slow to heal and is prolonged, add medicines that are dry in substance but potent in efficacy, such as a diaphoretic ointment, for it contains much vitriol, and this is the last resort medicine; take a diaphoretic ointment made with rose oil and sprinkle it evenly with old wine; then condense it and use it; and the same applies when cooked and thickened honey is used when no diaphoretic ointment is available: take myrrh, aloes, and incense, grind them, and mix them with honey while it is over the fire; then form a poultice and apply it to the stomach; sometimes administer aristolochia longa and roots of celestial lilies, which are like flour made from fennel and centaury; use simple or compound remedies: grind them into powder and mix with the honey I mentioned, and use it; and if the treatment is prolonged and does not heal by this cure, then know that corruption has set in deeply, affecting bones, hard members, or ligaments; treat it as a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarisis is an abscess that arises below the nail of the finger or toe, and sometimes it occurs in other toes; and when it ages and is not attended to, a foul abscess comes forth, running and discharging pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and sometimes it may run completely under it; and corrosion reaches as far as the bone, causing putrid pain, and the head of the toe becomes swollen, and its color turns black.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the section, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away all the excess that remains around the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is a great aid if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses on the flesh, causing it to become inflamed and sore, then you should place the blade under the nail that hurts the flesh, and lift it up, and cut away the flesh carefully and lightly, and apply the remaining flesh with hot and corrosive medicines to remove everything; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it away and remove it forcefully, for as long as the corrupted part of the bone remains, it cannot heal; and if you see that the bone is damaged, then cut it as described previously, then treat it until it heals; and if it is pierced and there is great pain, then first clean it thoroughly; then carefully cut off the nail with a sharp tool by cutting across the top, and be careful not to cut into the flesh beneath the nail, for this would cause too much pain to the patient; and if such an injury occurs, then apply something that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the swelling of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The second joint that sometimes appears in the hands of some people is entirely flesh, and at other times it has bones, and occasionally there is a nail; and some of them are born at the root of the joint, where the origin is in certain cases within the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who are born with a nodule on the finger do not move, and those who are born at the joint of the finger may sometimes move; the size of the one that is flesh is so slight, in this manner: measure it from its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born at the root of the joint are difficult to treat: be careful when cutting them.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or should be at the back part of the body, it is necessary that you cut first the flesh roundly until the bone, then cut the bone in one stroke suitable for him, then treat it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The wound that comes to the two together comes by birth, or by healing of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It is necessary that you cut the seam so that the edges repair according to their natural forms; then place between two cloths or wet bandages in rose oil, so they do not seal back together; or place between two pieces of fine linen until it is properly sealed, as is required.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If tightly bound to one of his hands with the palm, cut off that binding as is appropriate.
des vils	of small pox or pustules
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are thick and swollen, filled with melancholic superfluities, which occur in many parts of the body; and they happen more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must administer enemas to him at times, and then treat him with basilic.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment with iron is according to two methods: one is that you cut and draw out the black blood; and the other method is that you open the vein and draw it entirely out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The treatment of the leg is as follows: first warm the patient's leg with hot water very strongly until the thick blood becomes thin, then strip the leg of the patient from above the thigh to below the knee; then cut one vein or two or three veins at a width, then raise and draw out black blood into your hand, from one side to the other, as much blood as the strength of the patient can bear; and then bind it up, and order him to abstain from food that provokes black bile; and repeat the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and this is harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment of the leg is as follows: raise the patient's leg, if it has a lot of hair, then put it in a bath, and warm the leg with hot water until it becomes red and the veins swell; and if you do not have a bath, then heat it by the fire, and then cut along the vein from the base of the knee to below the ankle; then work the skin with a scalpel, and strip the vein on each side until it feels hard when pressed; and you can see it is red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord; then lift the edge underneath, until it is raised from the skin, and then gently scrape with another scalpel as you did before; then make another incision or more if necessary, then cut around the ankle joint, then draw and raise it up to the second incision; then lift it piece by piece until all of it comes out, then cut it off; and if you cannot draw it and raise it, put a needle through the entire strong double thread, tie and draw it, place an edge underneath, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out; and be careful that it does not break, for if it breaks, it cannot be drawn or raised, which is harmful to the patient; and when you have completely treated it, put wet wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound site; and care for it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it sharply, but do not cut it off; and pull it out as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron with which one cuts the vein is curved, and it does not cut, for it only severs the vein; and it is thickly curved, because if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein originates in the legs, in warm parts where no grass or trees grow, and in dry ground with little moisture; but it may also arise elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to the corruption that comes beneath the skin, as it arises within the body like serpents and worms, growing between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there comes a very great inflammation in the leg, then it changes places, and the vein begins to come out, as if the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein is open, you must wrap it around a piece of cloth one and a half to two fingers wide, tie it, and leave the cloth hanging from the leg; every time a part falls off due to removal, wrap it around the cloth and tie it again. If it is too long, cut some part but do not cut it at its root until it has all come out; for if you cut it, it will enter the flesh, causing abscesses and putrefaction where it was, leading to a bad illness; that's why it must be treated little by little until there is nothing left in the body. Sometimes this vein can be five or ten handspans long when treated, once for me an inch worm came out twenty inches long, and when you cut it, one of its branches or openings will come out completely; ensure all the matter inside is emptied, then apply medicines to prevent putrefaction for a few days, and treat it as you would abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this vein is superficial, especially when it appears in the ankle joint or foot, and there is much perforation, and therefore it often bleeds; treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	worms that are born between the skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "buffalo disease," because it often affects buffaloes, and it is small worms that are born between the skin and flesh, and they travel throughout the body moving up and down, and one can feel them well as they move from limb to limb, until they break through the skin where they go, and cause harm; and it is caused by putridity of certain humors, just as worms and serpents and larvae and ascarids come from the intestines; and there is fear of its malice, because when it travels throughout the body, if it goes up to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance it enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see that it needs to be drained and drawn out, one cannot force it: therefore, you must bind the area above and below with a strong tight bandage, then cut over it and draw it out by force; and if the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, cauterize the spot with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm that it causes is that it may reach the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming near the eye, hold firmly below it the eyebrow properly, then cut over it, and draw it out by force; and the patient should use cleansing of the body from medicines that dissolve bad humors and avoid foods that produce putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from gas buildup
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes in some limbs, and then moves from limb to limb; and I have seen what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she revealed her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and shortly after, I witnessed it rise as quickly as a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, like quicksilver when it flows from one place to another; the pain left that spot and settled in the shoulder, and then a short while later spread throughout her body until it reached the other arm; she then told me that it circled around her body rapidly, just as I had seen.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly at how it moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease behave in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had heard that many wished to move pain from one place to another, but I did not wish it, as I saw in the woman; and I thought it was because the woman has dry flesh, and veins uncovered, and thus this windiness appears constrained; and it does not appear according to this reason for those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and veins covered.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you wish to treat this disease, and the patient feels this pain, if it shows itself as we have said, lift it above and below quickly, and then incise until that windiness is constrained at its place; and cauterize the spot; and if you do not see it with your own eyes, cure it according to those who expel windiness, such as foul pills, serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows vary according to their appearance and the parts of the body where they penetrate.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The variety of arrows is such that there are those with large points, small points, barbed points, and fixed points; and those with two angles, and some with tongues, and others with pieces. And when an arrow penetrates any limb, it does so in two ways: either into a principal member, such as the brain, heart, liver, spleen, ribs, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it penetrates any part of these members and the signs of death that I will tell you next appear: then you must be wary about extracting this arrow, for death often follows in many cases; but when none of these bad signs appear and the arrow is not deeply embedded, draw it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the signs of the brain when an arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and passes through the dura mater which is over the brain, are when scotoma and headache and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and red tongue, and spasms and confusion, and vomiting of bile; and by chance it may issue forth without strength from the nostrils or ears; and by chance one loses speech and voice; and blood from the wound is white like milk, and also flows as pus; and if these signs appear to you, then hold yourself ready for treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is within.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart are that it is near the left mammary region, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard object, not an empty one; and by chance the arrow moves like milk, and black blood flows, and coldness and cold sweat come, and syncope occurs: you then know without doubt that death is imminent.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that pierces the throat is that foamless spittle flows from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow strikes in the back of the thigh, it is near the small ribs; and there is great pain and groaning and sighing; and all the shoulder members move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow strikes in the stomach, by chance some undigested food may come out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow strikes in the belly, and no sign of it can be found through the intestines, there is no hope for treatment or for extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes pouring forth, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and joint of the arm and spine of the back and ribs and thigh and legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to many conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for which reason you should act differently.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that an arrow fell in his helmet at the root of his nose: I felt it, and drew it out from the other side under the fat of the ear, and he was safe without harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And he drew out an arrow that had struck into the fat under his eye below the parchment skin, and the arrow was embedded such that only its tip towards the shaft could be reached, and the arrow was large from a Turkish bow, made entirely of iron without wings; the man remained healthy, and no bad accidents befell him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And he drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arab with wings; I seized the barbs, and carefully extracted it as much as possible, and the Christian remained healthy.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And he drew an arrow from the man who had it embedded in his stomach, and I thought he would die; but after thirty days had passed, there was no change in his condition; I cut around the arrow, extracted it forcefully, and he suffered no bad consequences.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish to treat a man who has an arrow stuck in his back, and the wound is sealed over; and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change any of his natural dispositions, nor finds harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And if you wish to treat another man who has an arrow shot into his face, and the wound is sealed over; and it remains thus without him suffering great pain; and many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And an arrow was driven into the head of one of the king's princes, which was embedded between his nose and declined slightly to the right side; and the arrow was completely bent. I was called for treatment after it had been there for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I probed it thoroughly with a fine probe, and felt nothing; yet he experienced sharp pain and discomfort behind his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I applied a poultice that is both drawing and digesting to prevent swelling; and the wound from the arrow became apparent.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the poultice for several days, and reopened the wound, and the patient remained in this condition for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose; and then he told me about it.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it was open, and probed it, feeling the tip of the arrow embedded in place; then I continued to apply this corrosive medication around the opening of the wound until the head of the arrow appeared visibly; and it took about four months before I could properly treat the area around the wound, making it clear enough that I could use pliers, but it would not come out; therefore, I did not stop trying different methods and tools, until one day I was able to grasp it with well-made pliers, according to what will be described at the end of this chapter, and then I removed it and closed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the doctor judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored; I repaired it then, and the wound was sealed, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have told you about the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your care into what I do not say, for books cannot contain everything; but wise masters compare well with much knowledge, and with what is present and lacking, find new work, and new instruments, at the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows exit from the limbs where they are embedded in two ways: either from the place where they entered, or from another part; and those that come out from where they entered, are penetrating arrows, and sometimes they exit immediately.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not come out now, leave it until the flesh around it is rotten and the opening enlarged; and similarly if it is fixed in the bone and cannot be extracted, leave it thus for several days, rubbing it each day; then it will come out, and if it does not come out, cut around it with a fine knife, enlarging the area around it until it comes out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head and goes to one of the ventricles of the brain, and any of the accidents that I have mentioned are apparent to the patient: do not extract it, but leave it for several days until it remains even, because if the arrow reaches the base, it is deadly.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is embedded only in the bone, and does not reach the surface of the skin, and the patient remains for some days without any adverse incident, then one must devise a way to extract it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot come out, then administer poultices around it, as I have told you; then treat the area until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged in a place where it cannot be seen, search throughout the body for it; and if you feel it, extract it with some appropriate instrument; and if you cannot because of the tightness of the wound, or the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins, then cut so that the wound is large enough; and extract the arrow if you can, and if the arrow has barbs by which it holds fast, remove the flesh that is embedded on both sides as much as possible, and then break or bend the barbs until you can pull out the arrow; and be careful not to break the arrow so that you do not make extraction more difficult.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it all at once, leave it until the area around the site is ripe, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding prevents you, then administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter; and beware of cutting the nerve and vein, and place a device as you can draw out the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and position the patient according to how he was when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest aid that there is, and if you cannot, then place it according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, where it shows something of itself, or the skin is swollen in such a way that it can be seen or felt clearly: cut above it until the forceps can grasp it, and then extract it; do this now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand round, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and then restart the extraction until it comes out; and if there is a shaft of the arrow in place, push it with the entire shaft; and if the shaft breaks and you wish to administer a probe, apply an instrument tip so that the point of the arrowhead enters into the tip of the instrument; and then push forward, and if the arrow is embedded, insert the pointed instrument to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touched, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the wound is, if you can, then treat the wound as is appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls in the thigh or in the belly or in the bladder or in the side, and it is close, and you can cut over it, do so; but beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound if necessary; and treat it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pliers used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and see here the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the hair probe is also like the feather of a bird, to push against the tip of the arrow, as shown here is the form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the tongs for pushing and holding is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are thirty-one veins from which one can bleed to heal, sixteen of which are in the head: two temporal arteries behind the ears, called the "twin herbs"; and the two arteries visible in the temples; and the two veins that are in the tear ducts under each eye, called "aspires"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein at the top of the nose; and the two jugular veins in the neck; and the two veins that are above the lips, which are called "augeherich"; and two veins below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins from which one commonly draws blood are V in each arm: the first is cephalic, and it is on the left side, and the wise people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle vein is called "femoral", and it consists of the cephalic and basilic veins, and the wise people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and they call it "vein of the belly" by the wise people, and it is above the fossa, and this one from which blood is commonly drawn, appears manifestly over the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the saphenous vein is the one between the little finger and ring finger, and it has II branches; and in the leg and foot are III veins: one is below the bend of the left calf, and the second sophene which is at the ankle of the right leg; and the vein called "nurse", which is at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg are III veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The salving of the veins that are behind the ears helps with chronic catarrhs and headaches; and the qualities of the salve, as I tell you, are such that you raise the patient's head, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then bind the patient's neck tightly to a stick so that both veins appear behind the ears in two places: press them then on your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, cut into it; take the lancet, and pierce beneath the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire length of the vein, cutting through the skin and vein well for two widths across, and let out as much blood as you wish; then bind it tightly until it is healed; and I have already mentioned the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bleeding from the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for chronic migraine, and severe headache, and habitual ophthalmia with continuous tears in the eyes; and the qualities of the bloodletting are as I say: it is when the patient tightens his neck so much that the two veins become clearly visible; and feel the pulse below your thumb, then prick the vein; then raise the needle above the vein on your index finger, and insert the lancet below, and lift the vein up, and cut it as you did with the other two veins, and let the blood according to your need; then release the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then bind it firmly, and leave it until it heals; we have spoken about their cutting and their extraction at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The vein of the forehead is worth as much as the cephalic vein for ancient face diseases, and for migraines, and for redness; and its quality is that the patient strains their neck by twisting it until the vein appears prominent; then take the instrument which is called "the digger," here is its form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and press above it with your hand or something else, and let blood flow according to the quantity you desire; then release the patient's neck, and tie off the vein until it is secure, sometimes using a wide bandage.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, it is not suitable for the bandages to be too sharp; and place them diagonally, as the bone is nearby, and by chance they may break if they are delicate.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bloodletting from the two veins that are in the two grooves helps with the eyes, and for eyelid diseases, and for redness, and for pus in the eye, and for ailments of the face; and the quality of their bloodletting is that the patient strains his neck by twisting some kind of ligature, as before; then let the blood flow, and make the incision straight, a little long of flame width, a little wide, because there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is fine, it might break; then let the blood flow, as much as you need, and then bind with cloth, and tie well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The bloodletting from the vein of the nose is useful for fever, and for fierce headache, and for ailments of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is old; and the quality of this bloodletting is that the patient strains his neck, then strain his nose with your left hand, take a fine long flame, and insert it between the lips in the space which is between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well inwardly, and the blood will now begin to flow; do not go too deep, let the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for one night, because it heals very quickly; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The salve of the two binders helps in the constriction of the almaine, and at the beginning of mixing, and for many diseases, and for empetigo, and corrosions, and herpes, and esthiomenes; and the qualities of the salve are that the patient tightens his neck below both, as we have said; and let the masters be standing over the head of the patient, and the patient sit on one seat, then bandage the vein long a little widely, then draw some blood moderately, as much as is needed; then do the other side in the other vein, then untie the binding, and tighten all the veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, so that the wound may be healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the salve for the thighs
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The salve for the veins of the lips above helps with boils in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and splits of the lips, and around the nose.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the salve is to make the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by their blackness, and by the small black veins around them: thus cut each of them, and if you do not know them, and are in doubt, cut the larger of each; and do the same for the two veins above and below, because it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	For the extraction of saliva, remove the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The saliva of the veins that are under the tongue aids in the extraction of cerebrospinal fluid, and it is at the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the extractor is such that the patient urinates into your hands towards the sun, and raises their tongue, and looks underneath on each side where there are two black veins: extract then one and the other, but do not go too deep, for under them lie the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the knife used for extraction are extracted according to two methods: either by piercing with a broad flame murtin, or with an olive-shaped fine one like cutting knives, and it is called "anesil"; and they are wide and fine according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame of fire is much renowned, and it is as wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open veins that are full of thick, visible blood, and which contain thick and turbid blood; and this is the form of the olive-colored flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more delicate and is for bleeding fine veins, where there is fine yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the abdomen; and it is necessary for the physician to bleed wisely, and to take care not to cut the artery that lies beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery, and blood flows out, it must be stopped as I have said; and it should not be pricking the flame, but cutting as previously mentioned.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica is not clearly apparent, then you must remove it and change another one; or take a small piece of it, or open a vein in place of it: it becomes clearly visible; and cut with the flame as previously mentioned.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you wish to know the location of the incision, then it is necessary that you extend the arm, touch the area until you feel the pulse; then mark the spot with a sign, and tie up the arm, and cut the vein with the flame as previously mentioned; and be careful not to hit the artery when you see the area swollen, for this is from the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it coming out high like a child’s urine, and the blood is red and fine, know that this is arterial blood: hurry then, and put your hand on it for a long time, then remove your hand if the bleeding stops, which often happens; bind the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move it by the patient; and be wary, and do not move it until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the bleeding is not stopped, and you must act, and no medicine is present, then cut the artery if it appears, for the end of life approaches; and stop the blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a strip of fig bark, and cut it, and take one half and bind it well until the next day; if the bleeding stops, that is good; if not, treat it as we have said with powders that stop blood; and the binding is not difficult in many conditions for the small area of the wound, and the strength of the arm’s ligature.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein in the middle helps to drain blood from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic veins as we have said; and it is necessary for the surgeon to work around the nerve which is below, and if he punctures too deeply, and finds the nerve, it swells and the treatment may be difficult, and perhaps cannot heal; this nerve appears very often, but if it does not appear in some people due to its subtlety, then you must treat it with a tranquilizing instrument; and avoid the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it lengthwise.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The cephalic vein helps to drain blood from the head and aids the eyes; and it is necessary to incise using an olive or myrtle blade, because it is the safest of all veins, as there is no nerve or artery below it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, one must choose the lightest spot, and it does no harm if it fails the first time, and one can try again; and sometimes the area swells when struck the first time, but it does no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the salve is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about bleeding is that it is only done to preserve health and to prevent future diseases; and the bleeding should be performed in one of the three veins mentioned: namely, cephalic, facial, and basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of prayer time in spring, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear; and one should bleed on the first day or the third, two hours or three after the day begins.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The physician who attends to the sick has no fixed schedule but must be available day and night at any hour and in all seasons; and it is not proper to treat children up until fourteen years of age, nor women carrying a fetus from the fourth month until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	And one should not treat the elderly who have passed sixty years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wishes to be bled, in whatever manner it may be, they must first cleanse their intestines with a mild enema if there is much retained feces so that the veins do not attract harmful substances from the intestines to the principal members; nor should one bleed those who are too full of food, or drunk, whether pregnant or not; and avoid bleeding after colic pain, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive sexual activity, labor, staying awake, fasting, and all such things that deplete strength; then purify the humors if the patient is obese through diet, drinks, and medicines if you have the knowledge; afterwards take a bath if nothing prevents it to refine the blood; and bleed from the arm vein near the elbow as we have said; and guard against work, strain, lust, and similar activities on that day; and be happy and cheerful, and let the physician be higher than the patient being bled, then stroke the arm two or three times; then loosen the bandage moderately for it must not be too tight or too loose as blood cannot flow freely if it is so; then rub the area with your hand until the veins swell and can be felt; then moisten the physician's blade with a little old oil; place your left hand above where you wish to bleed, on the vein, slightly so that the vein does not rise or fall when pricked.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that run like cords for the surgeon, and some are full of airiness, so when one applies flame, it retreats from the flame, and thus the vein cannot be opened; and if he works on the vein, the wound is too narrow, therefore it is necessary for surgeons to be cautious in such matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened the first time, it is good; if not, then begin again a little below that place hastily, if the area is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the area is swollen and the patient is afraid, let him rest for one or two days and do not tie his arm: perhaps an abscess will come out easily; nor enter a bath, then resume the bleeding if it pleases him; and if the opening is small, apply the flame directly to that point with all the heat, and work quickly so that the area becomes swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the area swollen, do not start bleeding again, and put a little poultice of oil on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and at this place the poultice is more gentle than the oil; and thus administer the poultice of oil in each time that you bleed the veins to stop the flow of blood; and the same applies when you apply triacle and bandages to the area; it subtly thins and disperses the blood when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when bleeding is not done forcefully enough at the time of vein opening, hurry and place a sponge moistened in warm water and vinegar on it for an hour; and you must do this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if some black or green discoloration remains there after several days, it does no harm; and if you wish, apply something made from aloes or myrrh dissolved in juice of calamint, mastix, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times an abscess and swelling occur at the base of the spine: place your hand there, and if you find the area soft upon pressing with your hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid applying anything from what we have said, for it may cut into the artery; but apply a dry plaster to harden the area, then treat it with another method until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw blood from each according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too warm, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is appropriate for one who is full and strong, and needs bloodletting, to make a larger incision, and the flaps should be wide; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed them gently and frequently, and this should be done by cutting across, not vertically; and this method of bleeding saves from fainting due to loss of blood and damaging nerves, and is worth more than long or wide incisions.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one to whom the body is in need of bleeding, it is appropriate to give moist bread in pomegranate juice; if they are heated, let them bleed three or four times. And if they have a cold constitution, give them moist bread in muscat syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup before bleeding.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints after losing much blood, then it is necessary for him to drink broth of meat, and aromatic syrup, and use other things that we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to bleed his arm and faint again, then when he is weakened by much bleeding, it is necessary for him to bleed a little at a time according to the quantity of his continuing strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wishes to bleed his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then he should bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wishes to bleed from another place, then he should bleed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood within the body that has already heated up and causes fever; therefore, it is necessary to draw out a great quantity and enlarge the opening until it splits in the palm of the hand; then when you fulfill all the conditions for bleeding, place your hand on the pulse as soon as the blood flows to prevent death from occurring in its place, which happens many times due to the negligence of the bleeders; nor should you press hard when you wish to loosen the arm and make the blood flow a second time if the opening is closed; or if it is curved, do not extend the arm hastily, for that would be worse; but leave it as it is until the blood flows again; or point with the tip of the flame so that the congealed blood in the vein's opening exits, and place a drop of oil mixed with water on it and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not bind it, until the abscess has subsided.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, do so from the same vein, or another vein, or from the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein on the arm is bled in place of the head vein because it is well-composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of bleeding is that the patient puts their hand in hot water until it turns red; then tie moderately so that the vein feels tight, and bleed now through the side, not wide or long; make the punctures large, and bleed close to the joint of the hand, and if blood does not come out, put the hand back into hot water, and let the blood run in the water until you have enough; and if it is summer, do not immerse the hand again in hot water because one does this more often in winter than in summer; and bleeding from this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are no arteries or nerves near it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The salvation of the right hand is worth for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner: pull out the hand, and put it in hot water, until the veins are swollen, if one can see them; and if the vein crosses, and if you cut it entirely, nothing will be harmed; and do not go too deep, because the nerves are completely bare of flesh underneath, and then put the hand back into hot water, if the blood has congealed in the wound, and no more may come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn enough blood as is necessary, apply oil and a bandage to quickly seal the vein, and do this for each cut.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The treatment of the left hand is worth for the disease of the spleen, and do everything as I have told you regarding the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The salve of the sophene is useful for all diseases that are below the body, such as ailments of the legs, and retention of urine, and disease of the thighs, and of the old knees and legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its salve are such that the patient should bathe their foot in hot water, and rub on the wound until it softens, and apply above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there are many veins; apply it then to the widest vein, or at the ankle, for greatest benefit.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you apply it to the foot, be careful of the nerves that are below, and apply it across as if cutting; and let the flame be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, put the foot in warm water, and let the vein be thoroughly opened.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the incision fails the first time, then restart it slightly higher up, for the place is salty; do not worry about nerves, as we have said, and do the same to the sole of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The site for the sciatic vein is at the ankle of the foot, and its incision is effective for hip pain when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its incision is such that the patient enters the bath, and presses above the ankle four fingers by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not appear; and if it appears, then cut it in all ways you can, and across; and it is better to cut it, for the site is deep, and it responds well to many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, take some of the skin from where the heel bone is exposed and near the little toe, and beware of the nerves; let the blood flow as much as you wish, then loosen the ligature, and put on cotton and bind it; she is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	cupping treatments
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping instruments are made of horns, silk, or glass; and cupping is performed in two ways: one by drawing blood and the other without drawing blood.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping without drawing blood is performed in two ways: with heat or without heat; and the cupping that involves drawing blood and extracting blood is done at fourteen body locations: one entirely on the head; another around the neck; two more on each side of the neck; one below the chin; two on the shoulders; some above the kidneys; two on each arm; two on each leg; and two on each ankle; and this cupping does not draw blood, except from small veins scattered throughout the body, and therefore it does not weaken a person as when a vein is bled; and it should not be administered with or without heat in any disease caused by excess, until all parts of the body are emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of illness it is necessary to bleed them, or out of habit, let us do this each hour at the beginning of the month, or at its end, and also in every season; for there are those who, when they need bleeding, have a heavy head; and there are some who experience swelling and redness in their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes; and there are those who spit blood, and their tongue is swollen, and they cough up blood; and there are some who dream, and see by night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially at the beginning of the month, we instruct them to bleed after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The massage of the temple helps with headache… that comes from the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of all the body; and this ventilation is instead of the cephalic massage, and should not be used by those who are of cold complexion, or who have catarrh, because it causes them great harm; and for these reasons it is not appropriate for elderly people to use it, nor for those who suffer from cold diseases in their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who become too relaxed from it may become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to place the cupping vessel a bit lower out of concern for forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	Cupping on the neck is instead of massaging the head and basilic areas, and for this reason it is useful for stiffness in the chest ribs, and for rib fractures, and for all conditions, and for repletion; and it should be applied gently, because if it holds too firmly, it may cause forgetfulness or indigestion in the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventosity between the two ribs of the neck is effective for headaches, and for ophthalmia and migraine, and for choking, and for pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the health of the basilica; and you must instruct the healer that he press his hand when applying it so as not to cut the artery, and there should be no bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The ventosity below the chin is effective for mouth diseases, and for gum disease, and similar ailments that are in the mouth; and it is at the place of the health of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventosity of the shoulders is effective for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventosity of the ribs is as effective as from three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the healer that he must not press too hard, for the area is bare of flesh, and there are nerves and arteries below.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup placed on the rump corresponds to hemorrhoids and diseases below, and it should be large, made of brass, needing to pull well; and if it were delicate, it might break; and thus great wounds are made.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs draw blood powerfully, as they attract blood from the whole body, and are beneficial for chronic pains in the thighs, and of the prostate, and of the bladder, and remove tumors; and they are placed at the two soles, and at the two ankles, and overall they weaken the body after long use, and cause fainting in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the suction cup is to place it first empty, and then apply it moderately, placing it quickly, moving it evenly, and continuing this until you see the area turn red and swollen, and feel the heat of the blood; then finish, and replace the suction cups, and be careful about the condition of the body, because there are some who have thin flesh, and clear pores: such cases require piercing only once, and should involve large cuts, and somewhat deep ones; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to thin the blood vessel.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we wish to draw blood little by little, we only need to do it once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we wish to draw a great deal of blood, we start over often; and if the vein is thick, strike it deeply, and the puncture should be such that the patient feels it immediately, which is necessary for those with thick and hard skin, and who have small pores, that you anoint the areas with suction cups with an appetitive and dissolving oil: if it is in summer, violet oil, or almond oil, or gourd seed oil; and if it is in winter, oil of chicory, or of lily, or chamomile, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, then take oil of marjoram, or balsam, or anise oil, and similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the person to be treated has tender skin and large pores, no oil should be applied, but they should be washed after ventosity with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain flower water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture should rise from a lotion of olive oil, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have thick excesses should rise from old wine, or maple water, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or similar; and one should not treat with cupping before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two; and do not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that they walk around when they are to be cupped and when they have been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And be wary if the person who is to be bled is choleric, and if the blood is too thick and inflamed; then it is necessary for them to take cold things, such as sour apples and endives and lettuce in vinegar, and similar things; and eat young birds, and castrated meat, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion should take syrup of honey, and aromatic wine that is between old and new, and eat young birds, and eat young birds and small birds and pigeons; and on the day they will be cupped, they should drink more than they eat; and it may be given to some people occasionally triacle or nutmeg before cupping, or after, to comfort the principal limbs; and their blood should be made subtle, but those who are hot should not drink this.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cupping glasses that are applied without cutting are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and for gout, and on the abdomen and the buttocks and the thighs and the hip, because these members do not bear being cut, and it is done only to draw blood from one member to another, as we apply them to the breasts when a woman menstruates; to remove viscosity that is in the member, as we apply cupping glasses on the abdomen and buttocks to reduce the member; and they take away pain when there is obstruction or stone, by their attractive power perhaps removing the obstruction, or dislodging the stone from its place; and similarly it does when applied to the liver and spleen where there is retained wind, and these cupping glasses are administered empty for suction only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in cases of pleurisy, and in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs suitable for this have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cupping vessel to be applied with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it should be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, with a small hole on the side in the middle, as big as to fit a needle, and it should be made of brass, smooth so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb; and in the middle there should be a crossbar of brass or iron for placing a candle holder, and they should vary in size according to the diseases and age of those who use them; for cupping vessels for children are different from those for the elderly, and for thin people than for fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should place this cupping vessel on the limb as follows: take a candle of wax or pitch and put it inside the cupping vessel across the crossbar that is in the middle of the cupping vessel, so that the flame stays at the bottom of the cupping vessel without burning the patient; then place the cupping vessel on the limb, with your two fingers covering the hole we mentioned, so when needed you can let out the vapor and remove the cupping vessel; and take the pitch or wax as before, and repeat often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping treatment used for pleurisy, in all acute cases, there is no rod or perforation, and it is applied only when it is full of blood, and it is placed on the limb solely; and this is the method:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Cupping glasses are used only on parts where cupping vessels cannot be applied due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and in the exposed flesh, such as the fingers or toes, and other similar places; and the quality of use is that when you find cupping glasses which are for mild conditions and clean without pus, take them; and place them in warm water until they become warm and have nothing inside; then make it bloodless by cutting a vein and using a cupping vessel, then rub the limb until it turns red, and apply the cupping glasses; and when they are full and fall off, if this is an area where cupping vessels can be applied, use them, because it is very beneficial afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If that is not the case, lift the area and then wash with water, very well, and then apply pressure; and if the wound bleeds too much after washing away blood clots, moisten a cloth of linen in cold water, and place it on until the bleeding stops; and if there are multiple wounds, put on ground vitriol or gallnuts, and similar things, until they stop bleeding; or you can place half a pound of peeled beans on the area, leaving them to burn at the site, which will now stop the bleeding; and if you need more, take other blood-stopping remedies.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the wounds do not want to stop bleeding, rub the area with fresh blood, or insert a needle until the wound lets out blood, and then place them on it, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will burn; and when you see that they are falling off, sprinkle a little aloeswood and frankincense powder, or ash, and now they will fall.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know this, dear son, that foolish doctors fall from this chapter because they have never seen any of the ancient books or read a single letter about it; and for this reason knowledge is strange in our land, for I have never found anyone good at it; nor do I know anything except by the knowledge of ancient books, where I studied so much that I mastered the science, and through experience, and by the customs of my life; and I have clearly described for you in this chapter what is contained within, and have summarized it at the end, and have shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in these two preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the main points of speech and the chapters where the wise person puts their understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture, dislocation, torsion, or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hurry to treat the patient from both sides if nothing prevents you, such as weakness of body, children, old people; or if the time is not very warm, or too cold; and eat cold things, namely cold broths, and meat of birds and kids, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not overfill yourself with foods that fill the veins with blood until you have no doubt about a hot abscess or spreading matter in the limb; then return to the first treatment which has been used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that provide thick nutrition, such as boiled wheat in water, rice, brains, feet, belly of pork, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For such nutrition promotes healing and the broken bones will mend more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that broken bones of the old and infirm do not heal well or join according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but there is no need for concern, reset the bone with a thick plaster that adheres and joins the limb together until it strengthens as it was before; and do not remove any part of its work, and for this one must nourish with thick meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the hip, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manners of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in sharpening, like the shaft of a writing quill.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture that is just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each manner has its own treatment and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes into place; and a bone fracture is known by its twisting, clearly evident by swelling, and sound when pressed with the hand; and when there is no twisting or sound upon touching, and the patient feels no great pain, then there is no fracture; but it may have twisting, or cracking, or slight fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not necessary to move it with your hand, but apply the medicines that come next, and then hold it firmly now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture that goes into the bone, and where the two parts are disjointed, it is necessary now to set them evenly so that no swelling occurs; and if swelling does occur, leave it for a few days until the swelling subsides; then set it gently and carefully, knowing that the restoration of this one is lighter than those with pieces; then hold it firmly as required next.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are pieces broken in the bone, they should be held from two sides, whether it is a hand or foot, or with your hands for smaller members, or with two cords, or one cord and your hands; and place the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the fractured bone are disjointed, reset all the pieces in their places as much as you can, and ensure that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient; and align the two ends of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And you can feel well in your hand if it seems to you that it is not right: then straighten it properly, and do not pull too hard, nor press as those who cause by their work heat and contraction in the limb, such as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is properly set, instruct the patient well not to move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; and ensure that the limb is so secure that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it feels any pain, it is not properly set, and it must be placed in such a position that it does not feel any pain; and take care that it is put correctly, so that no curvature comes about when it is restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and largeness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs such as arms and thighs: these should be wrapped in soft and fine linen cloths; and for the larger ones, such as legs and thighs: they should be wrapped with wide and firm bandages, because wide bandages encircle the large limb entirely and compress it evenly so that no part is left loose. Then tie around it light wadding three or four times according to the size of the limb, and press your hand slightly on all parts of the bandage, then apply pressure above the fracture slightly less than at the healthy part, allowing some space for swelling; gradually loosen the bandage a little bit by little bit until you cover most of the uninjured area, then take another bandage and wrap it over the fractured area again. Then tighten moderately below the fracture, neither too firmly nor too loosely, as we said in the first chapter above; then place between the bandages wadding made of linen or cloth to ensure evenness, then tie everything with a broad bandage, and then place your well-made splints if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, place on a soothing hot compress for the abscess and what removes the swelling, and leave it thus for some days; then incise along your splints, which should be half the width of a finger thick, or made from wood used to make combs, or from palm ribs, and they should follow this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but it is necessary that the splint placed over the fracture be slightly thicker and wider than the others; and it should also be as long as required for the limb, whether small or large; then incise along the splints as you did in the first line, then wrap with a thread tightly, as was done on the fracture in the first line; the tighter above, the looser below; and the thread must be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and should be soft linen; for if the threads are thick, like those used by fools who make their lines from twisted linen cords, it is a great mistake, because the suture cannot be even if it is too fine, and it is not appropriate to have less than two fingers of space between each splint.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is pierced by the points of arrows after they are pulled from their shafts, place plugs of flax or wool wadding so that it does not become infected.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the splinter, and the bone is broken, I will tell the treatment for it right after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And you should know that it is not appropriate to extract all broken members from the body on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limb is large, it is not appropriate to place hot plasters before five or seven days, or more depending on your judgment of a subsequent abscess; and here is the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take flour that is kept at the mill walls, mix it abundantly with eggs, apply this preparation neither too thick nor too thin, and use it, as this is the common method of restorative plaster for many conditions, especially for women and children, because it is not excessively hot or cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to make a plaster for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take З of abareis and styrax and enule and asafoetida and gum arabic and mastic, each X З.; myrrh and aloes, each V З.; alembicated vinegar IX З.; and make powder, and mix with egg white; if the person's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it has good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and suits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way to make a plaster for twists: take mastic and visnaga, each X З.; myrrh and aloes, each IX З.; acacia VI З.; Armenian bole X З., and grind well, and cook with water or egg white, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method of plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their places, and to ease the pain arising, and the use of bone cuts, and fractures: take new wool, and moisten it in grease and boiled oil, and apply it to the area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not heal, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess and properly alleviates the pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plaster to heal broken bones: take dried mulberry leaves and herbaceous plantain leaves, and grind them together, then make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plaster for the restoration of a broken bone and to reduce the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take roots of vervain, chamomile, violets, and flour of oats, an equal part of each; and grind them, and mix with wine, and if the member is heated, use a mixture with moist coriander water or just water, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to make a stronger plaster than the first one when a hard abscess comes during the restoration of a limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of vervain, seeds of flax, baluster, melilot, and saussurea, and flowers of violets and chamomile, an equal part of each; and grind them, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates states in his book that one should not apply anything to a broken limb for restoration other than waxed cloth made of wax and oil, and nothing more, and he says it should be neither too tight nor too loose.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen says that for restoring a broken limb, dry and slightly warm things should be applied, such as myrrh, aloes, and incense, and similar substances, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to make a plaster for injury and pain: take mutton fat and human hair, or bird feathers, and sage, in equal parts, and grind them together, then make a plaster with it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a little after that, and be careful if the patient does not feel any pain or if the bone is not in its place; do not loosen it by hand for several days. If pain comes to the area, or itching, without rest or swelling, hurry up and loosen it, and remove the plaster now; take a light cloth and a sea sponge moistened with water, and apply to the area until the itching stops, and the pain subsides; then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry flannel soaked in water or rose oil, and wrap it up gently until you are sure there is no hot abscess; and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then start the wrapping again with a thin plaster, but not as tightly as before; gradually do this until he is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is red and inflamed and painful and swollen are gone from all over, and you need ointment and linen, then restart it as you did first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if nothing comes to the limb of what we have said, do not dislocate it before III days or IIII or V or VII; and sometimes leave it for XX days, according to what you see, until the swelling subsides, and approach the joining of the flesh closely; then tighten it more than before, and thicken its flesh as I said before; and if you see the place drying too much beyond necessity, know that no new growth can come there; sprinkle it then with warm water each time you dislocate it, every third day, and loosen the bandage a little; by this work therefore prevent new growth in the limb, and hasten to correct what the foolish physician does, who resets the limb too quickly: this is wrong, and these are dangerous works, and I see nothing else but patience and working properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various manners of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many manners of fractures and various figures, and the causes are distinct; for there are fractures made by the impact of a sword, where the collarbone breaks all the bone up to the suture which is beneath the bone, as if it were split like wood; and therefore this manner of fracture is called "haichure.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, this manner of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound from these two fractures may be large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded impact, or a fracture from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture that approaches the membrane beneath the bone, whether it is on top of the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that penetrates the bone as finely as a hair, and the crack is small, and for this reason it is called a "hairline fracture"; and if the wound is made by striking against stone or falling, or similar things, causing a piece of bone to go inwards, and the place becomes like bristles as blacksmiths do when they hammer on cauldrons; and stone enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more to those who have moist bones in their head, such as the head of a child; and in all these ways of fractures small pieces are separated like splinters; and I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all types of fractures by the indentation above them, and by examination with probes, and by the corrupted flesh that is over them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hairline fracture is known by this: when the bone is exposed and rubbed over it, the fracture appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, be careful of accidents that affect the patient, and if you see any bad signs, such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, convulsions, fainting, intermittent fever, and eyes rolling and turning red, along with other similar symptoms in various conditions, then he cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any alarming signs and hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wounded person first comes to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day from the moment that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue under the bone does not become corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned do not occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone reaches to the tissue that covers the brain, then it is necessary for you to split the injured part as follows: take the head of the wounded person and uncover the bone in all possible ways, and around the wound as deep as you can. If bleeding occurs when uncovering the bone or a boil appears, use appropriate assistance; fill the area with cloths soaked in rose oil; keep the wound at rest until the boils subside and ensure there is no further bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone according to two methods of work: one method is to cut closely ahead, which is this form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make the second cut larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have various cuts of different sizes, some narrow and others wide, and they should be sharp, and made of iron; and work gently, so as not to injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is out and hard, you must pierce around it, thus administering cuts with trephines, but not so deeply that they penetrate beyond the skull bone, and should have at the tip a margin or circle, which prevents the point from going past the bone; and you must have several of them, each fitting in its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have trephines for the entire head; and this is the form of the three methods of trephining:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality to pierce around the broken bone is that you place one tarret on the bone, and turn it with your two hands until you know the bone is pierced; then move the tarret slightly elsewhere, and do this all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the holes, and do this as carefully and gently as we have said, until you draw out the bone in your hand, or by some tool such as pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the dura mater.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and extracted the bone, it is necessary to remove any remaining parts of the bone left by another instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other incisor; and if there remain small bones or scales, carefully remove them with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have described.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of work is that which Galen said, who was more skilled; and he praised it greatly, and this is his saying.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone where the fracture begins to emerge, so that when you have uncovered this part, place beneath the head of this chisel, which has the following form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and the part is beveled on two sides, so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; then strike gently with a small hammer, so that you cut lightly around the entire bone, and take great care of the tissue beneath; if it is loose from the bone, remove it gently, for it can be removed without harm and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the skin, and the bone is only broken from above, with small pieces, then it is necessary behind that roughness, to remove the scales with a fine scraper of which you must have various quantities, in order to best manage each place according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Start with larger scrapers and then use finer ones, and do not stop using them until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair cuts and fine fractures, you must manage them according to their direction; and this is something that cannot be taught to one who has not studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the sinus is exposed, then you must take a piece of linen according to the size of the wound and soak it in rose oil, placing it over the wound; then take another double layer of cloth, soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; do this as gently as possible so as not to burden the sinus, then cover it with another piece of cloth without compressing it too tightly that it only covers the wound; leave it like this for one or two days until the inflammation subsides, then remove it and apply medicines such as lily roots, wheat flour, powdered incense, aristolochia, and similar things; from these substances make a powder and apply it to the wound, and immediately thereafter use cleansing medicines without aggravation; ensure that the wound is always clean, do not leave any ointment on it, nor allow pus to accumulate on the membrane over the brain, because when pus accumulates on the membrane of the brain, it will corrupt and rot, causing great harm to the patient; for when something irritating is applied to the sinus, it will cause irritation beneath.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take care if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blackening appears other than from the medicine applied, which has such an effect, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix them with a little glue, then apply it to the surface; then treat it in ways necessary until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the skull above are broken, or only one part, because they are two bones; and the lower one is made of cartilage, which does not break but may be pushed out of place or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your small finger or a probe into the nose, and place that break inside according to your index finger, and at the nostril slightly outward, until the nose returns to its natural shape; and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach that place, you must place it equally at the head of a stick about a bit thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in two parts, you must do likewise, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after seven or ten days when the swelling has subsided, then insert into the head of the nose patches of linen if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you insert one from another side, if there is a fracture; and let the tents be so thick that they fill the passages of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some physicians say that the tents should be lubricated with butter, and changed each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think that is quite right, but they should be lubricated with a preparation of almond oil, and egg powder; then leave the tent in place until the bone is hard, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one inserts goose feathers in place of tents, and if there is the smallest gap around, it holds the fracture, and the patient blows through them; do as you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose while you are working on them, apply wax or moistened cotton in rose oil, or a piece of myrrh.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no abscesses come to it, apply an external plaster made of sesame flour and powdered incense, cooked with a bit of egg white, then place light plugs, but do not tie up the nose; and if there is only a small fracture in the nose, broken into small pieces, extract it using suitable instruments, then close the wound, and treat with substances that promote flesh growth and healing, such as plasters and appropriate ointments; and if there are no wounds inside the nose, cure it with bandages, and place strips of cloth, until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fractured from the inside, and there is no wound on the surface, and the breakage is clearly visible, and it is not broken into two pieces but rather like a crack within, one can easily recognize this.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is on the left jawbone, insert your right index finger, gently press the fracture inward from the outside with your other hand, and align it properly.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jawbone fracture is displaced in two parts, it is necessary to administer an extension of both sides until they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement of the teeth occurs, or fracture, then pull them with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then place on the broken mandible wax, and put over it two cloths; and place over the cloth a large well-made stick, or an equal piece of leather long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it up as much as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, then undo it on the third day and reset what has changed; and apply a poultice of powder from the mill with plenty of eggs or sesame flour after removing the wax; and place light wool over the poultice, and if the poultices adhere and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is well; many times he will be healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses occur, then treat them as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both a fracture and a wound, examine whether any piece of the bone has been removed; then carefully remove it with appropriate instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain, then stitch the wound if it is large, and apply suitable plasters to it, to heal flesh, until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The collarbone breaks several times in front of the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners: where it is broken and disjointed into two parts, with pieces, and this is the easiest to restore; where there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the treatment is when the break is without a wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder which is where the collarbone is broken; and the other extends the neck towards the affected part; then align the break with your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or change.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place under the shoulder of the patient a round ball of cloth, or wool, and let it be large according to your necessity; and stretch and lift the collarbone, and hold the ball with your hand, so that you align the break as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the humerus out due to it being deep, then the patient should lie on their back, and place a medium-sized pillow under the shoulder, and have the assistants press down on the shoulder until the bone of the humerus is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then align the fracture with your hands, and if you find it fragmented, then cut into it; pull out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any elevation, cut it with one of your chisels; but place under the humerus this instrument, to protect the surface.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it resembles a spoon, and is not sharp, and should be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two edges, as you see, one wide and the other narrow, like the shape of the wound you made when you pulled out the bones; and when you are sure of a hot abscess, sew up the wound, and if the wound is small and you doubt a hot abscess, fill the wound with cloths and lint according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if small abscesses come, moisten the cloth in rose oil and hysop and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The treatment of the bone when it is fractured and without a wound is to place on the bone the plaster made from flour and egg whites, then put in light pads, and if necessary, place a small ball under the healthy shoulder; then take a very wide bandage one palm wide, place the double cloth and plaster over the pads; then take a thin stick three fingers wide and long, wrap it around the bandage so that its ends hang down; place the stick on the fracture, wrap the bandage around the neck, under the healthy shoulder, and under the injured shoulder; tighten each part separately, when you see that the ligaments hold the fracture in place clearly, and the stick does not move over the broken bone, check it every day, and whenever the ligaments loosen, re-tighten them; make the patient lie on their back, and place a small pillow under the healthy shoulder during sleep to raise it up; this will lighten the force on the shoulder by raising it, where you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless an accident occurs until twenty days have passed; then restart the plaster if needed, continue applying pressure and leaving it in place until it is restored; and it takes up to twenty-eight days or less for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Rarely does the shoulder break in the middle but rather at its ends, and it is seldom that one can feel this by touch alone; thus, you should treat it according to the nature of the fracture and reset it according to its natural form in all possible ways. Then place on the area powdered miller's flour mixed with plenty of egg whites and light bandages, and cover with a double cloth; then place over it a broad and fine splint, somewhat wider than the shoulder, and if any part of the splint lies over any part of the shoulder, use linen bandages to pad those parts so that the splint lies evenly; and then bind it firmly all around with a wide strip of cloth so that the splint does not move from its place, and check the bindings every day; and whenever they loosen, retighten them, and ensure the splint remains in position if it moves, and have the patient lie on their side; and the shoulder will be restored in twenty or twenty-five days. And when this period is completed, you may remove it, and be confident, for no bone resets itself easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes and points away from the heart, cut it off, and do as we have said regarding the breaking of the collarbone to treat a hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the heel
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks at the base.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it tilts to the side, causing the patient great pain, and lack of alignment, and swelling, and by chance vomits blood, and the movement of the bones can be felt clearly through the skin.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies supine on their back, and a cushion is placed between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and align the ribs of both sides with your hands, carefully making it equal in all ways you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then place hot poultices and bandages made of fine salt or other light material over the bone, and wrap them securely so they do not move; then tie a cloth tightly around the back, and bind it moderately tight, and check every hour the bandage, and if it loosens, tighten it; and if it is necessary to loosen it, due to corrosion or itching that comes from the area, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and loosen it, and apply a new poultice, and address what has come there according to methods of treatment; then reapply the poultice, and bind it until it is secure.
de la brisure des costes	Of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the fracture of the ribs does not extend far beyond them towards the back, and to their front, and they do not spread widely because they are narrow; and one feels this well upon examination with both hands.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is that you place the fracture in alignment as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a bandage if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs inclines inward, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the tissue; and it leads to coughing up blood, and vomiting large amounts of blood, which is a serious condition, and the elderly suffer greatly from it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push out the rupture from the inside.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not allow that low abscesses should come there, if they have not already come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have come there, then heal them.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that cups should be applied to the area to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt whether the cups will draw the excesses to the place due to the disposition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that one should cover the area with wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to make the bandaging even, then treat it according to the treatment for pleurisy, with food and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear from the bone piercing the tissue, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to cut into the place of the broken rib, and put an instrument under to protect the surface; and then one must saw through the bone lightly, and then sew together the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat with plasters until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if soft abscesses come, then place strips moistened in rose oil on it; and treat the area as is appropriate for an abscess, and let them lie still on their side where they should be until they are healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck (collarbone or neck region)
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a break in the neck bones, and it can happen that they bend; and likewise with the spine.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know if they will recover or not, observe if you see their hands softened, swollen, and dead-looking, and cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when they are pinched and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and that the patient can be treated, if proper care is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing happens to the spine, and you wish to know if they will recover or not, observe if the feet are weakened, and if the symptoms present as with hands, and on the back there is bloating and involuntary vomiting; and when one lies them on their belly, there is also involuntary vomiting.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is laid on his back and wishes to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is deadly: do not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these accidents do not happen to him, then the matter is less serious.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you should treat him if there is a hot abscess, applying rose oil or boiled egg yolk until it subsides; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not let him sleep on the part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone breaks, it must be treated at the chest; remove the bone, then stitch together the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat it with ointment that promotes flesh growth until he is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the shoulder," place your thumb from your left hand inside, making it even with the right hand as far as possible, then apply the plaster and bandage if necessary; then compress it, and if there are separated bones, cut them and remove them, treating the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It rarely happens that the hip bone is fractured, and if it does happen, there is often only a slight reduction in its head; it extends along lengthwise, and inclines inwardly, causing pain to the patient at the site, along with swelling and bruising.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand above it, until you are above the fracture; and determine where the fracture is and its shape; and if the fracture is only at the head, then make it equal so that it has a natural appearance.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture extends lengthwise and inclines inward, make the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of that fracture is prepared.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, place the plaster on top, then put a splint of wood or horn, and hold the broken bone steady so that it does not move; and apply to the area under the ribs until the body is level.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if a hot abscess appears, do not touch it until the hot abscess is resolved, and apply what we have said before; then return to the restoration process, and bind it as appropriate, if there are no adverse effects; this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is that which is between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then it must be restored according to one of the two methods: one of which is that you take a staff full of medicament, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two heads with two ropes, and pull them up, and have the patient sit on a chair; then place the broken arm on the staff, as far as the armpit, and place a curved piece of wood in it, then pull upwards with some heavy object or the assistant stretches it downwards; then the physician should place the fracture even with his hands so that the fracture returns as needed.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that you suspend the patient by his healthy side, and tie the hand to his neck, then command two assistants that one pull what is above the fracture towards his hands, and the other pull what is below along the entire length of the ligament, and each should stretch at their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you wish for the extraction to be stronger, then grasp below the fracture, and above the fracture, and each of the assistants extend their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is close to the top of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you place one bandage below the armpit, and another towards the side, below the fracture; and similarly, if the fracture is towards the side, then place one bandage lightly, without effort, so that the fracture is equal above the area, and at the side; then make the fracture even as it should be, and press it firmly, unless abscesses come to interfere.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses come, do not press it until the seventh day, and apply linen soaked in olive oil and rose oil, until the abscess is eased; then press it, and the method of pressing is to place a poultice on the fracture, then bring the arm up towards the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest; and put the bandage, and press around the shoulder and the arm so that the arm is in position for healing, unless something prevents it, or if the bone has moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone will move, use splints, and place one splint above the fracture wider and stronger than the others, and leave two fingers' space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture three finger-widths on each side; then bind over the splints as I said at the beginning of this chapter about the fracture, more firmly and less in extending.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the placement of the splints and the binding as we have said when you restore the broken limb, and you fear a hot abscess, leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then check the bandage every three days to ensure that itching or swelling does not occur at the site where healing cannot take place because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it is positioned correctly, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accident occurs, do not dislocate it again for three days or more, and have the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach; place under the shoulder one cushion filled evenly with wool, and check every hour of day and night that the figure of the broken limb does not move or soften the ligaments; position it correctly by the power of medicine, and give them the food we mentioned earlier, in such a way that the food is initially finely prepared; and when they begin to recover, gradually increase the quantity.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset for forty days in total; then they must be dislocated and administered baths and medicinal ointments to heal the area.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is bad and tight, then wait to loosen it for one day or two months.
de la brisure du bras	Of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "forearm" bones, of which one is small, and it is the one that is next to the thumb; and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the little finger; perhaps only the larger forearm bone is broken, or the smaller one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the smaller forearm bone is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing is quick; and when the larger one is broken, the healing is difficult, and worse than when both are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small bone that is merely broken, then it should be gently extended and set even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bone, then it must be pulled more firmly; and place him on a cushion, with his hand higher than the others, and the small one lower than the other hands, and let the patient lie crossed over himself, and have the cushion in front of him raised so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the assistants' arm to the part below at his hand, or at the joint, and another assistant above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the bone evenly, according to its natural form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there are multiple fractures, place each piece in its proper place, and if any piece is displaced causing pain to the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut it out as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the trepanning for wounds, I have spoken of it in a separate chapter; then take that treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration abscesses occur, apply a strip of cerate made from rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard or too soft; and attach this strip gently, until the hot abscesses are relieved.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the cerate and apply the plaster made from mill powder with plenty of egg, then place the strips, and make sure the strip over the trepanning is slightly thicker and a bit wider than the others; and note that it should have six strips or more in various positions: whether the trepanning is on one bone or two; and hold tighter above the trepanning than elsewhere, gradually becoming less so as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages over the trepanning be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and make sure the thread, which holds them in place, is made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have stated.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And examine the limb and its joint after several days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that affects the limb, then you should rinse the limb with hot water until the itch subsides; and let the limb rest loosely.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the compression, and if the joint is softened and the bone dislocated, and similar issues, address them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And be wary if the swelling cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you should soften it slightly, and leave it this way for several days until the swelling can pass through, and then compress it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not release them until twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	When around it, then help them place their hands on their neck, and keep their necks even, and beware of movement and shaking, and let them sleep on their back; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and the natures of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and at the sides there are few fractures, and it rarely happens that they become fractured, rather they often bend.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is fractured or bent, it is necessary that the patient sits with their crossed legs and sits straight in front of them evenly; then place his hand on a flat surface, and have the attendants extend the broken bones, and align them properly so they are well joined; then apply a plaster and bandages, unless abscesses occur, then put a splint according to the size of the area; wrap it with one piece of linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is in the middle of the palm, make a ball of cloths, and instruct the patient to press it against his broken hand; then bind with a long cloth, and let the stick be as wide as the palm of the hand, and bind it, as is proper.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the side, then you must place a stick above and another below the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then wrap it tightly around the hand, and secure the binding between the two sticks.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is in one of the fingers, whether it is a phalanx, set it straight as appropriate; and bind it with the palm, and if you wish place a small stick vertically to lift the fractured part, ensuring it does not move; and if the fracture is in any other finger, such as the index or another, set it straight and bind it with the adjacent healthy finger; or hold them all together as they move, or place a stick under it like for a phalanx; be careful during restoration and treatment of hot abscesses, and support what comes next, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and this can be seen when it turns frontward and backward; and the restoration is done by binding one bandage above the break and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their back, then each assistant extends his bandage equally on both sides; and this is when the break is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then one bandage should be towards the groin, and the other bandages below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is near the knee, then the bandages should be close to the knee, and the extension downwards; then place the bone equally with both hands until it is in its natural position, and then apply the plaster cast, and bind it, unless abscesses occur.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside before returning to your work and treatment; the procedure is done in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You should wrap the fracture with a bandage doubled in two or three layers, and remove any excess; then turn the leg so that the heels align with the root of the thigh, and insert one long stitch between the thigh and the leg near the knee, ensuring the top end of the thread is free; then wind the bandage around both the leg and thigh, place splints on the fracture, put a splint over the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to make the binding even, then start tying tightly three or four turns above the fracture; as you move further from the fracture, tie less tightly; then bring together the two ends of the thread that were inserted between the leg and thigh, tie three splints that are above them, then return towards the foot at the top end of the thread until you reach it; tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, as there will be no abscess or swelling or other similar issue.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, then dislocate it and address what comes next as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that cause pain, they must be removed if possible; and if not possible, the area must be cut open, and force applied; and treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that splints are placed on it, as with the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, the patient does not suffer when the restoration is done in this manner.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in 21 days, or a few less or a few more, according to the differences in temperaments.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the joint of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the joint of the knee there is much breaking, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a crack, or a perforation, and it becomes like all wounds, and feels like a wound, and one feels this well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that you place even those who are bent at their joints together as much as they can move; then apply the plaster, and if necessary put a round splint, and bind it properly, then attend to all the preparations we have mentioned for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar conditions; provide what is appropriate for each condition until he is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are II bones, of which one is called by its right name "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile"; and it happens all similarly broken as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is all there. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain, and it can be seen clearly; and it turns inward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then administer extension, and place it evenly, and bind the splints equally; however, if the break is severe and there are multiple pieces, the extension should be lighter and gentler; and proceed according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two sticks that wrap around the leg from both sides, and let them run along the length of the leg from the knee to below; then wrap them with two strips of cloth above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, so that at this place the leg cannot turn to right or left, and thus it is well; and some apply a salve along the length of the leg, and if it is wood, they place it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly done is this in fractures where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or any other accident; treat it as long as it needs healing.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no break, but sometimes a break occurs in the bones of the foot and at the two joints, and it happens that it breaks in various conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that the bones of the foot break, and you see these bones overlap each other, then have the patient place their foot on the ground, as if they wanted to walk, and then put now your foot upon his, where the bones are raised, and then press so hard until they return to their places; then apply an emplaster and bandages, and under the belly of the foot place a small board filled with two handfuls, then bind it tightly to the foot when you have wrapped the cloth around, and other things that you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, undo the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the two are broken, restore them as we have said about the two of the hand; then place a splint along the length of the bone, and make it slightly wider, then place under the foot the board that I mentioned, and secure it tightly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then place on each one a splint according to its size, wrapped in one piece of linen cloth, and secure the board under the foot; and let them be placed at the head of the board so as to cover the arch of the foot, so that it fits well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said to other fractures; and treat each case as is appropriate.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's urethra is fractured, make her sit extended, then lean her towards the part of the back, and hold her from behind; then fill the urethra of the patient with cotton, and place there as much wool as fits; then stand the woman up, and lift her back little by little, and thus the cotton will jump, until it reaches the entrance to the urethra, and return the bone along with the wool; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for seven days or so: the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a sheep's bladder, tie a tube to the opening, and pour all of the bladder inside the urethra; then blow hard into the tube until the bladder is inflated within: this will restore the urethra; then fill it with cotton, and leave it so for some days, until she is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the little finger of a man is broken, or of a woman, restore it as we have said regarding the thigh bone; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from one who puts his study and use into them, and understand my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break signifies in various positions the right way of restoration: understand then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the shaft, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert the shaft into it; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days or until it has healed somewhat, and it will quickly be restored.
de brisure avec plaie	of a break with a wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, to be treated immediately, so that the treatments we have described bear witness to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then apply vitriol to constrict it, if you have nothing else, and then resume restoring the fracture at the same hour, or on that day, unless abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses do come, then leave the restoration until a new day, until the abscesses are calmed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause a harmful accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on the exposed chest, then it is necessary that you set it gently by hand, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not available to set equally by your hands, then use this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and the width is according to the size of the wound; for this, it is necessary for the surgeon to make three or four, depending on what is needed for each treatment of fractures; and let it be smooth and a bit thick, so that it does not bend under the compression on the limb during your work, and let it be sharp at the front, and thick from the middle forward, as follows:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", for which the curved head should be placed on the top of the visible bone; and push it in at once, until it returns to its place, and they are equal one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone until the instrument has proper hold.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot return the bone as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, either an incisor or saw, to your best ability; then remove what remains in the bone of hardness and small shards.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Set it in its place, then moisten the flap with black styptic wine, and properly if it is in summer; do not put on the wound cerate or anything else that has oil, lest it bring forth putrefaction and corruption; then administer splints once you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the surroundings according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not compressed with the dressing; and many times foolish physicians have done this, bringing death or corrosion upon the patient at times; and let the compresses be softer and more gentle than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that harm may come as we have said, and you find pain in the area, then it should not be covered with splints; but wrap around, instead of splints, hard cloths, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days swelling at the wound, remove what you have put on with all wine, and apply healing salve, such as tetrafarmakon ointment and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the member twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way that the swelling flows down gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if several days pass and it cannot heal but instead swells again, know that there are small pieces of bone, so you must probe the wound with a probe and remove all these dislodged pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place, or another kind of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it according to what he says in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not attempt to remove it, for many times death results from doing so; but leave it until it rots. Perhaps it will fall out after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it as is.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come upon the joints
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often see this after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a terrible sight to see the shape of the limb; and perhaps it cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then when the skin is fresh: if you administer styptic medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, so that you take any of these things, or all together, and confit them with styptic wine or with plenty of egg whites or with ashes; and apply them to the wound in poultices, compressing tightly, and do not loosen them for days; and then remove it, and start another one until the swelling is gone; or you can compress on a piece of plaster well made; for the property of plaster is that it removes all swellings above the limbs; and if the swelling has already turned into hardness like stone, and needs to be removed, cut the surface over it, and let the excess become apparent; or you can scrape it with some kind of scraper until it is gone, and treat it until it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weak after recovery
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb remains weak and delicate afterwards, this happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or there were too many bindings, so the nourishment could not reach the limb; or due to excessive washing; or from making too great movements at the wrong time; or because they have little blood in their body, hence are weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you make the patient eat, and make the body soft, until the blood is multiplied within him; and administer baths, and give joy and rest; then apply pitch to the limb so that the pitch attracts abundant nourishment, and wash frequently with cold water, until the nourishment reaches the limb; and return it to its natural condition.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the member twisted after the healthiness
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone broken clearly, and the form of the limb is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe those fools who say that one should break the limb anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land; these works are blamed, and great evils come from them, and perhaps even death; yet if the ligaments and muscles are fresh, they ought to be bathed in hot water, or herbs softening cooked, such as leaves of mullein, roots, and hellebore, and similar things; and you make a mollifying ointment, such as good myrrh is made, and take the mucillage of mullein, and mix it with fat from hen's meat or sesame oil, and apply an ointment on top; or take fatty figs, and pound them with linseed meal, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the knot is removed to rub continuously and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let movement be given to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is inflamed and hardened, like stone, and needs to be removed with iron, then it must be cut down to the bone with a fine and gentle incision; and apply caution and care in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs to anyone, it is necessary now to return it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the area swells, and perhaps it may be reset with difficulty to its place; for that reason, it is not good to move it while it is swollen: many times it brings on spasms and other pains; nonetheless, when this happens, make the patient drink a laxative, then leave him until all abscesses are appeased; then bathe the limb in warm water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each member as appropriate for its condition.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from the head down to the feet.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It rarely happens that the mandibles are dislocated in both jaws, and the dislocations of both sides occur according to two manners: where they are slightly removed from their places, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the worse side, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so it cannot be held, nor can it close its mouth, and envelops its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns on its own in many cases.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it quickly and do not delay; and in such a manner that the minister holds the head of the patient, and pushes his fingers into the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other hand should be further away to keep them equal; and instruct the patient to soften his mandibles and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the physician should place it evenly, so that it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if returning it is difficult, especially if both mandibles are involved, soak them in warm water and oil until you can gently return them; do not delay in returning them, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are returned evenly, and the patient's mouth is to be kept soft and well-moistened, place cloths moistened with cerate made of rose oil and wax over them, then bind lightly with soft bands; and let the patient lie on his back, with his head resting between two pillows, so that he does not move it either right or left, nor attempts to chew, but eats light food until the pain is gone and the mandibles are healed; and then eat what he wishes lightly, and do not work at opening the mouth for eating and drinking until the mandible is well-healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset properly in one hour, and are not returned to their places, it results in persistent fevers, habitual purging of the bowels, and possibly vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then you know it is a prognosis of death; and many times the person who suffers from it dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	of the forcefulness
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The dislocation cannot be reset from the side within the continuity of the ribs and spine, and it is sometimes displaced outward, which one can feel well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is as follows: the patient lies supine on their back and extends their arms; then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return; then apply the poultice and bandage, and secure it; and the head of the rib that is towards the side cannot be reset; if possible, if it does move, reset it to its place as we have said; then apply the poultice and bandage, and secure it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are well; and in the same manner, the vertebrae of the spine that is displaced from its place are also restored.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one of which is that it dislocates at the part of the socket behind; and the second is at the part below; and sometimes above, but this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor within the nerves; and more often it dislocates below towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, because for them it happens quickly; for those with enough flesh, it occurs with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to some men that they suffer a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they believe that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary then that you test it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And dislocation is known when it goes down towards the socket, and there is a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them; and you will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and below the socket to touch the head of the shoulder, as if it were an eye; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to his chest, nor move in any way; and likewise, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it clearly by touching; and this kind of dislocation is not to be put right when it is new, or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the minister lifts the patient's arm upwards, then places his fingers under the armpit, and raises the joint forcefully to its place; and the minister lifts the hand, and extends it upwards, then puts it down; thus it will quickly heal.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, the patient should be bathed in hot water; and the minister applies soothing and relaxing remedies, such as a decoction of elderflower, fenugreek, and honey-suckle in water, and is applied; then the patient is anointed on their back, and place under the armpit a pad of wool even, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the fingers of the minister's hand under the pad, raise the head of the shoulder forcefully, and pull the arm of the patient; and another minister holds the head of the patient so that it does not move downward; the shoulder returns entirely now, and if you wish to reset it according to this manner: have a man present who is larger than the patient; stand facing the side, place his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, lift the arm upwards, so that the patient hangs by their arm; and another minister pulls the arm of the patient downward toward the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he may hold something heavy with him, and now the dislocation returns.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And it is reset in another way as well: place a long stick in the ground, which should be as thick as a spear shaft, neither too large nor too thin; then place it under the patient but cover it with cloths so that the patient stands on the longer part of the stick; then extend his hand downwards from the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return despite all these things we have said, do this cure: take a stick two arms' length long and four fingers wide, which has the end thick for easy insertion under the armpit, in this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lie over the head of the body a cloth that does not hurt the patient, then place it under the seat of the patient; and extend his arm along the long staff, and tie the shoulder to the staff, and the hand to the top of the staff, then place the arm on one side of a wide ladder, and let the hand hang down, and leave the body hanging from another part: the joint will now be in its proper position.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, however that may be, you must place under the seat a pad of even linen, then apply a poultice prepared with powdered miller's flour, with incense and egg yolk around the entire shoulder and surrounding area, then press down gently under the seat gradually, and wrap the bandage over the poultice, and bind the hand to the neck, and let the hand remain in this position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he eat little, until the limb is strengthened, for it will heal more quickly; and then eat more after 5 days or 7, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come to it, or for another reason, you must administer cauterizations with three punctures as described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and after 7 days it still does not hold in place, and he cannot raise his arm, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation towards the hip, and the breasts, or behind, is done by impulse, and extending the hands, and another minister assists in other places; and treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing the limb becomes stiff and slow in movement, the patient should take many baths until the stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its original condition.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the elbow
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated by points, and returns to them; and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not remedied, because one can see and feel it clearly; and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the diseased part with the healthy part, then you can see clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is displaced, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it as if deep abscesses were present, for if deep abscesses were there, it would be difficult to reset; and perhaps it cannot be entirely reset, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, causes greater pain, and may result in death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such that when it can be reset, you should extend his hand with your two hands; and let his arm be spread out, and place your hands around the joint according to its shape, from above and below, and push the joint back into place at its base, until it returns to its proper position.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and twists from the base of the palm the knife that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not wish to return to its place, administer strong extension; and when two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with both hands so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm in each direction, after you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth around it; and when you see the joint at its finger, apply some ointment to soften the joint, then forcefully set the joint until it returns; and when it is in place, put on dry poultices with egg yolk, and firmly bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for a few days, then unbind it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, undo the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold tightly, reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it like this for some days, until it is firmly set; then undo it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels stiffness after the joint is returned, and it moves, bathe and rub gently, and press until it is relieved; or place a sheep's fat on the joint, then leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath; when he sweats, lightly rub the joint with an ointment, then put the fat back on, and again into the bath; do this two or three times until he is healed; if you wish, place moist birch leaves heated with butter over it; thus it will return to its proper condition.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand occurs, and its reduction is easy, more so than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place quickly, in the same hour that it is dislocated, before swelling sets in or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the reduction is done by placing the affected hand on a table, and having the assistant extend the hand, while you place your hand equal to it, such that its palm goes over the appearance of the joint, and push until it returns. Nevertheless, you must check if it is in the right place; then have the patient rest the back of their hand on a table during extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then have the patient place his back of his hand on the table, and the physician place his hand upon that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is well; if not, then apply emollient plasters to soothe the abscesses and leave them without relapse.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot place it back after several days, then the twisted joint remains so; and does no harm to the patient other than as long as the hand is softened, and cannot grasp anything at all: then know that the nerves are severed, or the artery; there is no other cause but to cauterize near the case, and perhaps nothing else may help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, apply the plaster we have mentioned, then press it and leave it for five days, then unbind it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, then moisten with warm water, and rub until it is loosened.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the thumb of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the thumb of the hand is dislocated in various directions, sometimes at the back or front of the palm; then it must be placed correctly, and the dislocation pushed back until it returns to its proper place, then support the head of the thumb, and move it towards the part where it is dislocated; leave it for two days, then make it equal on that day; and tie it as we have said, and untie it daily, and make it move, and retie it; do this often until it fits tightly, and similarly if it is dislocated at the front of the hand, and do as you did before, until it is healed; and likewise do when it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the backsplice
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the dislocation of the back or neck occurs, and there are multiple dislocations, there is no treatment, for death quickly follows the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that vomiting occurs without volition, and they cannot hold it, and often some member is weakened, whether both thighs or both arms or one. And often the dislocation shifts to four parts; when it moves to the back, it is called "gibbosities": the treatment is to determine if the gibbosity came from childhood: if so, there is no cure or healing at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And for those who come from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment were described with great words, which yield little benefit in all cases; but I have abbreviated them according to my understanding, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the condition of clubfoot affecting the front foot, there is neither remedy nor cure; and also for those that come straight to the two sides, and cannot be cured except by that which properly affects the back, as I say; and it is that the patient lie extended on his face in an even place, and have some padding beneath him so he does not hurt himself; then place a burning coal at the head in the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a rope under the armpits of the patient, and one at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two ministers hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two burning coals; and they should be well secured, the coal as we have said, and the physician place his palms on the spine firmly, until it relieves.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this cure, take a board three spans long, and place it under the arch, and have the patient lie on their side, and put the end of the board under the arch, then place the middle of the board over the spine; and have the doctor stand at the other end of the board and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you wish, do this with a twisting motion towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And if you place two torches at the head of the patient from one arm's length apart, and towards the feet two others, with a palm’s space between each torch above and below; and have in each torch one hole where the screw turns, and let the torches be firmly fixed in the ground so they do not move; and between each pair of torches place one turning torch upon which the rope turns, and next to these two turning torches put two small torches a palm's length apart for turning the screws; then tie the rope that is around the pulleys to the screw towards the head, and the other rope towards the feet to the other screw, and each assistant turns their respective screw along with all the ropes, while the master sets the spine straight as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, place on an absorbent plaster with plenty of egg, and then the bandages, and then a splint from a piece of wood three fingers long that covers the area of the humpback and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with linen as we have said, and let the patient use gentle care until he is healed; and if any symptom appears at the end of recovery, one must administer softening and soothing medicines along with the splint we mentioned before; sometimes a piece of lead is used, and sometimes an appearance occurs in the last vertebrae of the back, and people think it is dislocation; but this bone protrudes, for which there should be no presumption: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that at the joints of the hip and at the joints of the shoulder, only dislocations occur, not like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inward and outward, and front and back; and more inward than elsewhere, and slightly dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the recognition of an inward dislocation is that when you join the affected leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the patient's knee appears more bent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee over a fire; and the place nearby is swollen with abscess heat, because the thigh bone goes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of him who is coming to dislocation are contrary to those mentioned before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who is coming to dislocation are that he stretches his leg according to its completion; however, he does not double it at the knee without pain, and if one wants to make him move forward, he cannot advance, and he retains his urine, and his ankle swells, and when he walks, he steps over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who is coming to dislocation from behind are that he cannot extend his knee or bend it, and that leg is more bent than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is in a position below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The treatment for this type of dislocation is to check if the dislocation is old and it remains according to its condition, requiring no care; and there should be no expectation that it will heal.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and this is one of the four types of dislocations, hurry to return the joint, and stretch it inward and outward, and move it from side to side; perhaps it will come back into place, and no other treatment is necessary.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare one minister to strongly pull on the leg with both hands, or tie it above the knee; and another minister places his hand above in such a way that he pushes his hands under the heels, then tightens them with a strong bandage on the thigh; and another holds the head of the bandage; and they all extend upwards and downwards at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to the four types mentioned, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is correct.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then you must apply treatment according to its type. When the dislocation is in the hip joint, you should lift the patient onto their good side, then place the bandage at the root of the affected thigh, and below the groin; then extend the bandage upwards towards the groin and towards the buttocks; take another helper and grasp the large part of the affected thigh, and forcefully stretch it outward: it will now return to its place; and this type of dislocation is less severe than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot secure it in the manner we have described, then bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong bandage beneath the heels and above the knees; let the affected leg be extended two palms longer than the other; then suspend him by his head from a pole that is two arm lengths off the ground; then instruct one helper to embrace the upper part of the thigh, and have other helpers hang alongside the patient, who should forcefully grasp the thigh, for now the joint will quickly return.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation has occurred, the patient lies down, as we have said about the one who has gout, and bind the limb on the affected leg tightly, and also on the foot; then place two torches, one at the head and another at the feet, then insert a torch between the patient's thighs in the middle form; and place moist cloths around, so as not to burn the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the physician places his hand equally on the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place him on the table and press as we have said in the case of gout, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the affected leg quickly, and as I have said; and place your hand on the bad angle, then press with the other hand, and extend towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is behind, one should not extend the affected leg downward nor lift it up from the ground, but rather it must be as if the hip were dislocated backward, as we have described in the position of lying on both hips; and he should lie on his back, with the limb extended as we said before, and pressure should be applied to the joint at the table; and it will be complete when the patient extends their legs equally; then bring the thighs together, apply a plaster, and bind them tightly so that the hip does not move; rest for three or four days, then unbind him, and put on another plaster; if you see that they are equal, bind them again as before, and leave it for three days; then unbind him, and make him walk gently until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: namely, inward and outward, and backward; it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not hold at the thigh, then you know it is dislocated; and the restoration of all such cases is as follows: make the patient sit upright, extend his leg if he can, place your back against his back, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your hands, then bend the two sides of the knee firmly; another assistant should straighten his foot so that the knee returns to its place; the sign is that it holds well at the thigh lightly; apply a plaster, and bind the leg to the thigh tightly for three or four days, then loosen it; and do not let the patient work on walking until the limb is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not properly set, apply strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the thigh, until it is healed
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes completely dislocated, both internally and externally.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it feels loose in the area where it is dislocated: the reduction is easy, and one should gently extend it with their hands when it is only bruised.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, you should have the patient sit upright, and hold them firmly by the thigh from one side; then pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand, then twice with your left hand, then stretch it upwards, and forcefully push the foot upwards; do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, start over because it will return; and if it cannot return like this, have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a post firmly in the ground between their thighs, and tie ropes around them to secure the patient; then hold one thigh with your hands or a strap, tying it behind the heel; then stretch each side equally, and the post should be steady between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when stretching; then set the dislocation gently into place with your hands, and another helper holds the healthy leg from behind, and the dislocation will quickly return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is ready, place the plaster and plugs on it, and wrap it tightly, and tie the foot to the leg, and be careful with the nerves that are above the heel, so that the bandage is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandage loosens, tighten it again; then untie it on the third day or fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for four days; and if they walk before this term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if painful abscesses occur, you must soothe them as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	of both
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two [shoulders] are dislocated, they must be gently extended without effort, and this is an easy thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any part of the back of the foot, it is necessary that you have the patient sit on a flat place or on a table entirely straight, and put your foot under what appears to be the joint, then press strongly with your foot until it returns; and when they are even, and there is nothing apparent, place under the sole of the foot a board two fingers thick, then firmly stretch it out, and leave it for three days, then undo it; and have it rest until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies: do not be presumptuous in treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not long experience, and if you are not compassionate and cautious, not bold; and use at first soothing remedies for hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God’s hands if there is no hope of recovery; and when there is hope, now reset the limb to its place so that the hot abscess does not come; and when the limb is in place, minister soothing remedies for hot abscesses, and treat the wound as appropriate with drying ointments; and if along with dislocation there is a fracture and small bones displaced, remove them, and do as we have said for simple diseases; and guard against entering into ways of fear according to what I have said, because it will cost you more according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your arm and your body.
Amen	So be it
