O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science together with its contents, and I have made the end through its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and entirely foreign, the science has been lost and diminished, and nothing remains of its exterior but small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this came the errors and vanity, and intentions were closed off and science was removed.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems to me that I should revive it together with the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation;
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I will come together with the forms of cautery instruments, and of other tools of the work along with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there is no good master of hands found in our time, the art of medicine is distant.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for those who engage in this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that they know the true nature of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations from one another, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and sinews and their number, and the movement and resting places of veins, and their origin points.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little;
et meismement en l’art de main.	and especially in the art of practice.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above should beware of falling into error and harming people;
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	Thus, I have seen many times those who meddle with this art and abandon both their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a mad doctor who lanced an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of her neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	whereupon so much blood issued forth that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in the bladder of a man, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	and he took a piece of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to remove it, and saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut out he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another doctor who took care of a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	And the ignorant doctor presses the splint on the wound with forceful ligatures, and leaves no cloth to cover the wound, and left it thus.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	And he commands that it must not be untied;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and left it so that the leg and foot became completely swollen and he came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and untie the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I had it reset, it was in peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and it could not be healed.
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	And the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the entire limb was lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another doctor who drained the embedded abscess and then burned it with the malice of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a carbuncle, when it is full of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place where one can remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for that reason, young man, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two categories:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is to say, work where there is danger in many situations;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Therefore, it is necessary for you to be cautious so that the foolish doctor cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	So take up your weapons wisely, and approach your patients lightly yet firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised;
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and let the terrible diseases of severe illness be left;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and remove your weapons from what you doubt, and act in such a way that you may come from this world to the next in glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galien says in some of his warnings:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take seriously an evil illness, or you may be called a mad doctor."]
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicinal hot cauterizations, and the chapter is organized from head to feet;
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and about the forms of instruments, and cauterization tools, and all that is necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and the chapter is organized and the forms of the instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and is organized from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, as we remember the work, it is necessary for me to tell the quality of the aid and harm of each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of help and harm are the longest discourse and subtle science and secret responses;
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and many wise people spoke about this, and agreed on it;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and they suffocate me with their words, for I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cauterization universally aids all temperaments where there is matter, except for two temperaments:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	that is to say, the hot temperament without matter, and the dry temperament without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In the hot and dry temperament together with matter, some have discussed and said that cauterization is great help there;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that cauterization is not useful for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat a hot disease with heat, nor for dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	And he who says the contrary says that cauterization provides great help for hot and dry diseases that come to the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body of the person and their moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be true on occasion through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in any case, let no one interfere except those who have tested it, and who know through long practice the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of human constitutions, and the predispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the outcomes and timing;
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	we do not fear other constitutions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians gathered together and agreed on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that fire cautery together is of the secrets of treatments, and of greater goodness than burning medicine cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and does not affect any other limb but the one being treated, and it does no harm to another limb if there is some space.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	Pungent medicines travel from one limb to another, spreading and causing illnesses that are difficult to treat in the limbs;
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and by chance they may kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have found through experience and the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and it is upon the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and for this reason I excuse myself for the length of my speech, because it does not please me to take from you the secret that is hidden in the fire, and the quality of the work, how it removes bodily diseases, as the philosopher says in demonstrating;
or le recevez en vos pensees.	therefore receive them in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done, and chose appropriate times.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that the cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harmful things coming are removed by the aid of the cautery;
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And especially if the cauterizations are necessary for pains that cannot wait, so that the limb does not suffer greater harm.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And think nothing of it, dear boy, as foolish doctors do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no recurrence;
et il le dient ensi;	and they say it thus;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not as they believe, because cauterizations are a medicine that changes the complexion, dries up the humors which cause the pain, and works faster than other medicines due to its power and the strength of its effect.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible for the illness to come sometimes according to the patient's constitution and the location and nature of the illness;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and the excesses are gathered within him through the acquisition of food and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered in places where there is an abundance of excess and moisture, such as for toothache pain and similar issues, and such pain does not return;
mais ce avient poc.	but it rarely happens.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the rear of medicine, and this is true;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cauterizations are worthwhile after medication, but their understanding is false, and cauterizations are the last resort in medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any illness and they do not work, then we administer the cauterization, and it proves effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the foolish doctors' intention.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that cauterizations with an instrument of gold are gentler than those of iron, and they said this not only for the quality of the gold but also for the height of its substance;
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that the burn from a cauterization does not cause infection, but this is not true because I have tested it and found that it can be so in some people;
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	and cauterizations with gold are better than those with iron, as they said it is.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot tell by its color when it is hot, and it cools down so quickly;
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if one heats it too much;
si font au feu;	do with fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and thus there is sufficient obstruction.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason, we use fire cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have ordered this chapter from head to foot so that the path may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is useful for moisture and cold affecting the brain, and there are two types made due to a disease called "soda," and because of various humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and due to an abundance of dreams and tooth pain and throat pain, and especially for all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine cleansing the head for three nights or four, according to what the strength and age and habit of the patient can endure;
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then do behind the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then have him sit with his arms between your hands, and place his hands on his thighs;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And there where your two methods will come, if you bleed the joint then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", here is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place on the spot a signet of ink, and do it descending and squeezing your hand bit by bit while turning;
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	then lift your hand gently, and examine the spot if you see the bone slightly;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you do not see it, then repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I told you;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	after take a little thread, and put it in wax and soft cotton inside, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	Then place a moist cloth made of butter on it;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and leave it on until the heat is gone;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmason" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the ancients said that the longer a wound remains open, the more it purges;
et por ce si aide mues.	and for this reason, healing is aided.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one should leave the cautery long enough for part of the bone to be burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and it shall be treated.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And others say that the cautery should be left on for a certain length of time, and pressed so hard that it abates the bone as wide as the rod that women put in their hair to draw out the humors;
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one must leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	after which it should be cleansed and treated.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem entirely good to me, except in certain individuals where there is reason for fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and I think that I should leave it aside;
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the head is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we witness in other limbs;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and even when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization seems safer and more suitable to me, then I proceed with it for the sake of healing.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When chronic pain comes to the entire head and lasts for a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills which are called "cochies," and perform purging of the head and oils and plasters;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if one performs the cauterization that we mentioned before, it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care if the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	then cauterize below that area a little as we said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After cauterize on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we said before, and perform the cauterization at the place called "vasselz";
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and there are places where one applies cupping;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and place your hand so that you do not see until the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the patient feels much greater pain in this cauterization than with others, and I will speak about it later;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is necessary that the cauterizations of horns be finer than those used to cauterize the softness of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	For the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When sudden pain comes to a part of the head, and the illness extends to the eye, and the joint is purged by medicinal remedies, and all other treatments that I have mentioned in the division of illnesses have been performed, yet none of this helps:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	Then you perform cauterizations according to two methods, namely with dry medication and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cauterization with dry medication is done by taking a piece of alum, removing the skin and wrapping it in two pieces of cloth, and then applying it to the temple where the pain resides in such a way that you can place the wrapped alum under the skin;
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it is placed, secure and press it well and leave it like this for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	and then untie it and treat the area with garlic, and leave the wound like this for two or three days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then apply cloth dipped in butter until it becomes saturated.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment of ointment until it is healed;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you wish to use some burning medicines that I have written in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The cautery of iron is according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery which has the following form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because the head is shaped like a dome with a slight curve, and in the middle there is a small appearance;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and rotate it slightly, until half the thickness of the heart's flesh is burned;
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and let abundant blood flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After place cotton on silk for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then place moistened cotton with butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you wish to cauterize this wound with the cautery called "cultellare", do so at the tip, and be careful not to cut the artery in this wound which is not old.
de emigraine	of ulcer
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat a wound as we have previously said in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and see that the cauteries mentioned before from medicine and iron are ineffective, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white;
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and mark thus on the painful area a line half a thumb long, and remove your hand once, to ensure that you do not cut the artery and do not reach the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and beware of the jawbone that moves when eating, and the nerve should be careful not to move so that spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or cutting causes great fear and especially for one who knows nothing about it, and who is not learned and experienced;
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and leave the work in its place;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that these cauterizations do not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize on top of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see it necessary, apply the cauterization that we have described in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with a cautery that has two blades;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and this cauterization is better than the other and more effective.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain from coldness comes to the ear, and one has applied remedies such as dissolving medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery which is called "points," here is its form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After puncture all around the affected ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move a bit above the base of the ear once you have marked the spot;
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and place ten points around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treating the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the treatment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	A condition that must be treated with cauterization is not exempt from those that move due to phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not perform cauterization on conditions that come from dryness and nervous spasms.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this condition of colic that moves due to phlegm from the intestines and purging of the head and gargling, and if it is not effective, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauterizations:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, and the other a bit outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and apply it directly at the top of the ear just below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as far as one palm;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and leave the cautery on until half of the heart area is burned;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is similar to the cautery we have mentioned before, but it is a bit more subtle and the knife should be a bit larger;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the place as I said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is chronic and the treatment does not help as we have said, and the patient does not have a fever, then I make four cauterizations:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	Two on each of the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one at the place which is called "vasselz" as we said before, and the last cauterization above the stomach.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and let them be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	For liddergia (note: "litarg
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large doses and pills purifying the brain;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	After raising the head of the patient entirely, place the plaster of mustard which is written in the treatise on plasters upon the occiput;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the method of the cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If it is done thus, it is good;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	and if it is not, perform three cauterizations from the middle of the head descending to the neck, and let there be a space of one thumb's width between each cauterization;
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and treat it as you would the others, and if you wish to add more, and the patient is suffering, perform one cauterization in the middle;
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if necessary, two others at the two corners, and he treats until it is healed;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cauterization be what is called "olivare," as I said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of hair and of what we said before;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	after raising the head of the patient, then perform cauterization in the middle of the head and on each corner, one at the back and three along the neck spine;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, then perform four cauterizations along the spine;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and let it remain until the most painful part is burned, and lift your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the treatment until it is healed, and apply the cauterization known as "olivare" that we mentioned earlier.
de l’epilempsie	of the epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use the cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain of worms and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when the patient is large and suffers from difficult treatment.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot endure this, make them gargle and chew cleansing substances that purify the brain frequently with good meats;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	after placing the head in the middle, perform the cauterization according to what we said before, and apply the cauterization on the vessel, and on each horn;
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the patient is outside and suffering, perform cauterizations as I have said for those who have paralysis and bodily weakness, on the spine of the back and neck, and apply the olive cauterization according to the method I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is fasting, perform the subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy the excesses or humors are corrupted and phlegm is thick, then apply such cauteries as we have described to one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the excesses tend towards melancholy and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies the brain, according to what is mentioned before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After raising the head of the patient;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	after making the bandage of linen well, as round as a circle, place it on the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and the patient should sit crossed-legged and be securely held from all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	then present the linen strip, which should be made of sheep's wool from an old sheep;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and heat it over the fire to a temperature that the patient can tolerate when applied;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	then empty the circle and place it inside the head, allowing it to cool;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this for the patient once every week along with other good treatment until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	When you wish to cauterize, make multiple small punctures across the entire area to be cauterized.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cautery moistens the brain excessively;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then place cotton soaked in butter and goose fat on it.
de l’awe des eulz	from the pain of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When pain first comes to the eyes as I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying to drink, and protect them from all moisture, and make them sweat in a bath several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After instructing him to lie with his head back, apply the cautery in the middle of the head, and make two cauterizations on each temple if the descent of the spirit is to both eyes together, or one if it is to one eye.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and cover the entire cautery with all the veins and arteries that are near the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and be wary of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with as much force as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in cutting, the caution how you shall stop it;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and sometimes one makes a cauterization to separate the two bones at the heel.
dou cors des larmes	from the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and habitual and are on the veins, cut the arteries that appear on the head outside;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and when you see that it is from cold phlegmatic excesses, then I make the cauterization that I said at the beginning of the chapter descending to the eyes:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I cauterize in the middle of the head, and two cauterizations on each temple, and two cauterizations at the heel separating the two bones;
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if there is need for more, then cauterize carefully above the eyebrow with the small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	from the body of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three small drinks.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	raise his head, and perform the cauterization in the middle of the olive-shaped cautery;
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and perform two cauterizations of the cautery called "clavilis" above the two eyebrows, a little below the hair;
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and be careful of the artery so that you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the white of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you wish, perform two cauterizations above the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And do not let go of the hand until one third of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that points toward the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Sometimes the hair of the eyes grows inward and pricks the eye, and one makes cauterizations according to two methods:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	that is to say, with fire, or with burning medication.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they have grown and are even, then place the patient in your care;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	After marking on the paper around the eyes a shape that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then place cotton moistened in egg white and parsley juice on the eye, then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing around the shape that you marked little by little many times, so that the skin is burned in that place;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the signs of the work being successful are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs raised at the edge of the eye;
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	then lift your hand, and leave it like this for III days, then place moistened wool in butter until the inflammation subsides;
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if the hairs come back after that, and the skin is softened, then restart the cautery at the same place, as you did before;
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and if the hairs have fallen out, then cauterize until the skin rises to its natural level and is even, so that the hairs no longer irritate the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The hot cauterization treatment is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even, then make a shape from parchment like a myrtle leaf;
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	then take one part each of French soap and live charcoal, and mix them well together;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and do it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it over the area as you would a myrtle leaf, and place it on the eye paper;
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the illness affects only one eye, then treat that one, and do the same for both if necessary;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and place cotton moistened in egg white over the eye;
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and have the patient's head on your right side and place his arm over the medication, and press the vessel and cloth every time the patient feels a burning sensation from the medication, for he will feel it as if from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine at its proper time.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the burning sensation has passed, lift the area of skin, and examine whether you see the paper raised as if it had been lifted by heat from fire or by cutting;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And if it is thus, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, then reapply the medicine to the place where it was applied until your work is even, and your eyes are properly set;
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply moistened cotton in butter until the burnt area is covered, after which treat the affected area with ointments called "dyafenis" and others until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you to be very careful in your work so that none of the medicine falls into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs irritate the eye, then reapply the medicine to that area which is softened by the paper properly, as you did before;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it until it is healed;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And note that the eyes of people vary in size and smallness, and according to this, adjust your treatments;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and do not refuse the right path to him who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	for the treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to perform a cautery on it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and have the minister hold his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor should he shift his head;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	then place moistened cotton in vinegar or parsley juice on the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	After heating the cautery which is similar:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and place it on the head as if in the shape of a feather quill, so that the cautery is held properly;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you wish, it should be positioned from one side of the head to the other, and if you prefer, it should resemble a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but nonetheless, this positioning is better for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing the open fistula and drawing out the pus, dry it;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it is closed, work on it and extract the fluid;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	After place the hot cautery, and hold your hand on the cautery above the part of the nose near the eye, so that your hand does not act foolishly;
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and place the cautery on the fat near the eye, and it corrupts it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you proceed to the beginning of the cautery until the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, then begin the cautery again once more, and another time if you need it, and leave it for three days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	after place cotton moistened with butter on it, and apply the cure of a drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then apply a corroding medicine until the bone is exposed;
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and proceed as the king would in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cautery for fistulas that some of the ancients described.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Attend to the fistula, and clean the area;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	then place in the fissure a subtle preparation of which this is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and use an amount equal to one grain of pepper;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand on the preparation firmly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the melted pitch does not run into their eye;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to place on the patient's eye a cotton ball moistened with egg white or honey:
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	the pitch seals the area of the fistula, and it heals wonderfully.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to administer a puncture with a knife, and bring the fistula back into the body of the knife according to what is appropriate in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often there are cracks in the lips which are called "hairs," especially on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And place it quickly in those cavities until it reaches the top;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treating the area with plaster until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess comes to the root of the gum or in the uvula, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it becomes putrid and softens and ages and becomes a fistula;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not improve:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then you must use the cautery according to the size of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the opening or passage of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches its depth, and at the rear end;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this once or twice after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until it is healed;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is treated thus, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the site and remove the corrupted bone, as you will find described in his chapter.
dou movement des dens	of the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums become softened by moisture and the teeth loosen, and you treat it with medicine but that does not help, then place the head of the patient on your right.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	after heating the cautery in such a manner that you place a chain on the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and put quickly into the cautery hot [item], and hold your hand long enough that the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	then lift your hand and repeat the cautery as you wish;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	after have the patient rinse their mouth with salt water, and let them do this for one hour and spit outside.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner, the tooth that was moving becomes fixed, and the softened gum is restrained, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When tooth pain comes from cold, whether there is actual cold or not, and the remedies of medicine are ineffective, then there is need for cautery in two manners:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and cautery with butter and cautery with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Cautery with butter is such that you take sheep's fat, and melt it in an iron or brass spoon;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	Take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent (possibly meaning needle), and soften it in boiled butter, then place it quickly on the painful tooth and keep it there until it is cooled.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	And thus do frequently until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you wish, soften wool and cotton in cold butter, then place it on the aching tooth, and apply hot iron as long as the heat reaches the top of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The fire cauterizes are such that you take an iron or bronze cane, and it should be thick enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth;
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cauterizing tool, as described next, place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cauterizing tool is cooled;
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, for the pain will be removed on that very day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter at the time of this cautery, and then breathe freely;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And apply the cautery to whichever part you wish, according to your ability;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When scrofulas are of phlegm and cold moisture, and do not respond to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery as described below in its form, and make two openings for the smoke to escape on the opposite side of the cautery;
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and apply the hot cautery once or twice as needed until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it like this for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and apply moist wool wrapped in butter until the burning sensation is gone;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treating the area with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cautery:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When the humors overpower the channels of the body, especially when it comes from a cold temperament, then the patient must first be treated with solvent medicines.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After you apply the cautery at the root of the throat, be careful not to reach the throat itself, and do not burn the heart but a little bit.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After you apply the other cautery at the junction of the neck to the top of the spine, and let the cautery called "clavile" be as we have described its form before;
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the cough
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all the diseases of flesh are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the illness is old, then you should apply two cauteries on the forearm in their places;
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	And another cautery between two mammary glands;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	And let the cauterization, which is called "clavile," be according to the form that was previously described.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you wish, perform cauterization by puncturing the entire area of the cautery called "poins," whose form is described above for the disease of the ears;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And let the punctures be up to thirty, or as needed around the area.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the area as previously described, let the cauterizations be three rows according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for those the cauterizations are lighter, because you make three at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	After have the patient lie on their back and side;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	then lift the ear that is inside the tragus with your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the cautery which has two sides of equal width:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the area until it penetrates to the bone, and the shape of the cautery will form four cauterizations;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for that reason the cautery is made with a cautery that has three sides, so the figures of cauterizations are six cauterizations;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and the nerve is as fine as a thread, and this is the shape of the cautery that has three sides:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes it is applied to this one nerve, which results in eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After place the porous cautery with salt-pounded powder;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After having the patient rest, do not move the affected limb for a long time until it is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then make a cauterization on the thick part of the cauterized area, or many cauterizations by pressing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach, making it out of its proper balance, and the catarrh is multiplied within him, and common methods of cure are ineffective, then the patient should be laid on his back, extending his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	From there, apply three cauterizations. First, take one spoonful of pitch and heat it completely for the middle cautery on the clavicle, and two cauterizations on either side until the figure of the cauterizations forms a triangle, with enough space between them so that they do not touch when they discharge pus;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and let the cauterizations be deep enough to reach both sides of the chest, and let the shape of the cauterizations follow this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you wish to cauterize with a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	And he who fears this cautery, cauterize by pricking and cutting one point on the stomach according to the quantity that you wish of it;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize with the entire cautery which is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the cure that we had before, until he is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver experiences pain from cold and moisture and excessive gas, to such an extent that it is forced out of its natural temperament by excesses;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is treated as we have described in the divisions, and it does not benefit them, then the patient must be bled from their temple;
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and mark three cauterizations according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, away from the hypochondria, where the ribs of a person are;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and there should be a space between each cauterization equal to the thickness of a finger;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cauterization be along the length of the body, and do not press too hard with your hand throughout the entire cauterization;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and burn only halfway up the heart, and have the patient stand straight on their feet;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot stand, let him lie down, and stretch out his legs, and raise his arms;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if that is your intention, cauterize these cauterizations on the scapula, but only if you are subtle and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn the entire heart, for you would dry out the whole body;
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and let it not reach the eye, for the skin is very delicate there, and you should be careful to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain, but not too strongly;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	and if it is in the membrane, the pain is intense.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment requires the use of leeches, the patient should be placed on their head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then make an incision at the site of the abscess, and then heat the cautery which resembles a reed, as described in this form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize until the flesh is burned, and it reaches sepsis, until all the tissue is completely charred;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment according to the treatment of ulcers until it is healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and it is not appropriate for anyone except those who have studied medicine extensively to use this cauterization, and whose hands have treated these diseases at times.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he may boldly proceed with the work, although it seems to me that it is better to wait.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cautery for pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one should make cautery for pleurisy from the roots of artemisia, and in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	take a root of artemisia as long as you can find, and it should be dry, and as thick and as long as your thumb;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	And the poultice in oil, and apply it to the fire, and cauterize I cauterize between the shoulder blade and neck, and II small cauters a little descending in the part which is below the beard;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	And II cauterizes between the fifth and sixth rib, inclining back a little;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	And I cauterize in the middle of the back, and one above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two at the sides of the back outer to the cauterization which is between the two shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	And do not press your hand, but rather hold firmly as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And some ancient ones said that some men use a fire cauter similar to a razor, and heat it and place it between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess;
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And the pain subsides, as we have said concerning the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work, there is fear of the patient dying now, or a fistula may come which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not improve, then they recommended three methods of cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	In one manner, you should make three cauterizations, or four, in a line along the length of the thigh, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we mentioned earlier;
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand on the entire cauterization area, and have the patient lie on their back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another method of cauterization is to heat the double-sided cautery as we have shown in the case of shoulder dislocation;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and lift the leg that is on the affected side, where the wound of the patient comes from the left, and let the elevations you use to lift the leg be according to the length of the limb, and the cauterizations be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After inserting the two inflamed nerves until the pain is felt on the other side, then draw out the cautery, and thus there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you wish, cauterize the entire cautery with three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has expelled pus for a long time, and this is worth more than the others of the previously mentioned treatments.
de ydropisie	of hydropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not effective for a person with hydropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you must make four cauteries around the buttocks, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one near the armpit, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the hip.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cauteries be close to the place of the pain.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After leaving the cautery open to expel pus for a long time, do not leave the treatment of the patient after the cautery;
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and healing should be expedited, and both intentions will be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The form of the cautery for the abdomen should be the clamp that we have shown before;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and the one for the back should be olive-shaped, as it is placed above here;
de l’enfleure des piez	of foot swelling
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in one who is suffering from dropsy and are filled with yellow fluid, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and lift your hand with the cautery as you turn.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, lest you hit the heart, and let the cauterization be in this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After make two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the kneecap;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let the cauterizations be long, one above the knee in front and the other below the knee, in the middle of the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauterizations uncovered for a long time without cleaning, so the pus can drain;
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after performing the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of massage
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When a resolution of the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, such that the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by usual methods;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	And you see the patient suffering greatly and of great strength, so make a large cautery on the stomach as has been described above in the section about the cautery of the stomach, to the circular cautery;
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	And four small cauteries around the mouth, and one small cross-shaped cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each nodule, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	on the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and they are old and consist of cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we said in the divisions, and it does not help, then make cauteries:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	Three on the spine of the back, those that are farthest out from the hip bone and bone in a triangular pattern, and two below the mouth, one should be made;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	And if you think his stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees swelling on the face, then place a large cautery over the stomach as was previously mentioned, and another over the liver, and yet another over the spleen for the entire cautery process.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	And leave the cautery in place for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the area until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the flesh condition which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you apply althaea, heat the cautery that appears like a razor, and then place it fully ignited on the applied althaea.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	And keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the beginning of the vein, where the blood is cut off;
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this once or twice, and if there is much althaea, cauterize each area as we have said;
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the treatment of beneficial ointments until they are healed;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the affected area, it will be more effective.
de plaie mal curee	of an improperly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure incision or opening, which we will discuss in its place, if such an illness comes that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When fistula comes to someone and is inflamed, discharging pus and corrupt moisture, then you should immediately apply a fine tent, and be sure to know the depth of the tent at all times.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	Heat the cautery which resembles a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the extent that the tent has entered, and repeat the cauterization until the diseased and corrupted flesh is burned, once or twice or three times, as needed.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder and to the intestines, be careful around these areas, and do not perform such procedures except in fleshy parts, and remember that it is not safe there.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After treating the wound until it is healed, and if the pus has been drained, and the matter has been removed for a long time, then you can know that the wound is completely healed;
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the matter has not been removed, know that the wound is still present, and the bone may become corrupted;
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and thus as one of those we will mention in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain from cold comes to the thighs, and due to large flatus, and if it does not respond to female treatment, then you must perform a cautery on both sides of the thighs with the cross-shaped cautery that we mentioned earlier;
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and if we perform the cautery in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will provide more assistance.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is weak and feeble from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the outer part above the bladder where the hairs of the pubic region begin, one on each side, and let each cautery be as long as the width of a finger;
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and make one cautery outside the back, or two if you need them;
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and let the cauterizations be shaped as described above.
de la marris	of the swelling
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow conception for that reason, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, there is great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	Then it is necessary that three cauterizations be performed around the mouth, as we have said for the cauterization of the bladder, and two cauterizations on either side of the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let the cauterizations be made with a clamp, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the thigh
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the viscous fluids descend to the hip joint, and because of this it moves from its place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and if the place of origin is found nearby, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the hip joint with a cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the area around the joint as it turns, so that the joint lies within the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	And let the cauterizations be such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if these cauterizations are not present, make three large olive oil cauterizations, and let the cauterizations be as deep as all other burns;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the thigh
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes in the thigh joint, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have mentioned in the division, but the treatment does not help, and the illness is old:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	then it is necessary that you purge the patient of thick humors with foul-smelling pills or other similar good pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After performing cauterization;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the method of cauterization is according to two methods:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cauterization is according to many methods, of which one is such:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize on the buttock of the thigh three triangular cauterizations according to this form, and make them deep and large, and have between each cautere a space the thickness of one finger, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped;
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Sometimes a cauterization is made in the middle on top of the thigh head, for which there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you wish, cauterize with the circular cautery that we mentioned earlier in the hip dislocation;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but do it in such a way that the circle covers the entire hip, and all the nerves be cauterized.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done for sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach as far as the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it reaches the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations where the patient says the pain is, and one cauterization above the ankle four digits to the left side;
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let the cauterizations be shallow, and burn only the thickness of the nerve;
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two digits of the foot or nearby, cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four with the cautery called "points.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if necessary, do more of it;
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, do a cautery with the cutellaire or circular cautery, and take great care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave it so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who applied a cauterization on the ankle of the foot, and they left it burning so much that the entire leg became swollen, and the foot as well, and it was pierced and the whole foot corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a belly treatment from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts at once, apply cauterization to both, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise ones said about the cautery of the thigh, of which here is the manner, make it such that it is at the head as thick as a date seed, or a little less, and let it be between the joints, and from one joint to the other let there be a space of a barleycorn in length;
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and let the crosspieces be on both sides, and let them also be like bolts, and there should be one iron handle well made;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And heat it until it is completely red and sparks fly, and then place it upon the side of the diseased thigh, and turn it towards the healthy side;
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and let the patient undergo one cautery session and leave it for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treating it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasis says that we use this cautery little due to fear of his regard, and if we see few who use it;
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and still this is one of the good cauteries, which can be tolerated by those who suffer from it.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The cautery of burning medicine is such that you make the instrument with interstices in which descends the margin of the door, and it should be of brass or iron along one side, and at its height have two notches, and between each have the thickness of a finger.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and let them be open at both ends and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After place the box of the thigh on the patient lying on their healthy side, and then place your hand much upon the box of the thigh;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After pour it between the two circles of hot water that has been heated over the fire for one hour, and let the patient experience the warmth and burning sensation.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For it causes a bite as from fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the burning sensation has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip in warm water, and leave it this way for three days, and apply butter until the blackness from the scald is removed;
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let him rest for three days so that pus may be discharged;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the final aid after the treatment of poultices until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, make the instrument that fits according to what you have done for the thigh similarly;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the method for making it hot, and I have written it in the treatise on the preparation of medicines.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkaline substances and quicklime, an equal amount of each, and grind them together, then put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	where there is a small opening that allows the tip of a razor to enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and place another pot over that one, which is well leaded, and put alkaline substances and charcoal on it, with a layer of powder above, until there are two layers of powder above the prepared powders;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and leave it like this until water and pieces come out of the leaded pot, then take all that liquid and pour it over charcoal and alkaline substances as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then it will be very severe and is treated with various medical practices and cauterizations of other limbs.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it performs work like fire, and there are other medicines with which one can cauterize the thigh well as in the case of decoctions made from honey and anacardium and salt mixed together with soap.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galien tells us of a cure where a man was treated for pain in the hip and sciatic nerve, and he praises it highly, and says that no other treatment was done, and he was healed in one session when this cure was performed, and he bathed as he teaches hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And he says in this manner that you should take green fresh litharge and dry it, and grind it much with a little grease, and apply it to the thigh, leg, or shin where the pain lies, and bind it.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and leave it on for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then have him enter the bath until his body is slightly refreshed, and then put him to bed, and the pain will completely go away and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one must use such medicinal cauterization unless it is after the evacuation of pus.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat hair, it helps greatly;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and the cauterization should be performed in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take wool and grease it with old oil, and place it on the hollow that is between the big toe of the foot and the one called fuscule.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking dry goat hair, hold it over fire until it turns to charcoal, and place it on the wool, leaving it there until it is extinguished;
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and do it again in the same way, and continue doing so until you believe by sense that it reaches up to the thigh, and the pain is ceased;
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and this method of cauterization is called "goat hair cauterization".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or impact or from excessive bloodletting, or from substances spread out cold, none of these cases is suitable for cauterization except for that which comes from an influx of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is necessary after the patient has been voided of stinking pills or other similar substances, that three lines be marked on the back where the pain resides, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure;
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and let the cauterizations be done according to the cautery which is called "points";
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you wish, make three or four cauterizations at the middle clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	This illness often comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have difficulty raising their arms and are afraid;
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	And you find in the last spine of the back and in its appearance which comes above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you wish to treat it, cauterize it with the ball cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery affects each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with the pointed cautery in two or three lines, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treating the area until it is healed as we have said, and be careful not to apply a cautery to a swelling that is in a nerve cramp.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When joint pain is caused by moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which physicians call "podagra" properly, and when it is due to a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is treated with cautery in such a manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make the moles of cauterization around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need to cauterize the sole of the foot, then make the cauterization as one calls it "point" across the entire area.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, which happens many times, make cauterizations on each knee III cauterizations or IIII of each part, making all the cauterizations olive-shaped;
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need more, do more, but hold back your hand except until the scar on the heart is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, make poultices around the wrist for two lines;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if any pain remains in the two hands, make poultices on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pains come up to the elbows or up to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient with potent medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give it proper treatment and purge phlegm, then with God’s help he will be well.
de la routure dou syfac	of the fracture of the cheekbone
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When rupture comes in groins, and the balls descend to the thighs and this is newly happened, then it must be that when you wish to treat him, he must eat nothing that day;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and that he uses things that loosen the belly so that the feces come out of his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after you make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his breath until the eye is repositioned, and reset them with your two fingers, and cut from behind the rupture over the bone of the thumb, and make one sign that resembles half a circle above the body;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then heat the cautery which has this shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until they are white and shed scales.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the eyes to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the minister hold his hand so that they do not move back;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	And work well on the patient’s thighs, and place under him one cushion and one towel on the thighs, and another under the buttocks to hold the hands.
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	Then place the cautery on the mark with your entire hand, and hold it straight until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again until you reach the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	And be careful that the flesh does not come out when you perform the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	that you do not burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and that the patient does not die because of it, or suffer another harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cauterizations for children be delicate according to their measure, and for adults also large according to their measure;
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days, treat the area of the butter cauterization until the burn is gone;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	after that, treat with other ointments until he is healed, and have the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well sealed;
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary that his nursing be prolonged so that the eyes do not protrude when he tries to go into chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, provide him with a well-made bandage, and have him wear it for another forty days;
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and let him have good rest, that he work little and guard against excessive overeating and drinking, and too much loud talking;
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he follows this teaching, he is completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say hereafter the treatment for cutting in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When ruptures occur in other parts of the body and are known, and you wish that they do not grow larger, apply the cautery according to their size, and let a third part be burned.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the treatment as we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized at three points according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but mark the site first and draw a line across the width above the rupture, and another below, and proceed step by step throughout the entire cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being injured, and that pain lasts long, and medical treatment is of no use, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "points," and the cauterization should follow the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and strength and location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if he is well from the first cauterization, it is good;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If that happens, restart the other cautery on top of it, because such is custom that they must change to the nearest limb, so you must perform the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of mixing/misuse/malpractice
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The ailments are sometimes cured by cautery with great assistance, and especially those diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	When you see that it needs to be cauterized, take care if the patient is in the beginning stages, and if it is treated as we have described in the division, and neither desists nor delays, and you fear that corruption will spread throughout the patient, then perform V cauteries on the head:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	Place one nine inches from the top of the head, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair;
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and two above the two temples, and one behind on the occipital region;
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and leave your hand there until the cauterization reaches the bone, and until the bark comes out so that the vapors of thick humors can escape;
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and cauterize on the mouse according to what is in front of it.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the disorder is scattered everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and if it is clearly manifested, then you must cauterize with the cauterizations that we have mentioned at the head, and one cauterization in the neck, and two cauterizations on the nape of the neck, and six cauterizations along the spine, and one large one on the buttocks and another nearby, and two on the shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and two on the ribs, and two on the heels, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and beware of the nerves that are on top of the heel bone so you do not burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and sometimes a cautery is performed on the bone of the little finger, and another on the bone of the breastbone, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that the more cauteries you perform, the more help you give, and it benefits the patient;
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, because the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterizations be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you find in the ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, apply flour of wheat with honey to the area and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then you should perform cauterizations on the limb according to its size;
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	And let the cauterization penetrate a little into the thickness of the heart;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And sometimes cauterization is done to the hand and foot and back, at the nerve that controls the limb, and thus the swelling is removed;
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and in any case, do not involve anyone who is not knowledgeable about the limbs and the nerves that move the body.
de albaras	of alum
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the illness called "albaras" is severe, and medicinal remedies are ineffective, then cauterize it with a cautery slightly deep, according to the thickness of the heart, until the pallor is removed, and its color changes.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then treat with flour of barley and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and sparrow blood and lark blood, of each an equal part;
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and mix it all together, and wrap it in a cloth, and apply it to the place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of a sore using cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a sore appears at the beginning and you wish to stop its progress, cauterize it with a cautery that forms a circle around the entire perimeter of the sore.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And always the wise said that one should perform cauterization in the middle of the ulcer;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and always I do not think this is good, for I fear that it may ulcerate and corrupt, and I have seen it happen some times;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and a more proper thing is to cauterize around it, with the cautery called "circulus," as we have said regarding many types of cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot be cured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it delays death either because of the excess it produces or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, too old) and there is little blood, or because of the season;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see it hastening death:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then cauterize it with many small cauteries by pricking;
aprés le laisse ensi.	after leaving it like this.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to kill.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you wish to pierce it completely with the cautery, then heat the cautery as follows:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and make the cautery such that the patient feels it from outside in such a way that the course of the putrefaction is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cautery with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another type of disease called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a member consumption, for it consumes the limbs just as fire consumes dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in a place that can withstand cauterization with fire together, then heat the cauteries very small and large, according to what is appropriate for the location where the disease is;
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	After the cautery on all sides until you reach all the corruption, and there remains nothing of it, so that everything that is corrupted be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and place the affected areas that have been cauterized to soak in oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment with ointments that generate flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if after three days you see no healthy tissue grow, that is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if it does not, then restart the cautery on what remains unhealed from the corrupted area.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this treatment has sometimes been cured with medication instead of the fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but the fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already described the treatment with the medicinal agent in the section:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	pains that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times a disease arises in the feet from outside which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a swollen thing that hinders the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterizations for this disease are according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cauterization, and hot water cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery is such that you heat it until it is as hot as a feather of an eagle, and it should be made of good iron to the measure that it can penetrate like a nail from all sides, and there should be fine edges;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	after placing it completely on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and leave it like this for three days until it begins to discharge pus;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	then apply a poultice of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with an ointment that promotes flesh growth until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are turned outward from the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, then you must apply a hot water cautery to them;
et est en teil maniere:	and it is done in the following manner:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	take a chain of iron or steel, or a feather of vaultul, and place it over the nail and althea leaves, which are used to remove warts;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	and place the chain so that it surrounds completely, then pour some hot water on it, and hold firmly with your hand, pressing your hand around so that the edge of the chain comes to the base of the nail, and thus allow the hot water to penetrate deeply to the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and allow the patient to suffer a little from the bite of the hot water for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then leave it like that, and it will completely uproot itself along with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Do one after another until you have treated all those that are on the body, then treat them with ointments that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	the treatment for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When someone shivers from cold sweat due to nerves, or from a fever of four days, or otherwise, you must perform IV cauterizations on the spine, one cauterization between each vertebra.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one cauterization on the foot, and one above the stomach at the olive cauterization;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	this will stop the shivering and hasten the recovery from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	the treatment for foul pus-filled sores
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	At times, baths or foul pus-filled sores appear on the surface of the body, which come from large corrupted matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	It is necessary at first, when they appear, to make a cauterization on each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a delicate cautery made from the branch of myrtle, whose tip is heated by fire, or from a long root of arisotle (celandine), or a lentil-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow anymore from then on, but the excess that causes them is broken up, and they are healed;
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there are great hemorrhages from the artery that is cut at the wound coming from the side, or from incising an abscess, or from cauterizing a limb, and similar things;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	And it is a very grave thing to extinguish.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And whenever this happens to anyone, hurry to place your finger on the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the blood is stilled beneath your finger, and no more oozes out;
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then place the olive cauterizes in the fire, several small and large ones until they are all red;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	then take one, either large or small according to the wound and where the artery is exposed, and place the cauterize on that vein where you are pressing with your finger, and hold it there until the blood is stilled.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it spurts out when you lift your thumb from the vein, and the cauterizers have gone out, quickly take another of the cauterizers that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not stop doing this one after another until the bleeding is stopped;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and beware that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and note that when the vein becomes detached from the artery, one cannot properly reattach it oneself when the artery is large, unless it is done by one of the four methods we have mentioned:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by tightly binding with thread, or by applying medicines that have the power to reunite blood;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and let it be tied and compressed appropriately.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer a foul smell by tightly wrapping cloths or placing burning things on them, or other similar things, if it does no good even if possible.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to someone and there is no physician or medicine present, then he should place his thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until it is reattached over the wound and over the vein;
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move it, but moisten it with very cold water often until the blood is chilled and thickened and stinks.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and apply what is needed of cauterizations and medications to him.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of treatments for wounds
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter about every disease in which a fire cauterization or hot medication is necessary, and we explained the reasons, causes, instruments, and forms of the cauterizations;
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have placed that chapter from the head to the feet, and in this chapter, I will follow the same order so that what one wishes to find can be discovered more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so as I begin this, it is necessary, dear friend, that you learn that in this chapter there is greater risk and fear of the cauteries than in the first one, and therefore greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	such are those who become so enraged by their illness that they change slightly due to the frenzy caused by their disease, and because of the severity of their suffering;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and one must fear these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And there are those among them who give their senses and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	wait, I am cured";
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the illness is despised.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is not right for you to consent to those who come to you with this manner, but place greater honor in your dignity than in your desire, and do not act foolishly but wisely concerning what you are certain of, and from which you can gain respect and praise.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use prognosis and indications in the treatment of your patients where health may be restored;
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and this will help you achieve a good reputation, and glory, and praise-worthy memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Most dear child, Our Lord grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to breathe in the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into sections, as it is before the chapter on cauterizations, which I have described from head to foot, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	the head full of fluid
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, and when the head of the child is held too tightly;
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and sometimes it comes for reasons that are unknown.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this illness except in children, and in all those whom I have seen it hastened death;
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and for this reason it seems to me that I should leave such treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head swelled each day until he could not sustain it;
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and the moisture increased so much that he died, and this moisture is gathered under the bone above the phlegm, between the heart and the bone;
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the procedure is such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should cut a wide incision in the head;
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and it should be as long as two fingers, until the moisture flows;
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and see here the form of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the swelling is larger, and the abscesses are bigger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is out of the bone, and you see the seams of the head open on each part, and the fluid jumps outward when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond to you:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	it is necessary for you to cut three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture outside.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After cleaning the incisions with cloths and powders, and putting wine and oil on them, leave it like this until the fifth day;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	then loosen it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and clean the head evenly, and give the patient dried meat to eat with little moisture until the limb is healed and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another way of incising is to look at where the abscess is clearly swollen, and the gathering of the fluid;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for sometimes it is in front;
aucune fois derrier;	sometimes behind;
aucune fois en destre;	sometimes on the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Cut then there where the abscess is clearly visible, and the accumulation of fluid, and make the incision according to your ability;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and be careful not to cut the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and if blood flows, so that the patient dies from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone falls ill with a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or worse, and the illness is old, and medical treatment does no good, then the final remedy is cauterization using that which will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is necessary, when you are to cut the veins, that the patient lie with his head back;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	after which you should rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries become visible, then have the patient pull his neck against the entire cloth;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	then look where the vein lies, and their locations are behind the ears, and they are somewhat hidden;
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	then mark the spots clearly, then cut both veins with a sharp scalpel from two sides, until the vein reaches the bone, and this should be done along the side of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you wish, place the spatula beneath the artery and the cloth above, cutting as II should across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood continuously spurts outward forcefully.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not become visible to touch, you should measure a space of three fingers, then mark it clearly and cut down to the bone;
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and the amount of blood that should be let out is six unciae, and perhaps a bit more or less, according to what the patient can tolerate, and the fullness of the artery;
puis regarde la plaie:	then examine the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if it remains on the bone joint, cut it so that abscesses do not occur, then clean and bandage the wound, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	Of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes with a sharp catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and an ancient frenzied sweat and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medical care but nothing helps, then we extract the arteries of the temples and apply cautery as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the method of extracting them is that the patient should lie behind the hair on their temples, and listen to the artery that appears in the temple, for it beats clearly, and is slightly visible except in some people who are too cold;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is responded to, the patient should press their neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and wash the area with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible;
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the spatula which has this shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then trace it up to the joints, and carefully separate it from the tissues on each side;
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if the artery is delicate, use the tip of the hook to handle it, then cut it from that part according to the size of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, the blood will not flow completely.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And draw blood from six places, up to three;
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk, so that no corruption comes before the healing of the wound, and to prevent bleeding.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then cut away the excess that is between the two ties at that same moment, and then, if you wish, apply the fire cauterization with a cautery knife down to the bone until the ends are even.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And this is the principal work, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For cauterization is aid to finish off moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	for it is of greater help with moist conditions.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	For it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fill the place with old cotton and put on well-made bandages;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when they are untied, one should be careful with dry medicines that promote flesh growth and bandages until it is healed;
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and if the artery is cut as much as you work on it, hurry to cauterize where you fill the place with vitriol and pull it with your hand so that the blood stops;
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you do not have it available, place your thumb on the spot as long as the blood stops, and rinse the area with cold water until the bleeding ceases, and bind it as is appropriate;
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And for those who are weaker and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery from two sides, but let the cuts be well spaced to preserve their heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too cold, it holds less of its heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	There should be a space of about one finger's width between the two knives, and then when you have marked the two places, place the hot iron on until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places;
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and let them be spaced between the two joints because they are not to be joined together by this entire cautery;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears from the eyes come down from the veins that are above the forehead due to heat, and it does not benefit from any medicinal treatment you apply, and you see the patient's face turn red, and feel the forehead with a shaking motion as if trembling;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	And when the eyes are swollen and moist so that the hairs of the eyelids fall out, and the eyelids are heated and scorched by the heat of tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And the ancients called it "contusion treatment," and it is that you make the patient lie down who has this illness, then shave the hair from their forehead, and make three incisions on the forehead evenly according to its length;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and one of the incisions should be made in the middle two fingers' width above the eyebrows and extend down to the nose, and the other two should be made on either side near the temples, and be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on both sides near the temples;
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and move your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and let each wound be the quantity of three digits across the joint;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and prepare a piece of sponge and much cloth to wipe the blood, then place the spatula sharp from both sides as shown in this form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the incision which is near the temple to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and peel all the flesh which is between the two cuts to the surface that is on the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Insert into the first groove the instrument called "cultellaire," which is very well suited for cutting on one side, and smooth without cutting on the other side, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge towards the flesh on the chest, and the smooth side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle groove.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous until it reaches the one that opens into the flesh, and then do the same in the middle incision until the other end.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	Then draw out the blood evenly, and press the area to expel the remaining blood;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	Then place a piece of old cotton in each wound, and cover with cloths soaked in wine, oil, and pitch, and guard against the formation of pus-filled abscesses;
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And on the third day loosen the bandage, and apply a large poultice of water parsley, then treat with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds, until he is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the rheum of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When someone frequently suffers from acute catarrh, and you see the eyes swollen and small, with weakened vision, and the eyelids reddened;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hair falls out, and on the head it causes pain like fever, and the patient sneezes;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	then you can understand from these symptoms that those matters and that catarrh do not come from just one vein, and if the treatment affects what is there, this is it.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient to lie with their back against the wall, then make a large incision across the forehead, and another on the side of the head.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And start from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move during eating;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then separate between the two lips of the incision and place old cotton there, and bandage with linen;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	Then apply cloths soaked in wine and oil above it, and guard against hot abscesses;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	When it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with substances that promote growth of flesh.
En teil maniere:	In such a manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of wheat flour, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and apply it to the wounds to promote flesh growth throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the congestion of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that falls into the ears is one of the four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	For seeds, for beasts, for stones from mines, or similar things such as iron;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	for seed, such as beans, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	for things that flow out, such as water and saliva and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When a stone or other substance that does not belong in the ear falls into it and does not grow within the ear, place the ear towards the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, then drip some drops of violet oil or cumin oil, then proceed with its extraction;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and make them sneeze with something spicy, and plug their nostrils when the sneezing comes, and place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and cover the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Much fire comes from this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come with fire, then use subtle pinching to extract it, as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it comes out with the forceps, that is good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if not, then extract it with a fine double-pointed instrument;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if it does not come out with that, then make a linen cord and insert the end of the cord through the hole in the ear firmly, and plug what is around the cord with soft wax so that no air can enter with the cord;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	then pull it out forcefully, as it often comes out as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come forth in such a manner, take glue as birds use, and place some instrument that is sharp for this purpose, and put a little cotton around;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull forth.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not come forth from all the things we have mentioned, then hurry to cut the ear as for an abscess so that blood may flow and spasms stop;
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the manner of the cut is that you first bleed the patient from the cephalic vein, and draw out blood according to the measure of their strength, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear in the fat where it hangs;
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and let the incision be like a crescent moon, so that you come to the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it quickly with your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and continue the treatment until he is well.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is a grain that has entered and causes swelling, then proceed with its removal;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot come out, then proceed with the application of a thin poultice according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer an incision of that tumor.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this when you think the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have done it many times;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract it with fine forceps and with suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case of water that falls into the ear, the patient should use sneezing to dislodge it initially, and plug the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lie down on the side where the water is in the ear.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	if it falls out because of that, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	if not, take many stones according to the length of your thumb and light, and heat them a little in the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and place them in one or a hole of his ear, and have him step on one from the other side, and strike another stone against the stone that is in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not stop striking stone against stone until the water flows out completely, and thus it will flow out entirely;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you wish, take some reeds, and insert one end into the ear, and burn the other end with fire until the softer part of the reed is burned;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then do the same with other reeds until the water flows out completely, as we have said about the stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of the beast, if it is a small body, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division;
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is large and can be felt, then treat the extraction with tweezers;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and it is the lightest thing to remove that can be in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and if the treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	if you see any worms, then remove them with fine tweezers, and if none are seen, then take the chain of this form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And insert the most delicate tip into the ear according to the extent of the patient's pain, then proceed gently along the entire canal;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this repeatedly until all the wax comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not come out, plug the canal with cotton as I said for stones;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have tested for killing worms, and you will find them in the section on distillations;
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this equipment, of which here is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And let it be of silver or brass narrow with small holes, and above cover to drip through;
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and to press inside the distillation use an instrument of brass well made for this, and if you wish take a scraper and wrap around the tip appropriately with cotton;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you wish into the tube, and the tube should be in the ear;
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then press into the scraper on all the cotton, and squeeze your hand gently until the oil is dripping into the ear canal;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and the patient should feel it inside, and let the dripping be slightly warmed over fire so that it drips into the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the congestion of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	There are some children born who have no hole in their ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and this same thing happens to adults due to a blocked wound or flesh inside the ear, and these blockages sometimes occur deeply in the ear, so that one cannot see them;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and sometimes the hole is clearly visible and can be seen well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	That which occurs deep inside and cannot be seen is difficult to treat in many cases, and for the one that can be seen, you should place the ear of the patient in the sun;
et regarde dedens:	and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the scab clearly, then perform this entire spatulation as described in its form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And let it be sharp and cutting in front and behind all flat, so as not to catch the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the scab is of flesh from the ear's body, then hold it with fine forceps and gently scrape it away until all the flesh is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the obstruction is in the ear, take a fine, light scraper and heat it slightly over fire, then place it in the flesh of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the scab where the patient feels pain in the ear, gently pierce it, and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	then place a dressing in the ear according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this on some day when the wound is sealed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriol ground;
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see the ear swollen, then it is necessary to draw out the tent and move another tent moistened in cerate made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge and cloths in cold water, and place them on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are in the treatment of distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This althæa that comes in paper from the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to stretch them with tweezers and forceps, and cut a piece from its root with a spatula;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then place over the area vitriol ground.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if it does not respond to being peeled off, then cauterize with a fine lentil-shaped cautery, and after the incision, it will heal.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and often they repair, when something remains of their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the hailstones
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times in the eyes appear things that resemble hail in form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hail," and it is an assembly of thick moisture above and below the eye.
li ovraiges est telz:	The work is such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	be wary if the kneecap moves from side to side, and it is easy to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	make an incision then gently scrape each part, then take it with the forceps, and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	if you cannot cut it without piercing slightly the membrane, do not worry about harming the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	and if the wound is large, sew it together with stitches, and treat it until it heals;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if the wound is small, do not apply pressure, for the ointment will heal it quickly and generate flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the earwax is inside the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper over, and extract the wax with forceps, and cut and press from both sides;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is distant due to the incision, it does not matter;
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the wax is removed, wash the ear with salt water, and treat the area with a poultice of flesh until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a grease that forms on the membranes inside the eyes, and this happens more to children than adults, and it causes great pain in their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the sun's light because tears rush to their eyes;
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	And for this reason they lie down on their beds immediately, and sleep, and their eyelids are moist with the secretion and appearance covered by the exudate that appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press that place with your thumb and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the method of the work is that the patient places their head on your hand;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take a piece of linen, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exudate for each part, then place it on them;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your two hands from both sides so that the exudate is gathered within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a narrow incision, and let it not be larger than the wound made when opening a vein;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and they cut the skin deeply until you reach the external part;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in many positions, the external part comes from the fissure, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Extract it then in one piece of torn cloth between your two hands, and move your hand right and left until it is spread out;
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and be careful not to insert anything into the fissure, do not touch the entire spatumile until the eye, and do not injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the external part does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, then slightly enlarge the fissure gently until it appears;
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloths in wine and water, and place them on the site, and extract bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And there are such people who grind salt and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat him until he is well.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the place of an abscess being hot, treat him with plasters that soothe until he is well.
des poilz des papieres	of the hair of the eyelids
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hairs grow in places other than those designated by nature on the eyelids, and they are not removed, they harm the eyes and cause certain ailments such as habitual tears and inflammation of the eyelids and conjunctiva, to the extent that it is the cause of the destruction of the eyes;
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and the treatment follows in four ways:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	either by cautery with fire altogether, or by medication as described in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by cutting and suturing or by cantharides, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary for you to place the head of the patient on your thigh, then turn the palm of the eye toward your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	if it is converted, that is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, then insert a needle along the entire thread above;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and do this near the margin of the palm where the hair grows among these hairs, and draw the thread above across the entire palm, and then turn it to the edge;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then cut in the part below the palm, below the adjacent hairs, across the entire spatium from the large tear duct to the small;
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Then pull out the thread, and under the paper place a small tent of cotton and linen, then draw on the paper a pattern, as the leaf of myrtle, and nonetheless it must be according to the quantity that you wish to raise the paper which is designed for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if there is someone who needs to cut a large quantity of the paper according to how the paper has softened;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	Then cut through the entire spatumile along the two lines that you have marked, and start from the large window down to the small;
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the needle into one of the two corners of the cautery site, then peel it all off;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	Then join the two lips with a seam using one fine needle and a thread of thin wool, wipe away the blood, and trim any excess thread above the two eyebrows with some sticky substance if you wish to do so;
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if you do not wish to do this, then leave the seam and the threads until three or four days;
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then treat the wound without stitching with drying and binding materials, because the paper rises suddenly at the moment of the wound and its healing, but the stitch is moved (as the ancients say), and these are works without fear;
et si a une autre maniere:	and there is another method:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And it is that you should cauterize the paper with a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, at three inches apart according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut those which rise above the small parts equally according to the shape which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you do not have the ability to hold the tongs, and the objects are not even, then take a needle with a thread, and tie it around the figure;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and tie another thread next to the large artery, and the second thread next to the small one, and join them equally between your two fingers;
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift your hand evenly, and raise all the skin on which you have cauterized, as we have described, then stitch together the two edges of the wound, and treat it until it is healed;
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with plaster and similar soothing ointments;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	And sometimes the hair on the skin is turned back:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	Then you should use what we have said about incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the suturing in both cases is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment for canes follows this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and it is that you turn the skin and make an incision according to what I have said, and then make two canes by art, and two fine straps as long as the skin and as wide as the spatula is;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and cut to II heads of II sides where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then join one to the other carefully on what protrudes from the eye's membrane, and pull apart the two threads of the two parts firmly;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and leave it thus for some days, and the skin which is stretched will die, blacken, and pus, until it falls off on its own.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it delays, cut it with force, then treat it until it is healed;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound is closed, and the membrane raised, the hairs will no longer prick;
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	and this is the form of the two threads that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The work is such that you take a fine needle, and put a thin and fine silk thread through it;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then join the heads and tie them together carefully, and let the length of the thread be one palm;
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then arrange another fine silk thread briefly in the wound, and tie the ends of the thread gently;
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	then have the patient place his head on your shoulder;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and let it be near the sun so that the work is clearly visible, for this is a delicate and precise task; then insert the needle throughout the wound at the root of the adjacent hair, and pierce through the membrane quickly as you draw it over the natural hair;
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then pluck out the hair up to the root, and insert back that hair if there are one or two or three or more;
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then pull out your hand until the hairs come completely out of the root along with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the root is tight and the hairs do not come out with them, then draw the root from behind along the thread you have inserted until the root comes out of the opening above and you can see it with your eye;
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	then draw out the root and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days until the hair grows in its place and flesh grows over;
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hairs are short, match one long hair with natural hair, and lift it up along with those you leave, so that it is raised and then take it.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the pus of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease called "aleacrati" or putridity comes to the eye, there are two ways it can occur:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one naturally, and the other unnaturally.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens by sudden wound, or cutting, or cauterizing, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the method of treatment is that you cut open the seam, and separate the lips of it, and put in linen tents, and keep it raised until it heals;
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and you must not use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the illness returns worse than before;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but use things that soften, such as fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and boil the water of hellebore and flax seeds, and mix the melted cerate with some oil, then wrap a dressing in it, and treat him with this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the goal of your treatment is to ensure that it does not heal according to its former shape;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and these treatments we have mentioned are nothing but methods to prevent this illness from returning to its former shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes into the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is called "axacrati" in truth, and it is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accident comes from a wound and a cut and a cautery and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the method of the work is that you take a needle, in which there is double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left cheekbone to the right, so that the thread comes out in two places on the skin;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	then stretch the flesh above completely over the needle, and cover it with a piece of cloth about an inch wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the paper returns as it should, that is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	if not, then take a scraper and place it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make two cuts inside the paper;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and let the head of the two grooves at the two corners of the incision you have made be in such a way that when they are assembled, the shape should be like the letter called "X" Greek;
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then remove the flesh according to the sharpness of its edges from that which is under the paper, then join the two separated parts together with a thread of wool;
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with what we have said about softening remedies and tents until he is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the illness comes from a wound or suture or cauterization, then you must cut an open incision under the hair of the paper area, and as described above;
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and one must perform the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare remedies with all their power as they should restore the figure to its natural form;
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the patient himself, according to what is required of work and instruments in various circumstances.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the sudden swelling of the skin
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this adhesion occurs in some people such that the membrane above is adhered to the white of the eye, and they cannot move or perform their natural actions, then you should insert the tip of a razor below the membrane, and lift it up;
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and place the tweezers, such that you cut what is adhered to the thin spatula, which must not be too sharp or too cutting, so that the patient cannot bear for the overly sharp spatula to hurt the eye;
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and let your incision, by which you peel off that assembly, be slight, so that the tissue returns according to its natural form;
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and when that entire assembly is healed, sometimes they treat the eye with salt water, and lift it with gentle water, and use poultices;
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then place between the tissue and the eye a tent of linen, and put on the eye wool moistened abundantly with egg;
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And after the third day, use a colic belt and solid foods until he is well.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that the nail grows in two ways:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	it is nervous and similar to hard fat, and another which is not nervous, but is like frozen white moisture, such that when one touches it with iron and thinks to cut it with pliers, it cannot be done;
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and both of these conditions start near the large tear duct and grow little by little until they cover the entire vision, light, and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the method of incising is that the patient should place their head on your lap, then you work on their eyes;
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and lift the paper with your hand, then curl the nail at the edges of thin leather, and place it above;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and put horsehair, or goat hair, or ox hair on it, and strong thread;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the tip of the needle a little and insert it under the nail, and pierce through with the entire needle, and tie the nail with thread and place it above, and shave all around the side of the nail that contains the plumule and the hair to the top, then cut the remaining part at the root of the nail very finely and with small force, leaving the natural flesh of the nail so that by the incision no skin tears accustomedly;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and sometimes the nail adheres solely to the bone, and with a thread, as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then the skin is stripped off all of the spatumile, which is as follows in form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And be careful that the spatumile does not touch the tender flesh and tear it, and that the probe is not pierced;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision, sprinkle a bit of ground sulfur and a preparation made from litharge into the eye, and leave it until the next day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not loose and you cannot insert the needle, and the probe cannot enter, this condition of the nail is often treated with various medicines;
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you wish to cut them, let the patient's eye observe, and take a spatula gently and quickly according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And lift the eyelid gently, and if you see it shrink slightly and the reason presses on it, then drop from your mouth into the eye a solution made of litharge and red chalk finely ground, and plug the eye until the next day;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	then begin the other work according to this same method, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If anything is contrary in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then stop, and treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid harms the eye greatly, then suspend it to the nail, and cut part of it but not all, so that no more tears come forth;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then sprinkle into the eye a red solution made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	In some people's eyes, a red substance sometimes appears, covering the pupil and restraining it over the whites, turning it outward, and it looks like a rose petal.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	And the procedure is that the patient places their head on your lap, then you work on their eyes, and carefully remove all that red substance with appropriate hooks, and support it with strength;
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	Then cut the first layer of tissue, and keep cutting with the scalpel until the end, and be careful not to injure the eye during the procedure;
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	And let the incision be made with a spatula, as we described for cutting nails and removing small pieces, as the form following this chapter demonstrates;
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	And when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, then apply the juice of boiled rue or pour on red colic water and similar corrosive medicines, and place over it cotton soaked in egg white so that it is secure from hot abscess.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	And if anything remains and the blood flows up, and you fear a hot abscess, then leave the medicine and treat the hot abscess with soothing remedies.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do when flesh is applied to the eye in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	However, it is necessary that you lighten the treatment of each weak eye according to the natural way;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and from accidental injury, in work with iron;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member can endure the work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Blood vessels are red and are covered over the eye, and their appearance weakens the sight and weakens the eye all day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	Therefore, first you must check if the eye, in which the ulcer is, is protruding, and there is no other disease except for the ulcer;
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then treat it as follows:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, then suspend those veins along the arm according to your knowledge, and let the veins be fine doubled according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let two incisions be made step by step on the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then when you treat the veins with force gently, and wipe the blood hour after another, until you see the veins move away from the eye;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	And be careful not to strike the eye with the points of the spatulae, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very zealous in your work so that you do not miss any veins;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And when you have done this, then apply green and red collyrium to the eye to dissolve what remains of the cataract.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you do not have the ability to collect everything at that hour, then apply a poultice to the eye with things that alleviate the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is relieved and there is assurance of no hot abscess, then resume according to this manner as described above until he is healthy.
et c’est li forme des forces:	and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The physician calls this type of ulcer "arissati":
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	when you treat it with cautery and hot medicines as I have said before, and it does not heal, then there is pus that you must incise at the abscess, where it should be opened, and drain all the moisture that is inside, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then remove it with all the instruments of which this is the form;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called "aspre chief", and it should be made of iron for the head to be blunt, and it should be pointed like a file as shown in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place it on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that the corruption is resolved;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this several times, then restore the site with drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the flesh is sealed and new flesh grows, and the body of the bone is sealed, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not renew itself and is not inflamed or infected, then you know that it is healed;
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	if not, then there is another cause to bring the fistula to the navel opening according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and it is that you uncover the bone for the second time with an instrument and with wet medicines, and when it is uncovered take one forefinger according to this form, and let the tip of the iron be at three angles, and the shaft should be slender until the end as shown here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	Then place it on the bone near the cheekbone, and move your hand away from the eye one inch, then turn the probe completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it because the wind enters if he holds his hand on his neck;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the place with dry medications as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the area, remove the material from the neck;
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	it is easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the outlet of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eye has become completely open and there is no disturbance or reduction in vision, then you must bind the patient;
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then heal it, then apply cups without striking to suck, then place on the eye a bandage made of acacia and aloes and incense and myrrh, and then extract the eye, and the plaster over strips of linen and cloths;
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	And the method for the cloths is that you take cloths sufficiently soft, and fold each in four, and then place one on top of another according to the quantity that the eyes require.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	Then strain them over a hard bandage form, and reuse the suction cups to suck without injuring.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then remove the suction cups and leave the eye held tight day and night, and if the bandages loosen, it is necessary to hold them tightly again.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then remove the bandage after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, it is good.
se ce non;	if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then restart the poultice and the bandages and the ligature and the cupping until he is well.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the tearing of a swollen vein
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disruption comes to the avascular tissue, it becomes apparent, and force appears from the papers as if it were resin grains, and it is terrifying to see;
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	then if you see it needs to be cut, the procedure is such that you insert a needle into the root of the part below up to where it is above, then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the part by the eyebrow;
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and there you pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its position;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then cut the place of the double thread and tie a part of the uvea around it tightly, then remove the needle and put on the eye wool moistened in abundance with egg;
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and leave it until the child falls with the grape, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed;
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and sometimes the wound is restrained by the grape on each side with a circle of cloth until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eye shows great appearance, then pierce it with a fine spatula that comes in perfectly from the eye, and draw out the white moisture and lower the eye, and enter it immediately;
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then extract until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the socket of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but fluid that is gathered in the eye, resembling water descending, and it is not actually water.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	And the manner of appearance of the work is that you seat the patient upon a prepared and straight chair, then take his head between your hands on both sides, and move it until you see the brow come up to your eyes;
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then let it be fixed in place, and do not allow it to descend and let the light be unobstructed, so that the patient can see things as he usually would;
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend properly, know that it is acute, and if the descent of the brow is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	seat the patient between your hands, then take a fine speculum and cut through the corneal membrane in one spot along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane and the cornea, until the brow rises;
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when it comes out, drip into the eye hot honey mixed with half mead or boiling water and fenugreek, then treat it further until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	for the waters of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have described the appearances of the waters in the division, and what is necessary for piercing;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	and act according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you seat the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light to shield from the sun, and hold the healthy eye tightly.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	then place the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eye is left, or on your right hand if the eye is right;
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eye is right;
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the tip of the instrument next to the cornea by the thickness of a hair on that white part of the eye towards the inner corner, then insert the instrument called "almagda" forcefully, and turn your hand until it penetrates the white part of the eye, and feel as the almagda enters the empty space;
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and it is necessary that the length of the almagda be exactly equal to the space from the pupil to the end of the black part;
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and this is the crown of the eye;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	you will see the bone through that membrane due to the clarity of the corneal tissue, and then place the instrument until it reaches where the fluid is, then gently press from one side to another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water flows now, let the patient see before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After resting for a little while, if the fluid rises again, apply pressure with the instrument, and when it is firmly inserted and the fluid no longer rises, then gently extract it in small rotations.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then add a little powdered ruby to the fluid, and lift the eye from it.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place outside the eye plugs made of wool soaked in rose oil and an abundance of egg white, and tie them with a healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, apply it mixed with egg white in abundance.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some people who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called “alberit”, here is its form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And then pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make a delicate incision, then insert the instrument as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and at the completion of the work, prepare the patient for the doctor's arrival, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place;
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and let him be free of all movements, and give him light food, and do not move his head neither to the right nor left, and bind him according to his condition until the third day;
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then release him in the same dark house and test his vision, and show him some things, and then bind him again until the seventh day;
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	and it is not proper for you to do this during the time of treatment or immediately after the incision, but it is necessary to postpone this, because the fluid rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	If an abscess forms, that you should not open the eye before the seventh day, and direct it as he who treats abscesses;
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	and when it is healed, then open the eye and place a small piece of gold over it for several days, and let it be in a dark room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then leave the house gradually, and return to his usual activities;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and know that no student should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us who was from the Irach, who told us that in his country they use small lancets to draw off fluid, but still I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I read about it in ancient books.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And by chance it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the appearances of the forms of almonds, so that those who do not recognize them see them;
et soient d’arain proprement:	and they should be properly of silver:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the front part of them be of the same subtlety, and the rear in three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh upon the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	Sometimes the newly born creatures appear in various forms, some of which seem to have many legs like scorpions;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and there are some that have a body enlarged in red color, and below it has flesh of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In the case of those creatures that are below and not enlarged, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and work his nostrils, and throw the splint to those parts, and draw out the foreign object;
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	then hold it as you can sustain the sharp subtle spatum from one side until you know that the flesh is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains anything that cannot be cut, then treat it with all the subtle instruments gently, so that nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if it overflows from the abscess, then treat it as is appropriate;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if these are malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize until the blood is congealed and all the flesh is removed, then apply fresh and clean wine or vinegar to the nostrils.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the urine is being passed, and moisture reaches up to the palate, know that he is safe;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if moisture does not reach as it should, know that there is flesh on the bone above, where the instrument cannot cut:
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	then you should insert a thick linen thread there, and tie it tightly by hand, with about an inch between each knot;
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and place the patient's finger with the thread on his tooth as much as possible, and pull it gently until it comes through the tooth into the mouth;
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and often children at school do this, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it;
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	Then hold the end that comes from the neck in one hand, and the other end that comes from the mouth in the other hand, and pull them apart while noting us who are in the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you see that the knots have corrupted the flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before;
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrupts all that remains of the flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then place a bandage of lead on the nose for several days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medications, use them;
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, wherein one distills oils and medicines through it:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And whether it be of silver or copper, it resembles an open lamp, like a funnel, and the conduit is likewise;
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you prefer, make a closed funnel, and the instrument should be full for purging the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and it should have a handle at the top to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh upon the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times a disease called "telul" arises on the head of the nose, and it grows and becomes large soon, so much so that it is visible to the eye;
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	And for this reason, you must cut it at the beginning, remove all hair, then apply the cautery or the burning medicine.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	And if you delay cutting it until it is large, be wary if it is hard, of a bad color, and lacking sensation:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	do not touch it with iron because it is an embedded abscess, for when you cut it even once, great harm comes to the patient;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of a bad color, and you see that it can be completely cut out, then empty the patient of blood without fear, and treat the area with dry and binding substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the skin is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity comes to one of these cartilage works, there is little benefit, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	When this happens to anyone, then one must look to see if the wound is fresh with all its blood;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then join the two lips in one seam, and treat it until it is healed;
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are already separated from both sides, then you must cauterize all parts of their core until they bleed, then join the two lips in one seam and bind them together, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood on top, and grind incense;
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and place a piece of strong plastrum or another adhesive plastrum on top of the powders, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The method of sewing is such that you join the edges:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	using needles, as we have said in the sewing of the abdomen;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or using thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	In some people, there occurs an abscess in the lips, hard like grain seeds, smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	then you must turn the lips inside out, and cut into each knot, and take it with forceps and remove it from each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then apply the area after cutting with powdered vitriol, until the blood is congealed;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then lift the wound, and treat the area with dry substances until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus";
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	you should hold it with forceps, cut it at its root, and let the blood or pus flow;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then apply vitriol powder or other powders that constrict and dry the area;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if the flesh returns after cutting, which often happens, cut it again and cauterize it:
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	it will not return after the cauterization;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	And these are the forms of the instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough and unpleasant scales;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and sometimes the tooth is black and yellow and worm-eaten, until the corruption reaches the gum, and the tooth becomes foul-smelling;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and place his head in your lap, and remove the teeth or scales that appear, until nothing remains;
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and thus do you cleanse the blackness and greenness, and the yellowish discoloration and other stains, until they are clean;
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if one removes what is there at the first reason, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	if not, then start again from the second day and the third, until you have all raised it;
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and know that the teeth require various forms of instruments to raise them, according to what the work shows, because the remover which is used to lift out the teeth has different shapes than those used between the teeth;
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay drawing it out as much as you can, for one must not do this;
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	For it is a substance very high until one has no excuse for bleeding.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained to pull it, you must be certain about which tooth should be pulled.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain leads the patient to believe it is in a tooth, and he pulls out the good tooth;
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and the pain never leaves because of that, until the bad one is extracted, for we have already seen this happen with these patients;
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are certain of the painful tooth, it is necessary to scrape around the tooth thoroughly; apply strong spatinum all around to protect the gum.
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then move it with your two hands or with fine tweezers little by little until it is well loosened, then firmly secure the tweezers;
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	And let the head of the patient's shoulder be between your knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extract the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out forcefully, take some of these instruments and gently push on each side, and move it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the tooth is pierced and damaged, you must fill it with cloth where the hole is;
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if you restrain it gently with pliers, so that it does not break when restrained;
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and you must carefully work around the gum to extract the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be very careful that you do not break it, and leave a part behind, and return to the patient due to the mischief of the root greater pain than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And be careful that you do not act as the ignorant surgeons do, who in their hurry and boldness sometimes break the bone, and do not achieve what we have described.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but they sometimes cause great illness due to the roots that remain, or because of the cartilage that they break, as we have often seen;
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is extracted, wash the area with wine or honey and salt;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, then apply ground vitriol to the area;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shapes of the instruments used to extract teeth first should have long points and thick handles, so they do not slip when you are pulling the tooth;
et ce sont les formes:	and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should have thick parts so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be made of well-forged iron, and should be toothed to hold the teeth.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains in the wound, you should place cotton soaked in butter on it for one or two days until the area softens, then use pliers called "algefri," which make the head appear like a bird's beak;
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and they should be made inside like a file and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to come out with these pliers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root and place the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say spatula, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And let it be thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out through this, it is good;
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	if not, then help with all the instruments, of which the forms follow hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument which has two prongs, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron tools which are mentioned earlier in the rationale of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pliers, of which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let this instrument be such that it cannot break, and know that many instruments are made of bone;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments, which are not mentioned;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and the wise masters find their own instrument by themselves according to what their work and the illness shows them, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach an instrument due to the diversity of cases; and if one breaks the flesh or other bones, they should look for the instruments that are needed, which I have told you about, and assist with gestures, of which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be large and well-secured to hold the bone, so it does not slip, but can grasp and remove it;
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And then restore the place with appropriate medicines, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, remove it entirely with this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When a tooth appears not according to its natural form of the body, and its shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, then you must know if the tooth has grown after another tooth, and it is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or smoothed:
adonques lou raie;	then remove it;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is adjacent to the tooth, then take this instrument whose shape is like a small beak, and let it be sharp at the tip made of keen iron:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And cut it a little and a little over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so as not to move the others, and if it appears that you can file it, then file it with such a file as is shown here:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is like the edge from which needles are made;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and file the tooth bit by bit over several light days, so that it does not move until it falls out;
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then the surface should be smooth for everyone at the end, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, it must be filed down until it is even so that it does not cut the tongue or distort speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth grind together
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the teeth in front loosen due to impact or fall out, and the patient cannot bite down on what they eat without them falling out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, and that does not help;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	They must be restrained with a gold thread, for the silver thread becomes green and rots, but the gold never changes.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you wish to align the teeth, take the thread and tie it double between two healthy teeth, then place the affected teeth between them, whether there is one or more, carefully until you reach another healthy tooth;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then continue wrapping until you reach the part where you started, and gently and carefully withdraw your hand so that it does not move;
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and let the ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the threads with pliers, and join them, and place them between the healthy tooth so that it does not irritate the tongue;
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and then leave it as tight as it can remain, and if it loosens or the thread breaks, tighten it with another thread;
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	and it will remain like this for its entire time, and this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth and the two diseased ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth falls out, place another in its place, fresh for fresh, as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And do not intervene unless one is wise and patient, and sometimes it is made in the shape of a bone tooth, and it is placed where the deficiency is, and it is pressed as we have said, and remains and serves thus long.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cut the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Sometimes this ligament comes from below the tongue or naturally one is born thus;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by an accident of a closed wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the procedure is such that you work on the patient's mouth, and have their head in your lap, and lift their tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then cut the nervous ligament widely, until the tongue is separated from its attachment, and if there is hardness or knot, which is due to wound closure, then insert the hook and cut this ligament broadly;
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and guard that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which lies beneath;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done so, lift the area with rose water and hawthorn, or cold water, then place beneath it a tent of linen;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and bandage the patient each night so that the area does not seal over.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if bleeding occurs, then apply powdered vitriol to the area;
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if the skin becomes weak, then cauterize it with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then treat it further until it is healed,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see it as a dark or black or hard color, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is an ulcer;
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it is inclined towards a boil and there is moisture, pour on the unguent, and cut it with a fine scalpel, and release it from both sides;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if the sweat impedes your work, put on vitriol ground until it is dissolved, then return to your work until you exhaust all effort;
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then lift the area gently and carefully, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes in the throat there are lumps called "godath," and they are properly referred to as the two tonsils, and when you treat them, as we have said in the section, and if they are not healed, be careful:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If this is a hard abscess with little sense and dark color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also to prevent bleeding;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but let it be until it becomes black, and then you will open it, as it would rupture on its own;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	and if it is of white color and the root is fine, then prepare the instrument to cut, but first check if the abscess is at rest and has subsided.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then have the patient sit before the sun, and his head in your sight, and work on his mouth and grasp the servant between your hands, and press the tongue down with all the instrument, which is how it should be done.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and whether of silver or fine brass like knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	When you press the tongue against this instrument and see the abscess, take a lancet and insert it into the core, and pull it out above as far as you can;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and draw some material from the cloth with it, then cover it with the instrument, which has the shape of a forceps;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and the heads are curved, and one part faces the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of tempered steel or fine iron:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, cut it with pliers, here is its form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And let it be cutting on one side, and blunt on the other side;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot and clear water, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with cold water, or with boiled pomegranate peels, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stanched;
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat him until he is healed;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	and sometimes other abscesses may appear in the throat besides the two almonds, so cut them as you would the two almonds equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman for an abscess that had appeared in her throat, which is known as the small sense abscess;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I had nearly completely closed the throat, so that the woman could not expire due to the blocked passage, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained thus for one day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high up that it had been treated with two plasters through the two openings of the anus.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I hurried then and inserted an arrow into one side, followed by extracting a large portion of pus.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then I did the same on the other nostril, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	after inserting the lancet into the abscesses, I drained part of it, and only a little blood came out;
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	and thus the passage in her throat was cleared, and she now began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to incise the abscess for a long time;
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	and the abscess regrew quickly, filling up the place that I had emptied, until it became very large;
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	then I treated it and cauterized it inside the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	thus it remained without growing;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	and I left those areas, and do not know what God did with it after me.
de l’uve	of the eye(socket)
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When rheum descends to the eye and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular";
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and when it becomes large and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does no good, and you see that the hard abscesses are abated, and she is subtle, then it is necessary that you cut her.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and that which is round and assembled and is not long;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and if it is bloody or of a dark red color or black, then it is necessary that you avoid making an incision on it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	Then, when you see it, according to the manner I have said, regarding its whiteness and length, you should seat the patient before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument of which we made mention earlier;
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then insert the lancet into the eye, and draw it out from below, and cut with one of the two instruments that I mentioned for the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you do not cut beyond the excess that is beyond the natural boundary;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	for if you cut more, it will harm the voice and speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears the cutting, it is necessary that you use caution in the cautery of the fearful sensation.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the method of the cautery is sharp heat.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And it is that the patient place his head in your lap, and then press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and rinse with hot water, so that it is not too thick or too clear;
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and in using the construction of this instrument, which is here the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And let there be at the head a spoon where one puts the medicine, like the spout of a spoon, and place the instrument over all the medicine onto the eye;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and let the patient lie on their side so that saliva and mucus from their mouth flow into the medicine inside, so it does not go down to the throat, and do this;
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it has taken effect and the twitching from the medicine has subsided;
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medication, and place the instrument along with all the cotton into the channel above, until the cotton adheres to the eye;
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	do this often until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry, and after four days or five.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to restart the cauterization with the medication, then restart it, and after the cauterization, wipe around the eye with cotton wrapped in butter, and clean what is around with the medication;
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it be rinsed with cold water, and gargle as needed until it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This cure is more effective than incision, or the cautery;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	if it is cured by fumigation according to this method, take calamint and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and artemisia and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and add oil, and let it boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot should be well sealed with thick clay, and inside the pot there should be an instrument shaped in this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And it should be made of silver or bronze, and one end of the tube should be placed in the patient's mouth as the vapor rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is deadened;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	After you start again often, until the swelling subsides, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the hot onset of the abscess, for many things can happen;
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not do this when the abscess is hot and declining.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, take a chain and place inside the head a piece of eggshell, so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot;
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	for the eggshell does not allow the vapor to burden the mouth, and this is a good treatment altogether safe.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times it happens that a bone or spine of fish, or some other thing, gets stuck in the throat;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	Therefore, it is necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument so that you may see the movement of the thing;
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	and what you do not clearly perceive and is lodged in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the food be cooked in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	by chance, the harmful thing may be expelled through vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	when the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel cloth, or lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it reaches its place, let it settle, and then pull hard;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come out as we have said, then take the instrument of probe according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest you cause suffocation, nor push the bone inside;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and instruct the patient to insert the instrument, so that he moves when it reaches its place;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If the boil bursts, draw it out fully so that all the instrument is equally within, until it is completely out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	Sometimes the blood is treated, as I said in the division, by the care of medicines;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and when this does not help, then look in the throat of the patient by the light of the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, draw it out with a small hook or fine forceps.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that does not suffice, take a hooked cane and insert it into the patient's throat, then place a hot iron at the hook of the cane, and do this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is to be bled throughout the day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take a full glass of cold water, work it in the mouth, and pour it down so that it is swallowed, and move it with your hand frequently;
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and as soon as the blood tastes the water, it falls.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida, with the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye;
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this repeatedly, for it will fall without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the method of the fumigation is that you take a pot with live coals, and cover it with a perforated cover, and in that hole place the head of the instrument;
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	then pour in your fumigation, and the patient should place the end of the tube in their mouth, and close it tightly so that no smoke escapes but goes directly to the vein;
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and the blood will now flow out, and if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation multiple times;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	allow the patient to feel thirsty, and let them eat dirty and salty foods, and do not let them drink water;
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then it will be necessary for her to expel the fire by this regimen.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument used to treat the blood flow is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved pliers for entering the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and it has the appearance of a bird's beak, and there is a texture like that of a file, so that what it grasps, it cannot let go;
et vez ci la forme:	And see here the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	There are many types of abscesses, according to what the memory recalls later from one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and size;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and it is in two ways, one of which is in its own likeness, and from those that hold moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the places where they are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and abscesses of the flesh area are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And there are abscesses that one must not pierce until the swelling is dead according to its completion;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and there are such as must be pierced when they are hard, and do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and one lets it remain until it is rotten around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, thus causing contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	When the abscess is near the principal member, and if you delay the piercing until it is dead, it will harm the principal member;
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	where it is near the fundament, if one pierces it thus that it may die;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and it is not appropriate to pierce an abscess that has not been fully digested, except for one near the fundament, so that it does not rot and become inflamed internally, and a fistula does not form;
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and cannot be healed in a long period.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And you must know the time for perforating an abscess that has died according to its completion, and this is when the pain is alleviated, and the departure of fever, and the reduction in pain and redness, and the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	And it is necessary that you make the incision where the abscess depends most and where it appears most clearly;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And let the incision be long on the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, at joints and nerves and arteries, and equally anywhere where there is no pleurisy.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In cases of bleeding, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the flesh, it is better to wait until it is confirmed to be completely digested before proceeding with puncture, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it before then, the venom of the abscess will spread through the body, and it will be full of much corruption;
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and by chance the lips and depth of it become hardened.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And for some abscesses that need to be punctured according to the width of the body, depending on what the limb requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And you should treat small abscesses with small incisions;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large abscesses, large openings, and many fissures according to the size of the abscess;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to pierce the skin and cover them;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when they have become as stiff as cloths and are swollen, it is necessary to treat them as one would boils:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and there are some that are split into three angles, and there are others where one covers them as one would with myrtle leaves, like arm abscesses;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and there are some where one makes a round incision, and other cuts and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who have an abscess without a head, such as a superficial one, you must pierce it thoroughly;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and when the abscess is large, and it has collected much blood, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the blood at that time, but only part of it;
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then plug the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more afterward;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	do this gradually over many times, until all the blood has been released;
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or elderly and infirm.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the pus sometimes gushes out with the exit of the pus, which might by chance kill the patient, and you would not be blamed for it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have punctured the abscess, clean the wound, and examine whether the wound of the abscess is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is a large wound, then apply linen or old cotton dressings;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it is large abscesses, and there are many openings, then you must insert a dressing into each one so that they come together;
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have sewn it around, then you must fill it with old cotton or dry linen shreds without moisture, and bind it until the third day;
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs during your work, apply cold and moist remedies, and wet a cloth, placing it on the bleeding area repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the bleeding continues, administer governance and care, and use the powders that I have mentioned earlier in this book, and if it is winter time, and the place where the abscess is located is very cold, then you must put up tents and cloths soaked in wine and hot oil;
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it is in summer, and the area is fleshy, then you must place cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, for three days, as we have said;
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then open the abscess and dry it and treat it as is appropriate until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	For I have told you how one must proceed in the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	For small abscesses of the head come in various forms that are covered, like the shell of a hen's egg, and there are many similar cases.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are fatty and of such a type where there is moisture as well as pus;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and there are some that are hard and stony to the touch, and there is no doubt if the artery does not oppose it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the loin is such that you should test all the instrument called "entromissoire," the form of which comes next, and what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if there is moisture, then he splits it from above along the length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is drained, carefully scrape away without leaving anything the skin that contained the moisture, for it returns quickly if anything is left.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if not, in water and in salt, and immerse the wound, and leave it until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and those who remain overnight should bathe in it.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then start with the cotton again as before on the second day, and the third, until you know for certain that it does not remain overnight;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess persists in the fatty tissue, cut it according to this form, lengthwise;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and apply your ointments, and scrape it from all sides, and focus entirely on draining it from the cavity where it lies;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the artery opposes you, do as I told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And do the same for an abscess if it is stony, cutting and scraping as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when you incise a stony abscess and the moisture, it is easier, for they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if there are any abscesses on the head where there is no moisture, and among these were the abscesses that I treated on the head of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and I found the abscess like a hard stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken;
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if one had touched it, it would have caused a wound as if struck by a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses that come on the head, especially those that occur at the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the incision should always be made in the most dependent area to allow pus to drain.
et les cure si com il covient.	and treat them as is appropriate.
des scrophules	scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	This kind of abscess often appears on the neck, and sometimes behind the ears, and also elsewhere on the body, and they are very painful, growing one next to another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrofula is properly within its own area, such as the knot and the abscess of the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and there are many similarities among these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are such as contain moisture, and there are others that do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in the one that you see has good disposition when touched, and it resembles the color of the skin, and is soft on all sides and does not adhere to the neck veins or arteries or conduct, and is not deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	you should cut it open from above, and peel each part of the skin, and extend the two sides of the wound with forceps if necessary, as we have said about abscesses of the head;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	And draw it out bit by bit, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and let the spatula not be sharp nor cutting, for the hand will slip, and do not go too far, so as not to cut what should not be cut.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work on it, put in the wound vitriol ground up, or some powders that constrict blood, and press down on the wound;
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and leave it until the abscess is abated, and the wound softened, and begins to pus.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the bleeding is staunched, return to your work until you complete it;
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then inquire with your proper index if there remain any small scrofulous nodes, and cut them out and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, then it is not right that you should cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it off with a strong double thread, and let it fall away without harm;
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then fill the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the whole boil, then it is necessary to bring together the two edges of the wound and sew them now, since there is no excess tissue due to the size of the boil.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	It is necessary for you to focus on cutting the root of it, extracting the pus, and sewing as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrofulas that contain excess fluid, pierce them where it is most apparent;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and pierce them as was said before, allowing it to drain, then administer lint with ointment and similar things, so that it purges what remains of the corruption;
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound is well cleansed, then apply a healing ointment that promotes flesh growth until it is healed.
de squinance	of squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancient ones spoke and wrote about the treatment of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I have never seen anyone in our land who practiced it, and this is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those who have scrofula, it is necessary that the groove in the throat called "epiglottis" be exposed;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and one should not provide assistance through these, because all the veins and the flesh of the patient are affected in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the windpipe of the flesh, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the danger of suffocation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we should make a small incision across it between three and four circles, or rather between two circles according to the size of the incision on the surface, not in the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and those places are suitable for the section of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from there.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is fearful, he should extend the skin of the neck for the whole inch, then cut through until he reaches the windpipe;
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cut the surface as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the section of the blood vessel of the neck that jumps forth in the place where it is broken, and by the lack of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed during which strangulation is feared, bring together the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew it all up without the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim states that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dying, and death approaches.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and for this reason, the elders commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease passes, and it passes in three days or four; then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was treated.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young lady took a knife and stuck it in her throat, cutting part of the windpipe.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to treat her, and I found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I examined the wound and found the blood that had come out, and I knew that she had not cut any veins or nerves in her throat, and the flesh was issuing forth from the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, sewed up the wound, and treated it until she was healed;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	And it happened to the lady that she became red-faced, and returned afterwards to her condition.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	For this reason do I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "throat hernia," and it is a large abscess in the shape of a bean, and it occurs very often in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	and it follows two manners:
naturez, et accidens;	natural, and accidental;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	in the natural case, there is no foreign body.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental case follows two manners, one of which is similar to fat like ours, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from us of an artery;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And there is fear in it, and one must not work with fierce force except on the small one, and prove and search throughout the entire interstice:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it as thick as our fat, and it cannot be in any vein, cut it like one cuts the nose, and draw it out completely, if there is any.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search carefully at once, and treat it as is appropriate, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways to deal with noses, of which I will describe all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and now it is necessary for me to explain all the differences between our treatment and other methods.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that sweat and fever come, until the boiling is past, and the pus is complete;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the poultice there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains flour, which is its own kind of poultice and matches the color of the skin, and it begins like a blister, and becomes large;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are of two kinds, either fatty or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when you come to the treatment of the nose that you first examine and inquire about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to their form which will come in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of examining abscesses is that you take the moistest part that you find in the abscess, and press with your two fingers, until you know that the instrument has penetrated the core, as befits the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the interosseous bone, and take care not to damage it.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture runs across the skin, regardless of its color, treat it as I have said for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if moisture does not come after the interosseous bone, know that it is fatty, then cut it in a cross shape, and take it with forceps, and gently scrape each side and be careful of the coat where it lies so you can draw it out healthy with your hand;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot draw it out whole, then remove it piece by piece so nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, the pain will return many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it remains for a short while, and the blood does not distress you, then apply the wound with some corrosive powder, and hold the wound steady, and place warm poultices on the abscess, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if the flesh is abundant, then sew together the two edges of the wound, and treat it with what promotes tissue growth.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if bleeding opposes you or something else does, then hasten and apply the place with powdered vitriol, and leave it for two days or three, until the wound becomes rotten, and replace it with a decoction of blood.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to cauterize what remains of the flesh.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See here the forms of the instruments used for insertion, and they are of three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	large, medium, and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three squares which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and they are of three kinds:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, medium, and small, for enclosing abscesses of fistulas;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles used to stitch sorcerers, and are made of brass or copper, or iron, or silver, and yellow ones are more valuable, and those stained black are better for enclosing the bends of fistulas;
et sont de III manieres:	and there are of three kinds:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The forms of tumors are of many appearances, as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	large, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and there are tumors that have two curves in three ways as well;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and there are tumors that have three curves, and they are also of three kinds;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and there are tumors that have two curves, and tumors with only one curve, and they are also of three kinds;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these for which one performs is sharp, and there are some that only cut from one side, so as not to damage the nerves, for that reason one does not cut the vein or the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these intermissive ones are the allemandes placed in sleeves, so that the patient does not feel them during the opening of abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	and there are three types:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	large, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and one uses them only in fleshy parts, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar areas;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And sometimes another instrument is made small, resembling the husks of figs, in this form, with which one staunches blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is sometimes placed at the site where veins are cut open, and arteries, and sometimes follow this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes the testicles of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so much that they seem like women's breasts;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and remain deformed and swollen, and if one wishes to treat them, it is necessary to pierce according to this form from this line b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape off the fat, and apply healing medicine to the wound that promotes flesh growth, then bring together the two edges of the wound to heal it, and treat it until it is healed;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if the testicle drops down and is enlarged as it often happens with women, then cut it into two parts above through two similar incisions;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one is held to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line two until the line G;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then peel the skin that is between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and whatever is necessary for treatment until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healed, or the incision is not yet fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to excessive bleeding, you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in a caustic ointment;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave it until it has absorbed the remaining blood and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	abscesses of the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that appear under the buttocks are hard forms of scrofula with sides, and there are some that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. to the line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is emptied out, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment as needed until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles a scrofula, cut it as we have said about incisions for scrofulas, and if the wound discharges pus, treat it with cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	Of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is sealed, there often result abscesses; and likewise happens to a swollen vein and abscess;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and one recognizes this when it is due to the artery, as the abscesses are long and deep;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it with your hands, you sense the tightness;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is due to the vein, it appears more superficially;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to incise this abscess, especially when it is located away from the axillae and angles and on the neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is therefore necessary to avoid the iron treatment, and for him who has it at the head, one must also avoid it, and in the case of arterial swelling, make an incision above the skin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then work the area with scissors, and carefully separate the artery from the surrounding tissue, until it is exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	then insert a needle on one side and pierce it to the other side, and tie off the artery with a doubled thread in two places, as I have taught you in extracting the two arteries that are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then puncture the area between the two ligatures with an instrument so that the blood flows out which is there, and release the abscess;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then administer the treatment that induces vomit, until the patient relieves.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat them with appropriate ointment until they are healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	And if the abscess is near a vein, you should mark with your hand the area of the abscess on the skin, then insert the needle under the spot you are holding, and pierce it, and place double thread there so that you can draw it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	Then ligature the abscess as I told you, using one part of the thread around each of the two threads.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	And if you fear that the thread might come loose, insert another needle along the entire length of the first incision through the abscess, and tie the threads in four places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then incise the abscess until the excess matter comes out, then incise the excess matter from the heart and leave what is bound;
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place a damp cloth on it with wine and oil, then treat it with bandages and ointments until he is well.
des apostemes des ners	abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses occur in the artery and vein, abscesses also affect the nerves when they are injured, or from excessive labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens more often in the shoulders and elbows and in all places where there are joints, and these are severe abscesses, and its color resembles the color of the skin, and it is painful in various conditions.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when it is pressed hard, the patient feels pain, and it is not in the flesh deeply, but near the heart;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	And it moves well on all sides, neither forward nor backward, nor sideways nor upwards, and the one who is in joints should not be cut with iron:
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	by chance there would be contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and for the one who is in the head or forehead, cut the skin with a spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and cut it at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, suspend it with an ounce of material, and peel it, then remove it and stitch the wound together, and treat it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	large hanging pouches
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Sometimes it occurs in bellies and not elsewhere, and it is a disease called "fungus" by its resemblance to such things, and the root is subtle, and the mass is large;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and there are both small and very large ones;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw a man who had two of them in his belly which were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, they were white, and had fine roots, and were slightly split, and moisture corroded them quickly.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I removed them and found one weighing eighteen ounces, and the other six. The procedure for incising is such that you check if the patient is moist, and the color of the tissue is white and moist with a fine root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	cut it with a spatula wide, and have the fire cautery ready in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For in cutting there often come too great flows of blood, and if the blood overwhelms you, then hasten to use the cautery;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made linen thread, and tie it around the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then restrain it, and do not stop restraining the linen thread until it fits the joint properly, and work with it carefully;
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are thick, be careful when cutting to avoid injuring the abdomen, but you may cut half of it, then cautery it so that it does not regrow;
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the tendon which is of pink color and poor sensation and milk-white appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an embedded abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the ulcer shortly.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the swelling is strong
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of swelling comes from a cautery on a wound or tear on the surface, and it is on the belly and some of the bowels are involved, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before mentioned, or from windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if this is due to the rupture of the surface and the exit of the bowels, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the skin, and it causes little pain, and is clear from various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to an issue from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses on both sides, it responds and then returns, and perhaps it is constricted, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and for hard labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor issue, and becomes clear when you press it with your hand, without any restriction;
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to blood, then these signs clearly indicate large and hard abscesses, and they are fixed according to a certain quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to windiness, then it is shallow to touch, and the treatment is that you observe whether the appearance is due to arterial blood, or from a vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear about it, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the bile, then you must instruct the patient to hold their breath, and lie completely straight, then incise all around the wound;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then instruct the patient to lie still between your hands, then go around the place you marked with the spatula, then extend half of the abscess above with the large forceps;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then bind the area tightly with a strong thread or a rope of thick silk, and ensure that the bandage is firmly in place;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then work on half of the abscess extended over the bandage, and place your index finger inside to seek the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you find it caught in the bandage, then loosen it, and push the intestine back into the abdomen;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the bowel, grasp it with your hook and cut away the excess;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery or vein obstructs you, proceed carefully around them, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two strands of thread outside what you have done in a cross shape to ensure puncturing;
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then incise the abscess in four places over the needles, and if you wish, remove the needles, and leave the wound to pus until it necroses, and the dead tissue falls out on its own.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	When you cut it when it is subtle and pus-filled, then treat it as needed, and drain the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as needed, and close the wound.
dou chancre	of the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have discussed in the section the similarities of ulcers, and how one should treat them with medicine, and how to avoid treatment with iron.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	And we say the ulcer spreads to the marrow, and great care is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when ulcers are in places where they can be scraped out such as an ulcer on a breast or thigh, and in similar places, it should all be removed at the beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	And when it is large and old, you should not approach it, for I have never seen anyone heal such.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	nor has anyone ever been healed before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And in the places where it can be removed, as we have said, it is that you should sometimes purge the patient of black bile;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	Then make it bleed if there is obvious fullness, then position the patient properly to perform the work;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	Then apply your poultices to the ulcer, and remove hair from all parts, and remove tissue from all parts leaving nothing behind;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow completely, and mark well the place with your hand or some object, and if the outflow of blood is contrary to the incision of an artery or vein, then cauterize until the bleeding stops;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it further until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of hydropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have already described in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the accumulation of fluid is formed, and the signs of each condition, and the treatment done with medicine, and that which is treated with iron:
si est eclites soulement;	It is swollen only;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one should not touch with iron in these two similar cases:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	that is to say, tympany and ileus, for it is a fatal thing;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	then when you treat this case of dropsy which is called "swelling" with medicines, and the cure does not help, look to see if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as colds and loose bowels and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	do not use iron in this case, for there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient is of strong temperament, and he has no other disease but dropsy only, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should act thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Lay the patient straight on your hands, and have the minister press the belly by inserting water into the lowest part of the abdomen, then take the spatula according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be cutting from two sides.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	point it, and ensure that it does not enter so deeply as to reach the intestine when inserted, and cannot be withdrawn;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then check if the edema is located towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	if necessary, you should cut above the navel three fingers wide on each side of the belly;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if the edema is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel three fingers wide;
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is for the midsection, let it be to the right, and it must not be that the patient lies over the crease so that the excesses do not flow to the weaker area;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then pierce the skin with the instrument, and cut it, and lift your hand to scrape off all the suppurative material between the skin and the tissue as you would in flaying, about the thickness of a nail or slightly more;
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	then puncture the tissue until the pus comes to an open place, which is where the fluid will drain, then draw it out with force, and use this instrument whose form is as follows:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it is similar to a thin silver chain, and it is made of light iron or reed, and has small holes in one part;
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and when there is a cost (rib) on one side, three perforations;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two on the other side, and one on another;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that writers make on a quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the top is the blade, so that when the instrument comes to the tip, it now descends along the instrument;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	empty then half or one-third of it, for if you empty more than is necessary at that hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit due to the weapon, or he falls fainting, or he approaches death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but according to the emptiness according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the conditions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulse;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then draw the instrument and retain the fluid, and it is now retained for the heart which stops up the passage that is above the diaphragm, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then restart the instrument on the other day, if you see the patient suffering from this, and draw off a small quantity of fluid;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	do this on some days, and be careful not to overdo it so that no more than a little bit of fluid remains.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you are uncertain about the patient, leave them much in water, and treat with the cure of the grave or hot sand, and by much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and dye from drinking;
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and treat with drying medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after the extraction of water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	about the impediment of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born who have no opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary to pierce it immediately throughout the spatumile very finely according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	then put a fine plug of lint in the opening, and tie it securely for three days or four, and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug, let him urinate, and then replace it;
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and perhaps it is not necessary, for the urine that comes from above does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	He whose opening is small, if treated with the cloth of flax as we have said, will be enlarged.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the urethral opening in its proper place are afflicted, for some are born with it at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis upwards.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and they cannot urinate because the matter cannot reach the bladder, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the method is that the patient lies supine on their back, then stretches the head of the penis and holds it as thick as a quill, so that the urethral opening points straight ahead, as it should.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be cautious of bleeding that often occurs, and if it happens, stop the bleeding as one would for any bleed, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	pustules of the shaft
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Often this swelling comes in the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and there are both malignant and non-malignant ones;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	you should take them out with a fine needle, and cut and clean all of them, then put on moistened cotton with Egyptian ointment;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure it with Diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the wound is malignant, of a foul color and putrid, then you must apply cauterization to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have cut it, and if the swelling is in the shaft of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the part that is inside first;
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And when it is sealed, then treat it to avoid.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you treat it together, the head of the penis is not assured that it will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption come to the penis and the testicles;
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made of pomegranate peel and vinegar, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, then treat with a lunar cauterization according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cauterization helps with both conditions together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	that is to say, in the discharge of blood, and in corruption;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary to insert a silver tube into the urethra, and the patient should urinate through it;
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And when the hairs are raised at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, and it becomes an injury or an abscess, then you must burn it with a sharp instrument until the band is loosened, and release the head of the penis from all sides;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	And if it is difficult to discuss this matter, then you must burn with the cautery slightly at the head of the penis and on the skin;
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Then carefully separate them, and place a fine linen cloth soaked in cold water on it so that it does not raise again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not like the separation of other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Though we perform this work of our will, and properly for children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision for their children, as they did not practice it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have seen the majority of masters and seniors who performed circumcisions around the age of one year, and for those with strong constitutions, and for all newborns;
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	It is dangerous because there are two layers, and by chance one cuts through the upper layer and leaves the lower;
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Now there is the need to cut again, and the pain is doubled, and for the purification which is at one year old, the tip of the member is not assured;
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and in the purification of the nail, by chance the iron slips, and ruins the work, and many times they are born such that they do not need purification, and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the healing that is done with threads throughout the entire limb, I have discovered the goodness of the experiment, for the threads cut precisely both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, cut evenly in one continuous motion;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but the thread should be tightly wrapped around the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and the method of the first procedure is such that you should make the child, if he understands, believe that you are only tying the thread around his member and then you can amuse him in any way you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then hold him straight between your hands, and place the instruments between your hands or behind your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	then place your hand on the member and blow at its root, and pull it up until the head of the member is engaged;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then clean well of the dirt that is assembled there, then bind the place with a double thread, then bind from one pit to another ligature;
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it with two fingers by the second binding at the pouch and at the right index, and cut between the two ligatures, then lift the heart quickly and pull the head of the rod;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood flow drop by drop, for this is the safer method;
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put powder on and above the powder place a piece of cloth glued with one yolk of cooked egg diluted with rose water, prepared with good and fresh oil of roses, and leave it there until the next day, and treat it again as needed until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of the forces for purification is thus:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	the two heads should be sharp and should be as large as the shaft equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	the mistake in purification is when the pus inside goes to the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	then you must extend it to your fingernail, just as the pus forms an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it to your fingernail, then hold it with forceps, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they transgress for three days, and that which is below the thigh swells, then leave it until the abscess is sufficiently healed, and lightly scrape it;
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	Move the part as much as you can, and avoid the shaft of the penis, so that it is not harmed.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Treat the wound with powders that we have discussed in the chapter on powders, and if you cut into the heart too deeply, and it goes beyond what is necessary, it will do no harm;
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	treat it as we have said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	from the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of stones, or clotted blood, or bile, or dead tissue, or similar things, as we have said in the section;
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone that is in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees;
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and place the feet on the back, and extend the stomach from above the back, and have the patient pull in their abdomen as much as they can;
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and then the necks of the bladder are constrained to express the stone above, so that the urine is loosened and;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument called "syringe", of which here is the form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and let it be of fine silver, thin and drawn out, like the feather of a bird;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and let the tube be one palm in length and a half, and let it be fine at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the method of urine evacuation is such that you take a doubled thread, tie one end to a piece of wool or cotton, and put the other end of the thread into the urethra;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and trim the excess wool and push it up to the end of the thread, then grease the urethra with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a chair, and massage the bladder and penis with warm olive oil and vinegar;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	Then gently insert the syringe into the vein until it reaches the root of the vein, then fold the vein above toward the bulb;
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and feel the patient’s sensation come up to the empty space, but this is not done according to this order unless the path it follows is twisted;
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then stretch the thread through all the wool bit by bit, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and let the urine flow;
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and continue with the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient feels relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When pus or blood comes to the bladder, and putrefaction is gathered there, and you wish to introduce liquids and medicines, use all the instruments which are called "clepsydre", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and has three openings:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	II from one side, and I from the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the hair of the place where the medicine is applied should be such that it closes off the opening well so that one cannot draw out moisture, and insert when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you wish to apply your medicines to the bladder, place the head of the catheter in the moisture, and draw it out with the extractor that is inside;
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	you will draw out the moisture with the catheter, and then firmly press the extractor inside;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	the moisture will enter inside, and it will now reach the bladder, so that the patient can feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the form of the subtle enema with which one administers to the bladder:
si est ci:	this is it:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	It is made of silver or reed, and the tip is higher;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and direct it toward the side where the ligament falls;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a sheep's bladder and put in the liquid with which you wish to administer the enema, then tie it between the two sides securely with a strong double thread, and heat the pot of that liquid over the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	then insert the tip of the enema into the penis, then squeeze your hand along the bladder to push all the liquid gradually until the patient feels that the liquid has reached the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle out of it, and pierce it roundly around;
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then thread a strong wire through these holes, then join the circle as one joins a sieve, and place within it what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and attach it to the instrument;
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have already mentioned in the section the methods of stones and their extraction along with medicines;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and I have said the difference between the stone formed in the kidneys, and all the signs, and which stones one should operate to remove;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is formed in the bladder happens more often to children, and this is a sign that the urine skips from the bladder, similar to acute conditions in its subtlety;
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and he clearly sees urine, and the patient scratches his penis, and does so many times, and then becomes dizzy;
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and in many of these cases, the foundations are weak;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and the healing of children is easy until they are four years old, and it is very difficult in the elderly, and for adults it is moderate, for those who are between young adulthood and old age;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	And the treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to clean the patient with an enema, to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes hinders in seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet, and raise him up and move towards his back, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and it sometimes comes out from a higher place;
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	then have him sit between your hands which are prepared, and his hands should be behind his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downward;
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	then press and feel inside;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	if you feel the stone in its place, then hurry now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not fall to the touch of everything, moisten your middle finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is female, or your thumb, if the patient is a fully grown male;
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and insert it into its fundament, and search for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, draw it to the bladder neck;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press with your finger, and remove the stone where you wish to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to spread his right hand over the genitals upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin which is below the genitals in the area where the incision will be made;
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then place the spatula over it, which is its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And make an incision between the genitals and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and it should be straight over the stone, and your two hands should immediately be at the anus, and the incision should be wide enough on the outside, and inside narrow according to the size of the stone, not too large;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	by chance the pressure may cause your hand at the anus to jump outward without effort;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and know that there may be stones with corners and edges:
si est griés a issir;	It is painful to exit;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and it is like one who is swollen, similar to a flower bud, and round, with a slight opening.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	For those who have corners and edges, make the size larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not jump out, then you must clamp with pliers that are like a file at the top to firmly hold the stone so that it does not escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	where you insert from the side a delicate curved instrument at the top;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot manage it this way, then enlarge the opening slightly, and if blood flows out, clamp it with vitriol;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And if there is more than one stone, place the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then draw it out forcefully, and the smaller ones after if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, you must wait and make a larger incision.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	either he dies, or urine comes immediately preventing the wound from closing;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but still, strive to extract it, or use pliers to remove it piece by piece;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly, then place a damp cloth over it in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then place the patient on their neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, thoroughly wash the area well with oil and water, then treat it with diafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if abscesses and infections come into the wound and blood coagulates in the bladder, causing retention of urine, which is known to occur in such a manner that it clots along with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Insert your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder, and cause harm.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then clean the wound with water and herbs and bind it, and assist in all ways you know until he is healed;
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	and it is necessary that every time you treat him, you bind both thighs, and apply the medications to the affected area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is in the urethra passage, stuck inside, and the urine cannot exit;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if he treats it as I say, you should cut it multiple times, and he is excused from the cutting due to this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already tested this in this way.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take an iron fork according to this form and let it have three prongs fixed in one handle:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	then take some thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot move back into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then insert the probe gently into the penis until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and rotate the probe with your hand against the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone from another direction;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what is obstructed by the stone that is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	It is broken immediately, and the stone comes out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you cannot do this for some reason that prevents it, tie a thread below the stone and another above it, then cut the penis directly over the stone between the two threads, then extract the stone out, and untie the thread, and clean the clotted blood that is in the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the female stone
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It rarely happens that a stone forms in women, but if it does occur once, the treatment is difficult and is prevented for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	One is that by chance the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows herself well enough to expose herself to men, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman who knows well in this art of midwifery;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth manner is that the stone in the woman's body is harder and deeper than the man's stone, so it requires a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved. And if necessity demands this, then you must find an experienced midwife, but one such as this is hard to come by, and if you cannot find one, seek a discreet and chaste midwife;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and present a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command regarding the inquiry into the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and carefully observe whether the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then she must insert her finger into the fundament and search for the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, she should press the stone down with her finger, and recommend that she inserts her finger into the patient's vagina, and searches and presses her left hand firmly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, she must gently move the stone from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	Then cut around the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the groin, where it is moved, and feel for the stone in that area;
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move his hand above the stone or below it, and let the incision be small at first;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then insert the probe into the incision, if you feel the stone enlarge the wound as much as the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	that is to say, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those with edges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	and know the signs to understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the blood flows, then place vitriol powder at the site, and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops;
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	Then return to your work until the stone is out, and have the instruments that I told you about for extracting stones from people to help in your work;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if the blood thins and it is from the artery that has been cut, then apply powder to the area and bandage with cloths and linen, and do not attempt this again, and leave the stone unextracted, for the patient may die by chance;
puis cure la plaie.	Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the swelling subsides, then return to your work, until the stone has been expelled.
de hernie carnouse	of flesh hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Ramus aqueous is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white matter, which comes from the kidneys and is contained in the egg;
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	And it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly on the skin of the eye, so one thinks that it is another eye;
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and it is the skin of the pupil between the white syfac that we mentioned;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and this does not happen unless there is pus.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this aqueous retention is due to weakness that affects the testicles, and the matter spreads there.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And sometimes it comes from striking the pupils, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	where it is a color declining to yellow, or without redness, or black, or clear white, and this happens more frequently;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognize this condition, for if it is in the white syfac that we mentioned, then the abscesses are round, the pus long like the figure of an eye, and does not affect the pupil, because there is moisture all around it.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the proper tissue, then the abscess appears with part of the eye, and because of this, people think it is another eye;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white membrane, then one can feel it well;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	then when you wish to know the color of the moisture, test it thoroughly in all directions, as the form has been described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the intromissory part, judge what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we treat it with iron, the patient must be bathed according to his strength and the fullness of his body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then lay him on his back on something slightly elevated, and place many cloths under him;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	Then sit on his left side, and instruct the attendant to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs below the heart.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the scalpel and cut through the skin between the testicles down to near the root, and make your incision perfectly straight until you reach the white fat layer, and peel it back gently as much as possible;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then puncture the fluid-filled area with a wide incision, and drain all the fluid, and then use your forceps to stretch the opening upwards;
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the heart of the testicles, but only the fluid-filled area;
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Cut through all or piece by piece carefully considering him subtly, for if you do not cut wisely, the fever will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	And if the eye jumps during your work, then reset it to its place once you have completed the task of suturing.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then sew the two halves of the torn foreskin together at one seam, then treat it as other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the eye corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary to ligature the vessels that are suspensory, fearing the loss of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cut the foreskin along the suspensory part, and extract the eye, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if heat is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	if you cut the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put wool soaked in rose oil into the wound;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and place another piece of wool soaked in wine and oil, and put over the two wounds, and cover with doubled cloths, and bind it securely according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths, and wrap them with linen strips according to this appearance and join them by sewing at the groin of the trousers, one from the thigh up to the buttocks, and the other to the side part;
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and place the two heads on the two rings, and let all the ligature be secured in the loop of the bracelet;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and sometimes this condition is treated with a cautery instead of iron, and you should take a fine knife-shaped cautery, cut the skin between the toes, and heat it as we have said, so that the white substance containing the fluid is exposed;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	take the cautery in this shape, and pierce that fluid with hooks, and scrape it with this fine hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And cut in all the ways you can, until you remove everything;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and be careful that the fire does not touch the eye;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this work is more safe;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and move them to prevent bleeding, and proceed with the work of cutting;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if anything goes against you, such as an abscess or bleeding or another thing, then treat what is contrary to you according to what was said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to endure this work because of its horror, then administer perforation as I tell you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs we have said that aqueous pus is there, make the patient sit on a raised seat;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then pierce the abscess on the inner part across the entire span of the body, and place the puncture along the length of the body;
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and let the aperture be wide so that all the fluid can flow out;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then place cotton on the site, and bind it, and leave it so that the remaining fluid can drain, then treat it until the wound is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the white cloth does not allow the fluid to exit at the wound site, then you should insert a quill or instrument used for treating the fluid in hydrops, as described above;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and enlarge the pocket of the wound, and check that the fluid returns, and it will clot after six months or thereabouts, and when it has clotted as before, then the patient will spend their days in this state.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that during the cutting of this vein, fear occurs in many conditions, so it seems to me that it is better to leave it as it is;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the work and similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say then that many abscesses occur in the body, especially in the groin;
et c’est par mout de cas.	and this happens for many reasons.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is due to excessive acidity and coldness spread in the groin, or from impact;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the skin;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and finds no pain, and there is a severe abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance, some severe abscesses are frightful and stony, and of a dusky color, and sometimes they come from the body's arteries, or swelling of veins.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from the arteries, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it is not proper for you to touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	One who is afflicted by the swelling of veins is known by its disposition through the feeling of finger pressure, and one can properly assess the condition based on this sensation, as well as on other parts of the body;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And it is that you cut the cord of the testicles, then place the egg above, and draw it out from the white membrane, and release the suspensory ligament from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the testicle is already hardened with these new membranes, then it is necessary that you draw out the testicle, and cut it.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is swollen in the membrane, or inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you release all of this area, and cut it completely.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is at the back, then you must cut it all away, and extract the eye, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, apply the wound with wet wool in rose oil and wine, then treat it further as needed until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess wrapped in a covering similar to leather, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient moves very painfully when he goes.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment for this illness is also as dangerous as the one before, and nevertheless we will tell you about it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you seat the patient on a raised chair, then place the suspensory from below to your hands, covering all the vessels close to the penis, and grasp them firmly, and stretch them forcefully;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	then cut through the large oblong spatula with a sharp edge across the vessels until they are exposed, and then skin each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then insert a needle with doubled thread and tie it at the first place where the vein is, and tie it again to the other end;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then cut them directly in the middle, along the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted humors;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as you would others where you apply poultices, so that no vessel bleeds that nourishes one of the testicles;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for by this no harm comes, and if the veins are full throughout, it is necessary to draw blood from all the veins;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the testicle does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of veins, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the fracture of the cheekbone
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The occurrence of this condition is due to the incision that comes from the suprapubic region, or the extension on the abdomen in the area of the inguinal canal, which causes the intestines to descend through that opening into one of the testicles;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this rupture is in the thigh or from extending it, and these two manners come from many causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	by impact, jumping, bending, lifting heavy loads, and similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is from extending the thigh are that they come little by little over a long period and do not happen suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are equal up to the bottom because the thigh presses against the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs when it is from the section of the cheekbone are that they cause sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear differently, near the skin, because of the exit of the intestines and the body part moving away from the cheekbone.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines descend with the hernia, and are trapped inside, causing great pain for the patient, especially when they are compressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments there is fear, for which one must avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to push the intestines back in with their hand into the wound if they can reach it;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then bind around his neck, and lift the thighs;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then extend the heart above it, and shave all the skin of the genitals completely;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then insert hooks into the flanks according to what you need to open the wound, and make them such that the eye can easily exit;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then peel off the skin that is away from the genital skin until the white fatty tissue is exposed on all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	then insert your middle finger into the area behind the genitals, between the white fatty tissue that is under the skin of the penis, and between the second layer of fat, and separate what is behind the penis, and between the second layer of fat;
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then move to the right hand inside the groin, and stretch the white surface up with your left hand, and lift the egg over all the surface towards the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the attendant to lift the egg up and loosen those who are tied behind the binding;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and ask your two assistants if there is any part of the intestine wrapped around the white surface tightly, and if you find anything, push it back into the abdomen;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take a needle with a thick thread made of several strands and push it into the rear part of the surface, which is behind the skin of the groin;
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	after the waist, then cut the head of the ribs that appear from the children, until there are IV children;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then arrange them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and bind it with a strong cord from two sides;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the head of the ribs that appear from the children and bind them firmly from two sides so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter, preventing an abscess from forming;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and place the cord again according to the first binding long by two palms from that point, and after these two bindings leave the skin underneath the scrotum large by one palm;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and then all around according to the curvature that the eye carries;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut in the part that is away from the skin of the scrotum, until the blood flows, and the bowel, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then apply moistened wool in oil to the wounds, and wrap them with the linen we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white vein that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens often, and leave the bandage on until it falls off by itself;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it delays in falling off, soak it in warm water, and apply what we have mentioned, until it falls off;
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with another method, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of flesh hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I have never seen anyone dare to treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is made like thorns that are alongside the vein, in such a way that you tie the vessels, above the waist lightly towards the back;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then cut into it and treat the abscess of whoever is operating, until the vessel discharges;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Sometimes rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and it is evident;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and no part of the intestines descends into the scrotum, and if it does descend, it is serious, and requires repair at all times;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and if it remains too long at this stage, the wound or sore will grow worse, until the intestines are affected;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens due to the extension of the sore which is in the angles, as we have said, because it becomes extended, then softened and swollen and open;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the treatment for this is with cauterization, as we have said before;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and have the patient lie supine on their back between your hands, then probe the swollen area of the wound to a width of three digits;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the tissue which is below the skin as follows, then take the thread and place it on the visible part of the tissue;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press it firmly against the belly, then stitch the two visible parts of the tissue at the top of the thread, and stitch one and the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the head of the thread, and do not cut any tissue or stretch the egg or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of intestinal hernia;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	then treat it according to the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, bandage and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The tissue is tight, and there is no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is stiff in this place, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	for the softening of the skin of the genitals
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men because the tissues inside become softened, and it appears milky.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	And it is necessary when one wishes to treat it, that the patient lie down on his back, and the leather which is softened be placed upon the natural skin;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	then join the two edges at one seam, and if you wish, sew the excess of the softened leather to three seams or four firmly;
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	then cover between the seams, and treat it as other wounds until it is healed, and remove the stitches.
dou chastrement	of the discipline
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that castration is condemned in our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to speak of it in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is necessary only for two reasons:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	Therefore, one is that the physician knows how to answer when asked, and knows the treatment;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, because we often need to castrate some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say then that castration is performed according to two methods:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either by attraction, or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the method we perform by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and hanging.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then grasp them with your hand until they retract and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the treatment of the spine:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	You should castrate the animal, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then attach the suspensory bandage, and cut around each one at once, after you have properly flayed them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and leave some of the fat on the surface and the fine fat that is on the vessels;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this method of castration is gentler than the one done by traction, because with traction some part of the testicles might remain accidentally, causing the animal to desire lust;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	On hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermpheidry is according to two manners in men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one of which is that between the two thighs it opens as much as the figure of a woman's body would, where there is hair, and sometimes encircles the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other method is for women, and it should be applied to the wrist like a rod and two fingers.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment of the man and the woman is that you cut the adjacent tissues all around, and treat them as other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	in the second manner, for men whose urine sprays out from the skin of the thighs, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	of tension
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tentigene is a tissue attached to the genital area, so that it is too ugly to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the condition to be treated.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary to soak the excess of the tension with your hand or fingers, and then cover lightly;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not go too deep, so that no blood seeps out, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed;
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and for another flesh that appears at the mouth of the throat, and when you touch it, it may break apart, and it resembles a quill, and because of this, the ancients called it "quill disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you treat it as we have said regarding tendon treatment, and care for it until it is healed.
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	It is erratic when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and it is natural from birth, or accidental due to illness that has occurred;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	whether it is by flesh attached, or of thin or thick skin, and is made deep in the flesh, or ribs, or inside, or wherever;
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and prevent conception, and childbirth, and perhaps menstruation from occurring;
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of these things is by observation of the bile.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the obstruction is close and apparent, then treat it with your fingers or with a catheter.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is of thin skin, and it is close to the ribs, then hurry, and cut in this manner:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	place your two fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back, spreading her legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then spread the two ribs apart, so that the thin skin is cut, and it is over the swelling;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take wool, and melt it in oil, and apply it to the site, and have the woman lie on her back each day so that she cannot stand.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the sialagogue is hard and thick, then you should scrape it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the obstruction is due to flesh, suspend it at the olecranon and cut it away;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and have the blood-stanching medicines ready, such as vinegar, dragon's blood, incense, and egg whites;
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then apply a bandage of flax wide enough that the wound cannot close;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and keep it open for a long time, and dress it with a tent of dry linen;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then proceed with other treatments until he is healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when flesh is dead in a wound, it must be cut according to this method, except for deeply seated abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For in the deeply seated abscess that is in the wound, one should not attempt to cut it open.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without proper treatment become hard.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	and I have already mentioned in the section the similarities of them, and the signs, and here I will say those that are curable.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and hard lumps, when they are perfectly formed in the wound, and do not appear to the touch, should not be treated with a cautery.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who have the mouth of the ulcer, which can be felt, are those whom one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It is necessary then that you place the woman in a cold room, then pull out the tumor with pliers, and cut it at its roots, then apply powder of medicines that constrict bleeding, such as oak bark and dragon's blood and frankincense, and similar things;
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then place her feet against the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	And if bleeding occurs, make the patient sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and oil, and make one plaster on their back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, apply cupping to the back and breasts without injuring them;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	then take wool, and soak it in plantain juice or in elderberry juice with old wine, and apply to the area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess subsides, treat the area with ointment until it is healed;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and what is called "albathir" is red and resembles a sharp head, so it must be cut as I have said about the thelul;
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then treat him until he is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	for abscesses of the flesh
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses occur in the flesh, such as canker sores and stone abscesses and herpes and ulcers and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	Therefore, it is necessary for me to discuss in this treatise the hot abscess that occurs in the thigh, which is not among those that affect the bowels;
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you wish to know the work of iron, observe whether the abscess is sharp at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and turns red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Then do not hurry to pierce it, but allow it to come to a head until the pain subsides;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then have the patient sit on a chair, and place two small stools for him to lean against, support his back, and position his legs so that they are bent at the knee;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and let his thighs be spread apart, and place his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a good rope;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then place the patient on his right side and bring the instrument used to work inside the mouth of the wound, which is described below;
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you bring this instrument near, you insert the tip first to determine the depth of the wound so that what enters does not go too deep and does not injure the patient;
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths so that the instrument does not harm it;
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	And it is necessary for him to place the tip of the instrument above, and to hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess is apparent, and it is incised by hand gently, then it must be opened at the top, at the spatumile site;
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the boil is emptied, it is necessary to place in the wound moistened cloths in rose oil, or in green oil;
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and place the cloth outside the wound in the middle of the dressing, and place on the outside over the dressing and over the joint clean cloths moistened with water or in which mallows have been boiled;
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat after two days of ointment application as needed, until it is healed;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	And sometimes one raises the swelling and the wound with a enema of water and honey, and then with water in which long roots of lilies and artemisia have been boiled;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then return to applying ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is laid open in the morsel, then you must avoid treating it with iron, but treat it as we have said in the section.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	It is necessary first for the midwife to know the appearance of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman strain downward, and desire to smell the air:
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then the child hastens to come out;
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	then you know that this childbirth is according to the natural form, and the exit is under its head, and the afterbirth with it;
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	And when you see these signs, gently press his abdomen so that the baby comes out quickly;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	for when it descends with its head, the afterbirth comes out with it, and is purified of its excesses through proper care;
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and those who come in another manner do not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it sometimes comes upside down, with its feet first, and may come out in an abnormal position through the thighs or hands, or emerge from the abdomen or buttocks, and turn around by chance on its neck, or in other bad positions;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these matters, wary of error and deception, and I will show you all the positions how one should assist them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the child comes out naturally over its head, and the woman gives birth heavily, and her strength is weak, then have her sit on a stool, or where women hold her;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and prepare her nature with oil or fenugreek boiled, and then place between her two thighs the small spatula whose form is here:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and cut the membrane, and trim it to its nail so that the moisture inside flows out;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and press the woman's abdomen until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to give her an enema of fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then have her take and sneeze from conditi, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	Now remove the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if both hands come out of joint, you should reset them gently bit by bit;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot be reset, place the patient on a chair and lift their feet up;
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then raise the chair off the ground, and support the patient so she does not fall when standing;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if the hand cannot be reset and the child dies, cut the hands with a knife that is placed here beforehand, and extract the child, then reset it properly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of delivering the child onto its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child stands up, it is necessary to lift them up high;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little, until it is even;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take one of the feet and extend it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it jumps to the thighs, instruct them to grasp it, and make it sneeze from this position.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	and may it jump out if God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not go further as we have said, then turn it little by little until it is according to its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it moves easily.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come out as we wish, take mastic from the altars, and sesame oil, and melted gum, and pound all in one mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and place the preparation inside and apply this ointment, then have her sit in warm water up to below the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when it is softened, apply the collar of myrrh to it, and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then have her sit on the chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her abdomen, for the child now jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the birth of the child upon its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the fetus comes in this form, place your hands on its head little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then let her be seated on her neck, and hang her feet down, and lie her down on the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold her hands little by little, and then press her hands on her abdomen, and remove the cushions from under her until she is prepared to go down;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not jump, then take his feet and move them apart, then push up his belly, then put your hands under.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and lift the child little by little;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and instruct the woman to hold on as tightly as possible when the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the birth of the child who emerges with one hand hanging down
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary for the surgeon to return the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be returned, then help the woman stand and walk;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then have her lie down on the bed and spread her legs apart;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then massage as I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, then study to return the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and place the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and command her to grasp as the baby comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the exit of the child onto her neck, and let her spread out her hands, and her face turned towards her mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the dislocated joint hold their hand, then turn it little by little, and move it gently;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, put on the natural muscle movement of height and oil, as we have said, then command her to move little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, make her sit on the chair, and command her to grasp;
et la fai esternuer.	And make them sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner for the entire second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When the swelling reaches this point on the entire second joint, cut into the second joint to your nail, until the moisture is emptied;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the child can move up its face and neck, cut from the mouth so that it is not held back, and move the child;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then push the child inside until it is positioned as needed, and instruct the woman to hold onto something;
adonques si istra legierement.	then extract gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	on the outcome of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that children often come in pairs, and sometimes three or four are born;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not a strange thing, and often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	These are strange things, and do not live, if they ever occur;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiplied and are separated by the upper part that divides them, which is attached to the cheek;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they come out as naturally as any other part, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come out forcefully, treat them as we have said, and let the hand be subtle, and do quickly and gently what needs to be done;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do so as it is needed for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Sometimes they are formed in the marrow I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or even up to XV, and they are all shaped like children by the measurement of the wise sage, and it is necessary that the bailiff seize everything, for perhaps a similar thing befalls them;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	do as is appropriate according to them.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman of the dead child in the womb, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	you must know if the woman is in good health and has no accidents that would cause her fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	It is necessary that the woman lie on her back, and let her shoulders be inclined downward, and raise her legs;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the attendant should divide her into two parts, laying her on the bed in such a way that she is not positioned for the descent of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth with warm oil mixed with a decoction of horehound and fenugreek seeds, and also smear her hands with these oils and decoctions;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then gently press on the woman's abdomen, then find the appropriate spot where pressing is effective, and watch to see if the child is prepared to descend headfirst;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	Place the cautery iron in his eyes or neck or mouth or palate or behind the beard or in the throat or near the sides, and if the descent is on the feet, place it on the toes and at the middle ribs;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that he hold the cautery iron in his right hand, and place the curved part between the two fingers of his left hand, and press it gently with his whole hand, and apply the iron to one of the places we have mentioned until it reaches the empty space;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the form of the cautery iron:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then apply another cautery iron opposite the first one, or a third if needed, so that the extractions are equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then stretch it evenly by moving from side to side, so that the bones can exit, and let the edges of the bone be toothed to hold the bones in place, as shown here is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if one part remains, anoint the side with some of his oils, and press it into that part, and pull the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if any part remains, place this bone higher up, and do so until it all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back for grasping, then you must wrap around the finger, until it all comes out;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then place it at the joint of the sole or heel, and thus you should do with the other hand, and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the head of an infant is large and it is tight in the birth canal, or there is a swollen assembly on the head, then you should insert two fingers between them, cut the head open, and extract the fluid;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	where you should round it with the instrument called "almidach," of which the form comes with the instruments in the chapter that follows this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and do the same if the child has a large head naturally;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then pull the bones with pliers, and if the head jumps forward and it is tight against the forceps, cut them until the moisture that is in the foot's exit is reached;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, cut it piece by piece until you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or between the ribs, you must pierce it until the moisture flows out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on his feet, then the traction is light, and the adjustment to the mouth of the socket is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is tight in the belly or breast, you must stretch it with a drapery wrapped around your hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and cut into the belly or breast until the moisture that is inside flows out;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other limb is removed and the head remains, push your hand in through a hole at the base, and draw it out to the mouth of the socket;
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	Then insert the needle at one or two places, and draw it through.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the sore is constricted due to a hot abscess that has come upon it, one should not work on it, but rather administer moist and greasy substances;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and the treatment includes plasters, and applies aqueous solutions that soften and moisten.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on its side, and you can make it lie flat, then treat it as we have said for a living child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one has no power to do so, then draw the needle through in sections, and leave nothing of the second skin.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, apply the treatment we have described for large abscesses that occur in the flesh;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if bleeding occurs, apply cold compresses, and use other treatments as necessary.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whom the fetus in her womb had died, and when another was conceived after that one, it too was stillborn.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, abscesses came to her mouth, and it swelled so much that it burst, and began to pus heavily.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied an emplastrum of strong attraction, and out came one bone, and after several days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled greatly, because there were no bones in the abdomen.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I treated the wound, and laid bare the bones, until the woman was in better condition;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and I tended to the woman for a long time in this way, and she would occasionally discharge a little pus from the area;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have recorded this chapter only because when masters encounter something unusual, they should know how to provide assistance.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To return the joint to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Here follows the form of the compress, which is used in the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	And to two turns at the two shoulders of the two ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle than the retort, and should be made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of the tube should be two fingers wide, and the edge of the wood should be one finger, and its length half a palm;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two ligaments should be two joints of the same tube, which are firmly fixed in each, half a palm long or a bit more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two joints are placed at the mouth of the tube to open when the two horns are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter, should be made of ebony wood or boxwood, according to the appearance of the pincers;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and have two heads with two joints, as you see, one palm in length, and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you wish to open the rectum with the instrument, make the woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging down and legs spread, then insert the two joints of the instrument together into the rectum, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then work your hand on the instrument as you did with the pincers equally, according to the amount you wish to open the rectum's opening, until it stretches as much as she desires.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all mounted, and their kinds are multiplied;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	and when the physician has them prepared, the work is done more quickly, and they appear greater to people because of their size.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument just because you have not prepared it, for their need is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze by administering something suitable, and hold your hands over her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she expels it because of this, so much the better.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take a poultice and make a hole in the cover, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as chamomile, rue, anise, daisy, savory, and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs, or some of them, should be boiled in water over the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then place a tube in the opening of the pot and the other end in the mouth of the mare, and let it flow until the vapor comes inside the mare;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	The second joint jumps quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if she remains after this treatment and does not improve, instruct the patient to moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or in mastic of hellebore, and then place it on the affected area, and seek a second opinion;
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when she has found it, take it and stretch it little by little straightly, so that the fetus does not fall during extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but it is necessary to move it gently to the right and to the left, and then straighten;
si venra et se desaerdra.	it will come and dislocate again.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the opening of the nostril is narrow, we have described the treatment of sneezing and the fumigation of herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it does not respond to all that we have said, be careful not to force it;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary to tie the affected area of the nostril to the woman's thigh, then administer an enema of tetrachordal ointment;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	it will soften and return, and come out on its own;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	however, when it happens, a bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and troubles the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	Therefore, appropriate fumigations should be given to them:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	some of the ancients have tried fumigation with cabbage and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain her flowers and secondine is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is like glass in appearance, and one places the head subtly in the nature, and the cheeks wide over the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigation be over the charcoal, and continue it until it is spent, and then start another one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the fundament
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the anus developed, instead it is closed by fine membranes:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore, it is necessary for the surgeon to pierce that spot properly with its appropriate tool, and not with a sharp spatula, and be careful so as not to touch it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply wet flax in wine and oil, then continue treating with ointment until he is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will stay in place, insert a wire through the hole, and leave it there for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go to rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes these obstructions come from the sudden closure of a wound or abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	it is necessary to cut open that sudden closure:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	and treat it as we have said about the sinew of flesh.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the anus
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from below the fundament are nodular, and those that come near the fundament or in the space between the two parts may be one fistula or multiple;
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	And when that knotting is old, it works, and still moisture attends white or subtle poultice, and sometimes these fistulas are perforating;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And they are known by what comes out in diarrhea or flatulence when the patient has diarrhea, and sometimes worms come out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And there are fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and reach up to the joint of the thigh, and up to the root of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows the perforating fistula at the anus, and not perforating:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And it is that you place your thumb at the base, and insert a fine needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is curvature, then insert a fine thread of linen or horsehair until you feel the thread or hair with your thumb;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and there is no passage for discharge or gas or truth, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	you know that it does not penetrate;
si te haste dou curer.	then hurry to treat it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula reaches to the bladder or to the urethra, then it causes urination, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it reaches the joint of the thigh, then the thread comes to that place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no curvature and the cause of the pain around it is not apparent, then it will become a bow (a permanent deformity), and medication or soothing ointment will be ineffective.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in these persistent fistulas, there is no cure other than diligent work, and the vanity of foolish doctors who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In the case that is not persistent and is not old, there is hope for healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is when the patient lies down on their back with their spine between your hands;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and lift the patient's legs up to their thighs, and have the thighs inclined towards the abdomen;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then insert a tent of linen, or one made of cloth if there is curvature, until you know where the tent reaches.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it around the fundament, then you must insert your finger there; if then you feel that the tent has been pierced,
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and it is uncovered where you feel between your finger the surface or flesh, then you know that it is perforated;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	do not treat it further as it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	It is said that some can be well treated, but this happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the treatment that is done involves heating the cautery gently according to the width of the fistula, as was said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and insert it completely hot into the fistula until it reaches near the fundament;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this two or three times until you know that the charred parts are burned away, which resemble a feather of a bird;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then treat it with moistened bandages soaked in butter until the flesh grows back, and then treat it with an ointment that promotes tissue growth and healing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healthy, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this cannot be healed by any other means;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the pus enters and does not reach the root which is at the base, and there is a thick layer of flesh or tissue between your bone and the abscess, and you see the fistula under this covering of the chest;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	cut it from the beginning of the fistula and then cut towards the abscess, and apply the cautery afterward until you reach the head of the abscess;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and the tent will be delivered, and it will fall;
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then cleanse those damaged tissues that resemble a bird's feather, and leave none behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the flesh resists and does not allow you to reach the work, then cauterize it with fire or a dry medication.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery combines two good things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	that is to say, the removal of adherent tissues, and stopping the blood and drying the moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then treat moist tents with butter or ground substances until the place secretes pus, and remove the burnt tissues in the pus;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then treat the wound with hot applications and penetrating medicines that harden the tissue, and the medicines will dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes up from the deepest part of the fundament, and is distant from the body, touch that place with your finger and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tent, and there are two layers of cloth or skin where it is close to piercing, there must be no fear but faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it down to the base, or if you can place tents and treat it as in the first case;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deep, so that you do not cut the tissue that holds the base, and vomiting occurs unwillingly;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it since it has been cut near the base, either by tenting or with another appropriate instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then cleanse the wounded flesh that is in the wound as much as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	Then strive to restore the wound and to heal the fistula in the part away from the fundament:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	it will be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And sometimes fistulas occur in this manner:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is in the crease near the fundament under the skin, then take a probe with this shape at the tip:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And insert the thread in a twisted manner into position two, and insert the probe along the entire length of the thread into the fistula until it reaches the tip.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is perforated in the margin of the fundament internally, then extract the thread from that passage, such that you insert your finger into the fundament;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and pull the head of the thread, and bring the two shoulders together, and hold them to each other, and leave it for one day or two;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it several times until the thread cuts through the tissue between them, and they separate;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then treat the wound until it is sealed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open, pierce it in all ways that you can, if it is not too hard.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not proper to operate on it if it is too hard, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spinous process where one makes the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other side it is not, so that one does not cut what should not be cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	for hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Emorrhoids occur in two manners:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	where they are inside the fundament, like grains of sand, and there are small and large ones, and in the course blood is present, and there may be one or more, and they are deviated from the fundament and at the head of the fundament;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those that are deviated have little moisture, and still contain a small amount of yellow water or a small amount of blood, and they have the color of flesh;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment for those who have them inside the fundament is that you instruct the patient to abstain from going out of bed until the fundament heals, and this applies to children;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	hurry and grasp it with forceps, where you hold it with your nail, then cut it off at its root;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the hooks cannot hold them due to moisture, they take them with one finger, or with cotton, or with a piece of cloth;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and extract them with your two hands, then cut them, and apply some warm powders that are used for cauterization;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cauterization, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the hemorrhoid cannot be removed, administer a harsh and sharp enema to the patient to cleanse what is in the anus so that it can exit freely;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	when the patient is constipated, and if the filaments are hard in the anus, then the treatment is light;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And it is that you grasp them with your nail or pincers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and that they fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	It is necessary that you manage the suturing according to this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	take the thread and twist it onto a needle, then pull the thread from above and pierce the needle from another side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be wide;
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and tightly pull the thread, then tie it off, and remove the needle, and do this for all of them, leaving one to allow the excess blood to flow out;
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place a moistened piece of cloth in rose oil or cerate on the foundation, and place it there, and instruct the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave them until they fall off, and when they have fallen off, treat them with ointment and other treatments until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	from the dryness of the bowels or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often there is constipation of feces in the intestines, and by the constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is of no use.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you cut with the tip of a spatula or your nail through the skin above, without leaving it to become moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then treat it until it is dry as necessary;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it does not dry, then shave more forcefully than before until it heals significantly, and let it be scarred;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat him until he is healthy.
dou fremit	with trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	The flea is a small striped appearance on the body, and moves very quickly;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes it is found in the cold, and one feels it as if frozen with shivering, and it spreads throughout the body, and more so in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a quill from a goose feather or a strong bird feather, and place the quill on the shiver, until the circles surround the shiver completely;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand around the quill until you cover all around the shiver, and move it quickly, and shake the shiver from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you wish, do this with a tube of linen or iron according to this form, and let it be fine underneath and threaded above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not pierce, to keep the hair from moving, and press the hairs.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you wish, cauterize the tremor as it is described before in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Sometimes a enema is made of silver or sorrel, or molten wool or bran;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and sometimes these instruments small and large are used, according to the needs of those to whom they are administered.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who are treated in the care of children and those who are weak and in pain are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the enema, small and large, is as follows, or the belly is bound in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and there should be a separation where the abdomen is bound as you see, and the rectum inside is perforated;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and on one side there should be two holes, and on the other side one;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And let the pouch where medicines are placed be made from a bladder of an animal or parchment, and let it be pierced all around with small holes, and have one finger’s width between each hole, then insert a strong cord of rawhide thread in ten or so around, and join the pouch as if it were a drum.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	And when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then administer as an enema;
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the tip of the enema with oil or egg yolk, or similar substance, then insert it gently;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then the minister presses both hands together onto him until he is fully turned, then removes the enema, and lifts the patient's legs against the wall, and if the medicine needs to come out, let it drain as much as possible;
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps one full night, then there is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you administer an enema in a case of diarrhea and the medicine wants to come out quickly, then repeat it until he is well.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament, or an abscess, then the enema should be as fine as for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the fine enema in which the skin is stretched:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already said in the section about the treatment of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We will tell you about the treatments of hands and medicine, according to their fulfillment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and what they are made of.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are from falling stones, and the cutting of swords and knives, or lances or staffs or arrows, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or they are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is from falling stones or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you fear the rising of a hot abscess:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	If you treat it immediately to staunch the bleeding from the wound, and let the dressing be on the opposite side of the injured part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and prevent the patient from overindulging in wine and fatty meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to be bled, then let his food be light, and do not drink wine or eat meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and apply to the wound, if small abscesses occur, cotton soaked in rose oil only, or in styptic wine;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no warm abscess, then apply to the fresh wound that has not been exposed to air, powder which I will describe a little later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the area is inflamed, apply some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar ones, and the edges cannot be brought together by approximation, then bring them together by suturing, as I will describe for belly wounds, of the suture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is exposed bone and flaps open, cut it away;
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat thick foods, such as boiled heads and wheat, and porridge, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find the skin is rotten and does not adhere to the bone, cut away all the decayed flesh, apply heat, then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if there is an artery or vein in the wound that cannot be stopped with medicine, then tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, secure it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and it is that you put in this powder which the patient has sweated out.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the method of the powder is as follows:
pren encens une partie;	take one part of incense;
sanc de dragon II parties;	dragon's blood two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	living charcoal three parts, and powder it finely, then apply it to the wound, pressing it firmly until it adheres well and joins with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then stir the mixture well, and leave it undisturbed if it does not swell;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one does this with charcoal alone, when one has neither incense nor dragon's blood, but the burn has not yet healed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the burn has moved the wound, especially in winter, one must not apply this powder to it;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some prepared ointments, or porridge made from oat flour with water and honey, until it discharges pus;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the fracture comes with the wound and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And I will tell you hereafter about fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerve, then there is no other remedy but to leave it untreated and not apply anything constricting, for it harms the nerve and causes it to retreat;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest part of the body;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but let the medicine be warm, such as cheese washed in sweet water and mixed with rose oil, and crushed cucumbers also washed in sweet water, and other minerals according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then stitch and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and she is swollen and full of blood, then pierce it at the lower part;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut and bleeding occurs, then open it, tie it off, and cauterize it if necessary;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the windpipe is cut, or the throat, and the passage through which food passes is protected, then sew up the wound on the neck muscles, and do not touch the throat but place it according to its natural form;
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then bind it securely, and leave it for several days, then treat it with drying ointments until it is healed;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has impressed upon the bone, then probe it;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are pieces of bone, then remove them all if you can, and leave those that you cannot reach until the wound heals, and clear and align the openings;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on the powder that I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is an abscess, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, then look to see if air bubbles come out of the wound as the patient exhales:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	you then know that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put the powder at the first hour, nor bind it for the blood that does not stop flowing and returns to the heart, and kills the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but apply an adhesive ointment and bind it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you do not have an ointment, then put old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	then there will be no spasm, nor will there be an evil trembling of the heart or foreign matter intruding;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good signs, then you know that the wound is safe.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat her then with poultices and other treatments until she is healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if she cannot recover and the condition persists, then you know that there is an abscess;
si la cure si com on doit.	treat her as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, whether on the front or back, treat it as one would in such cases.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is large, stitch it up;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, treat it with powder; and if it is pressed against the bone, and in pieces, then probe the wound, and tie off any separated tendons;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not separated, let the wound heal, which will ease the extraction;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	from the rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The rupture of the abdomen is great, medium, and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	in the large wound, sometimes the intestines protrude, or the nerves of the intestines, causing an intrusion of air;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one because putting the intestines back in too quickly can be harmful if they are not placed carefully over time;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	Because the intestines swell immediately when they feel the cold, they retract further, and for this reason it is better to move the middle wound, because thereby the intestines are moved back to their place more than with others two.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And you should know that the rupture of the abdomen occurs in four manners:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	the two common sutures occur in the seam of the abdomen, and the sutures of other wounds on the body are also common to those other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and they are still more proper with the seam of the abdomen, and I will say each one and explain them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small and some part of the intestine protrudes, it is a difficult thing to replace, which can be done in one of the two methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	For the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it in such a manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	moisten a sponge with lukewarm water only, or boil it in scalding water with cypress and spikenard, and irrigate the intestines until the swelling subsides;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and sometimes use constrictive wine, which is thick to help reduce the swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling subside, moisten the intestines with water in which hellebore and mallows have been boiled, for this gradually opens the passages;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first treatment should be to avoid cutting unless there is great necessity for it;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the instrument for splitting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	cut inside at the curvature and not further out, and see here the form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump outwards, place them back according to their natural form in their proper place if you have the power, for this is better.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the abdomen, you should have the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the part below the abdomen, place the head and feet higher than the lower parts, and likewise if there is a rupture of the abdomen in one of the two parts, raise the injured part higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And thus must you administer what I say regarding large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	In small wounds, apply what is appropriate for them, then hold the compassionate minister who covers the entire wound with his hand, and bring together the edges.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and this is the common method of suturing, which involves taking one or more needles according to the width of the wound, then leaving about an inch from the edge of the wound and inserting a needle with strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two edges of the skin with the two edges of the suture material, which is underneath the skin, until you pierce it from that part, and bring together the two ends of the suture material.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then draw a thread doubled around the needle on both sides, then bring together the two edges of the wound, and leave one finger's space, and insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then tie the thread as you did for the first needle, and continue doing so as needed with the needles until the entire wound is closed;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	and the needles should be medium-sized, between fine and coarse, because the fine needles cut through all the flesh, and the too coarse ones cannot enter properly:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	that is why they should be medium-sized;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it is not appropriate to insert the needles too far from the flesh and skin, as they may cut and damage the wound before it heals;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then cover the points of the needles so they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and place tents or cloths over the needle points to keep them covered, and leave them until the wound is healed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it suffices to use one or two needles.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second method of sewing is common, and it is that you bring together the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the flesh with one needle where there is a strong thread in between;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and when you have pierced these edges all four together, then pull the needle back to the part where you began, in the manner one sews cloth;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and place a space between each seam as thick as a thin thread;
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This seam is known to the surgeon, and I stitched a wound that a man had in his abdomen, which was pierced by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide, and intestines were protruding about two palms, and the wound was in the middle of the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned the intestine to him after it had been outside for twenty-four hours, and the wound was sealed up for fifteen days, and I treated him, and he became well.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctors had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not treat it with ointment, because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I placed fresh cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle, and bring it from the outer part to the inner part;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the skin directly through, seize the head of the thread or suture where you inserted the needle, and have it pierce from the inner part to the outer part;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and the method of this suture is that you sew as tailors do with fur, and leave once the thread on one side, and take it up again on the other, until the entire suture is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of suture, which Galen described properly, is as some do, who naturally bring together the two parts and fasten one end of the thread to the other in such a manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Pierce an needle at the nape of the neck nearby, and pierce only that place, and leave the two heads of the shoulder alone;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	then turn the needle and pierce from the outer part to the inner part, to the two heads of the shoulder;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce one and the other from the outer part to the inner part, in two other nape points that are on the opposite side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the usual method of suturing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galien says this word, and some witness it, that one must suture the abdomen with two needles, each having thread.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And one must insert one needle from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew belts;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, it is more painful than ruptures in other parts of the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is like the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as if the arrow had drawn it, then reset the intestines and sew it;
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then apply powder that heals flesh, and if the arrow has drawn it, then apply any available ointment until the wound absorbs it;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And cut the thread, and let the suture be sealed, and the wound;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you do not have medicines, place on it as soon as it begins to discharge, old cotton, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no need for other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you fear that the wound may affect the principal limbs, then it is necessary to moisten fine wool in warm infused oil or rose oil, and place it around the angles, and under the armpits;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	And if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, and it often happens, then administer an enema of boiled black wine, and especially if the putrefaction reaches the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And pierce inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is pierced, and this is because of the smallness of the veins that are there, and the subtlety of the whole body, and its proximity to the nature of the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the spleen jumps out of the wound, put it back in as with the intestine, while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	And if it is old and has turned green or black, then you must ligate the area that is black so that no blood flows out, as there are veins and arteries there;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Then cut those that are between the ligament, and let the two heads hang from below the wound up to where it falls to ease the extraction when the edges fall in, and the wound will heal.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the eye
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestines are pierced and the wound is small, it can sometimes be repaired in some people, as I witnessed a man being speared in the abdomen with a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, from which feces and gas exited;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated it as best I could, and did not stop suturing until he was healed, and the flesh closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him cauterize it, I feared the patient would suffer pain in his abdomen;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he did not suffer any pain but improved in disposition, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and some experienced practitioners say that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be treated in such a manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take large flax seeds, then bring the edges of the wound together, and when the seed opens up, place it between the two edges so that they hold it tightly;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then cut the seed in half, and it stays in place so that it cannot be dislodged, then place another seed similarly as before, until the entire wound is covered;
et cout la plaie.	And sew the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If the thread is inserted into the intestine, and it causes no harm to the patient, then one can tie the intestine with a thin thread that is cut from an animal's intestine, in such a manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	take the tip of this intestinal thread which is very clean, and then wind a thin linen thread around it tightly, then put the thread on the needle, and sew the intestine with it, and secure it in the opening;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this method of suturing intestines is not stronger than according to the way of trust and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the major intestinal areas, there is no remedy or healing, except for great skill.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it suppurates, is generally called a "fistula," especially when it is deep and hollow.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to truth an abnormal hard and white swelling where one does not feel pain, and it is also branched like the quill of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes clear and hollow, and at other times thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes small, and at other times larger;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken about this in the section on wounds, that any wound which is not healed and lacks flesh is due to one of the nine causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	which is to say, due to the thinness of the blood or flesh;
ou por sa malice;	or because of its nature;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	For because there is hard flesh inside, and on the lips, do not allow new flesh to grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	For where there is too much pus;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	where the wound is infected, and the matter is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	where the medicine is not good for the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	for because the corruption is like a plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	for because the property in that region is slow to digest, and delays healing, and swells by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins in the bone:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I shall tell you about the treatment of a fistula which is done by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that a fistula can occur in all parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that occur in the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or on the face, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or at some of the ribs, or along the spine, or at any joint in the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and some occur in the principal part of the limb and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all fistulas of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is no cure except for diligent treatment and lack of ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is any fistula that does not reach the place I have mentioned, and you trust in the cure, and you wish to know it, then take a probe of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, and insert it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is curved, then search with a delicate probe of lead, for lead can bend around the curvature;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot properly probe it with probes, then irrigate through one of the openings, for the moisture passes quickly from one opening to another, and clean it;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then probe carefully to your best ability to determine if there are any bones or nerves, and inquire thoroughly from the patient about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and where they feel it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places I have told you about, then cut according to what I have said, and remove the pus and the corrupted flesh that are inside;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	And then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is deep straight ahead, you must cut deeply as much as possible, then place moistened bandages soaked in hot medicine into it, up to the top of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then apply healing salves to regenerate the flesh until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if it is not healthy because of this, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it away.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or artery does not trouble the principal members as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, remove it until all the corruption is gone, then treat it with substances that promote flesh growth until it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it is not healthy and continues to swell as before, know that you have not yet reached the core;
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	then expose and search until you reach the depth, and remove all the corruption, then repair the area;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if he is thus well, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, you should know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	there is no other remedy but to leave it to nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small corrupted bone and you can pull it out with forceps, then remove it with the appropriate instrument, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, do not leave even one.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if the moisture opposes you and there is no mistake or fear, then cut through both the moisture and flesh, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them at once, place on the wound something that generates putrefaction, and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then they will have the bones more easily.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	And if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, then raise the putrefaction only until all the black matter is removed, and then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part of what is corrupted, and it reaches the substance of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	then it is necessary to sew and cover up to the corruption, and then treat it until it is healed;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you can take it as an example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was about thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came within the body, so that the matter came to the leg, and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no reason to delay in opening it;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but the physician, through their folly, worked so much on it that they opened the abscesses greatly, and it corroded much matter, and became a fistula, and many holes appeared where all discharged pus and moisture from the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many physicians treated him for two years, and none showed skill in the art of hands until I was called to it, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what was discharging through the holes in large quantities;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And the body of the young man became red, and he had a yellowish complexion.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that they came together from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I then hurried and inserted into one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone, which was corrupt and perforated, and the corruption extended to the inner part of the bone;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I treated what appeared to be the corrupt bone, and I believed there was no other corruption besides what I removed;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to treat the wound with internal medicines over a long period of time, but it could not heal;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then I tried again, and exposed the bone as before, and found that the corruption continued in the bone, which I treated, and then removed, and attempted to heal the area;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I did not do so much as copying around a palm's breadth of the bone, and I stripped it bare to its full depth, then restored it with medicines;
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and he was healed and sealed quickly, and it did not require repeating the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, and out of fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood often occurred, but he was entirely healthy, and in place of the bone grew hard flesh, and he was well disposed with no harm or contrary effect at all, neither going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, then it must be treated in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take some linen, and pull it at the head of the exposed bone, and instruct someone to stretch it above.
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and place another linen bandage thicker than the first one, and tie it over the flesh that is around the bone, and stretch the head, so that you draw the corrupted flesh inward, and uncover the flesh at the spot where you wish to treat, so that the bandage does not hurt the flesh;
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a torch on a table below the bone to move aside the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and continue scraping as long as possible until the corruption can be seen and felt, and scrape again further.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted and it is not apparent, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, then uncover all the flesh.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then place the torch below, and then scrape from one part to another where the corruption is, and let the scraper follow along the length of the corruption as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut away the corrupted joint, and scrape the bone on the other side where it contains;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if the corruption is in the continuity of the two joints, there is no other remedy but to cut them.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	And if the corruption is in the finger of the hand or foot, it is a very serious matter, but nevertheless you must inquire about that corruption and how it appears to you.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And cleanse it in all ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve oppose you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And know that the incisions and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	And for this reason, it is necessary to prepare for each kind of work its instrument;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and know that the work will show you the instrument of which you will have need, according to the knowledge of this art, and by the testimony of the ways of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	so consider the instrument you need according to what is appropriate.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head may become dislocated either due to something inside or due to being forced out;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have treated that corruption with the cure of medicines, and they do no good, then it is necessary to amputate the limb at the place where the corruption comes, so that the patient escapes by this from death, or by the greater evil of losing the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	And the signs are that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and then the blackness spreads, gradually spreading corrosion from one limb to another, and takes over the whole body;
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	Hasten to cut it if this is due to the bite of venomous beasts such as a sea scorpion and viper and similar, if the corruption is at the top of the head, then cut it, and do not give it space to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it reaches the hand, cut it at the joint so that the corruption does not reach the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it reaches the arm, cut it with a knife;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the cut, it is fatal, and no remedies outside of its quantity of virtue help;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and do this entirely when corrosion comes to the foot:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it affects the first joint, then treat the next joint after it;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, treat the entire foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it ascends to the leg, then treat at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to let the patient die;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the method of treating or bandaging the limb is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister with one cord downwards, and another minister with the other cord upwards, and you cut the flesh which is between the two cords at one span wide, until the bone is uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Then cut the cloth where the silk is, and place a piece of linen on each side so that the silk does not touch the healthy area, and do not cause another injury or abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if bleeding occurs when you work, cauterize the area quickly or apply some constricting powders;
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your treatment until it is complete, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed;
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to a man in such a case:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	It happened that he got a black corruption that seemed burned by fire, and this corrosion started on his heel of the foot, spreading to the entire foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the lord saw the corruption, he hastened to cut off the foot, and was healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and a long time after, the corruption returned to his thumb, and he came to me, and I applied counter-irritants after purifying the body, and could not stop the corrosion;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to, as I had hope of counter-irritating the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I also feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the man's vitality was weak;
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he completely despaired and returned to his land, and hastened to cut off his hand, and was healed;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I do not have this ready except for what one does differently, when there is need for it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess occurs in the flesh and remains so long that it causes a large collection of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus flows out, leaving the area healed, just like a vessel;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin that is above it is as delicate as fine linen, and does not extend to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a condition is called "sound," and is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone deeply, then it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And you should cut the skin all around, especially when it is thin, like a piece of cloth;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not worry about its decay.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you trust that the skin will adhere and there is no risk of decay, and the skin is thick with flesh, treat it as follows by enema:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	check if the swelling is large, and if the pus that comes out has a foul smell, then administer an Egyptian enema made as follows:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	Take honey, oil, and litharge in equal parts, and put it in a vessel over the fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take some of it according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and use it as an enema, and hold the passage.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine in for two hours, then remove it while straining.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this multiple times until the breast is cleansed, and the pus is removed.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and sometimes an enema of ash water is given when this medicine is not present; take ashes from vine wood, pour water over it, let it strain, and use it as an enema until you know the breast is well cleansed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water, then give an enema of water and honey with a little bit of litharge powder.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	When you make the enema of honey and mixed wine, let the honey have the property to cleanse and wash, and the wine softens the flesh;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you trust that the area is well cleansed, then use an enema of what promotes tissue growth, and prepare a poultice with rose oil and in wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	when you administer an enema of certain medications and ointments, the properties of which I have mentioned when discussing ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the opening of the area is small and the tube for the enema cannot enter, widen it with a tool slightly, and insert a pad of Egyptian ointment or mastic ointment until it is widened;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the wound is too wide, then sew it up but leave enough space only for the place where the clister can enter, and if the hole from which pus flows is above, cut it lower down.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the pus is deep, do not allow flesh to regenerate there;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	and if you cannot cut beneath the swelling as you wish, prepare it in such a way that the pus flows to the lowest point where it is, for when the pus is deep, do not allow flesh to regenerate there, and if you cannot cut beneath the swelling as you wish, then prepare it in this manner:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	so that the pus flows gently downward, and leave nothing of the pus there;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidating medicines to apply over the wound, and place a linen cloth that covers the entire wound;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then cut in the forceful places the hole of the chest larger than the first one, then apply an ointment underneath another cloth according to the size of the hole, and place it over the wound to alleviate the pain, and do not remove the large cloth until after several days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and the one who is over the hole of the chest should often remove it to alleviate the pain, and check what comes out of the wound, whether it is poison or too much or little, or digestible or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and be cautious if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in such a manner and you see that the nature rises up over the wound, then know that the chest is healing, and approach the treatment;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	And then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, change the cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the stomach vomits undigested food after many days, know that the stomach does not settle.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons come after a long time, do not despair of health, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are people who take too long to treat flesh wounds, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if undigested food remains in the breast for many days, know that the chest does not resolve;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the chest is slow to improve and has been prolonged, add drying but moist medicines in substance and dry in virtue, such as a diaphoretic ointment, for it contains much vitriol, and this is the last remedy;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take a diaphoretic ointment, and make it with rose oil, and dilute it equally with old wine;
puis le confit et en use;	then apply the ointment and use it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and this same thing cooks better when thickened, when a healing salve is not present, take mallow and aloes and incense, and grind them, and powder them over the honey when it is on the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and then spread it on a cloth and place it over the chest, and sometimes administer an aromatic long herb, and roots of celestial lilies, which are like fennel flour and centaury;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and use simple or compound remedies:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	grind them, and make powder, and mix it with the honey I mentioned, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	And if the treatment is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then you know that the corruption has reached deep, and impresses upon the bone, or on hard members, or on ligaments;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the treatment of the fistula is as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panarisis is an abscess that arises from under the nail of the thumb, or of the foot, or occasionally arises in other toes;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when they are old and no care is taken, then the abscess becomes severe, and it spreads and discharges pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps it will spread entirely;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And the corrosion reaches the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the head of the shoulder is swollen, and the color is bad.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment is of no use, then you must cut away all the excess that remains around the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is a great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail adheres to the flesh and begins to hurt, and the edge becomes inflamed, then you must place a strip under the nail that is hurting the flesh, and lift it up, and cut away the affected flesh carefully and lightly, and apply burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption is in the bone, then cut it out, and apply force, because as long as the corrupted part of the bone remains, it cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see the toe corrupted, cut it at I as has been said before, then treat it until it is healed;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if he is wounded and feels great pain, then it is necessary that you treat him first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the nail of the thumb diagonally across it, and be careful not to cut into the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, place something on top that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the numbness of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The second joint that is born in some people's hands is entirely fleshy, and sometimes it has bones, and at times there is a nail, and some of them are born at the root of the joint, where the origin is in some of us in the flesh near the two joints.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Those who are born with some deformity of the toe do not move it, and those who are born at the joint of the toe may possibly move it;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The body of one who is fleshy is so light, in such a manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	He who is born with a condition at the root of the joint is difficult to treat:
si te tien dou coper.	so hold the copper gently.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or must be at the rear end, you should first cut the flesh around smoothly to the bone, then cut the bone in one stroke appropriately for that person, then treat it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The wound that comes to both together comes by birth, or by the union of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	You must cut that solder so that the parts repair themselves according to their natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then place between two cloths or dampened cloths in rose oil so that they do not solder;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or place between two pieces of fine lead until the wound is sealed as required.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If a wound comes to one of them with the palm, then cut that wound as is appropriate.
des vils	of worms
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Veins are thick and wrapped, full of melancholic excesses, which come to many parts of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and it happens more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should administer enemas to them at times, and then treat them with the herb basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The iron treatment is according to two methods:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one involves cutting them and drawing out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other method is that you open the vein and draw all of the blood out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The procedure for bleeding is as follows:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	First, warm the leg with hot water very strongly until the thick blood becomes thin, then stretch the patient's leg from above the thigh to below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then cut the vein in I, II, or III places, of a wide size, then lift it to draw out the black blood to your hand, from one side to the other, until as much blood comes out as the strength of the patient can endure;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then dress it, and instruct him to eat foods that include black broth;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and repeat the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and it harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The treatment of this condition follows this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	raise the patient's leg if there is much hair, then place it in a bath, and wash the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and swell the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you do not have bath water, heat it by the fire, and then cut directly into the vein at the length to the knee, or in the part inside of the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then work the skin to the tendon, and strip the vein from each side until it feels firm when pressed;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and it is seen as red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then raise the edge inside until it is raised from the skin, and then gently stretch it to the tendon, then cut another place above three fingers;
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then strip the skin over the vein until it feels firm, then lift to the edge as you did before, and stretch it to another tendon as you did previously;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Then cut another length, or more if you need it, then lift it, and cut to the joint of the foot, then draw it out and lift until the second length;
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then extract it piece by piece until it comes out completely, then cut it;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and if you cannot draw and lift it, insert a needle along the strong doubled thread, then lift and draw it, and place one below the next row, turning your hand from side to side until it comes out;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and be careful that it does not break, for if it breaks, it cannot be drawn or lifted, and this causes harm to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and when you have treated it all, place wool moistened in wine and rose oil over the wound site;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it quickly, but do not sever it;
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the knife used to cut the vein is curved, and it does not chop but cuts the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is of large curvature, because if it were fine, it would cut the vein too deeply, but it should be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein appears in the legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and by chance it may appear in other parts besides the legs, and this happens due to the putrefaction that comes beneath the skin, as it arises within the body like serpents and worms, appearing between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there comes a very great inflammation in the leg, then it changes places, and the vein begins to come out, as if a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the wound is open, you should wrap it with a piece of cloth about one and a half to two fingers wide, tie it securely, and let the bandage hang down the leg. Every time there is any looseness or movement, wrap it around the bandage again and tie it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a part of it and wrap the remaining piece, but do not cut it at its root until it is fully out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	For if you cut it, it enters the flesh, causing an abscess and putrefaction in that place, and a bad illness;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For this reason, it must be treated little by little until the end, and nothing should remain in the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and sometimes this vein, when treated, is V palms in length or even X, and one hand of mine has been at a distance of X palms in length from where it exits, and when you cut it, I release I rays or perforations, and pierce it to the bottom so that everything comes out;
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and empty the matter that is inside, and apply to the place medicine that discharges putrefaction for some days, then treat it as you would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And sometimes this vein branches off, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot, or in the foot, and there is much perforation, and thus it often bleeds;
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Treat it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	worms that are born between the skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called in our land "the buffalo disease," because it often occurs among buffaloes, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body moving up and down, and one can feel it well as it moves from limb to limb, until it breaks the skin where it goes, and causes pain.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is caused by putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms and snakes and maggots in the intestines;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and be wary of its malicious nature, for when it travels through the body, and ascends to the head, and reaches the eye, it may by chance enter, and destroy the eye;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see the need to cure and drain it, one must not delay once it has spread:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	then it is necessary to bind the area above and below with a strong and tight bandage, then cut into it and drain it forcefully, and if the pus is deeply embedded in the flesh, and you cannot find it, cauterize the area with fire until it subsides;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm it causes is that it can corrupt the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming near the head close to the eye, then firmly grasp the eyebrow area, then cut above it, and draw out the fire.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and the patient should use cleansing of the body with soluble medicines for purging bad humors, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to certain limbs, and can move from one limb to another;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I saw what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to see a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	And immediately after, the flesh rises like a worm on the shoulder, faster than anything, like quicksilver when it is cut from its place;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain leaves that place and fixes itself in the shoulder, and then a little while later runs throughout the entire body until it reaches the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me that it quickly circled around her body, as I saw it happen.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly at how it moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease behave in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Still, I had heard of many who wished to move pain from one place to another, but I had not seen it myself as I did in this woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought it was because the woman had a dry body and her veins exposed, which made this windiness constrained;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And they do not perceive according to this reasoning for those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and veins that lie flat.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you wish to treat this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, then place it above and below quickly, and then incise until that windiness constricts at its site;
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the site;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat it as one would an accumulation of wind, such as with pungent pills, and snake skin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows vary according to their appearances and the parts of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity among them is such that there are those with large points, and small ones, and hairy, and smooth.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those which have two angles, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and when it falls on any limb, it falls in two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	where it falls on a principal limb, such as the brain, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls then in any part of these limbs, and the signs of death, which I will tell you next, become apparent:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	you should be wary of extracting this arrow, for death follows in many cases;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when these bad signs do not appear, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then remove it and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the signs of the brain when an arrow falls and pierces the bone, and jumps the meninges which are over the brain, are when scotoma and headache and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of tongue, and spasm and disturbance of understanding, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and sometimes it passes without meninges from the nostrils, or from the ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and sometimes speech and voice are lost;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and from the wound moisture white like milk comes out, and it also flows like pus;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if these signs appear to you, then proceed with the treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of an arrow when it falls in the heart is that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and sometimes the arrow moves like hair, and black blood comes out, and coldness and cold sweat occur, and syncope sets in:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	then you can be sure that death will follow shortly.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that pierces the windpipe is that white foam spurts from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow falls in the covering of the hip, it is near the small ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and causes great pain and groaning and sighing;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and the movement affects all the shoulder limbs.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow strikes in the stomach, perhaps some undigested flesh will spurt from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow strikes in the abdomen, and no piece of it can be felt through any part of the intestines, there is no hope for treatment or for extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes pouring forth, and the patient feels great pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and arm pit and spine of the back and ribs and thigh and legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to many conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for this reason do as I say.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man that an arrow fell in his skull at the root of his nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and I extracted it from the other side behind the ear, and he was healthy without further issue.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And I extracted an arrow that fell into the fatty tissue under the eyelid above the eyeball, and the arrow was buried, and little could be reached except for the tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was large from a Turkish bow, entirely of light iron without feathers;
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The joint was sound, and no bad accidents occurred.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And he extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I grasped the barbs, and was subtle enough to extract it, and the Christian was saved.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I extracted an arrow from a man who had it embedded in his stomach, and I thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut around the arrow, and managed it skillfully, and forcefully extracted it, and he did not suffer any bad consequences.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you wish to treat a man who has an arrow embedded in his back, and the wound is sealed over;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the arrow remains inside him, and he does not change his natural disposition in any way, nor finds harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And you wish to treat another man who has an arrow shot into his face, and the wound is sealed over;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and it remains thus without him suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And treat an arrow in the head of one of the king's princes, which was embedded between his ears, and it was slightly inclined to the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	And the arrow was completely buried.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to treat her three days after she fell ill.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I examined her thoroughly and found nothing.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and she felt pain and discomfort behind her right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I applied a poultice to the area to prevent swelling;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and the location of the arrow became apparent.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I applied the poultice for several more days, and reopened the wound, and the patient remained like this for a long time, until he felt the arrow inside his nose for one day;
et il le me dist.	and he tells him to do it.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied a corrosive medicinal agent to the wound for several days until it was open, and I probed it, feeling the head of the arrow that lay in place.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I inserted the corrosive medicine into the wound opening until the head of the arrow became visible.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and after about four months, I carefully enlarged the wound so that I could place the forceps inside, but it would not come out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	then I continued to devise and craft various instruments until one day I was able to grasp it with well-made forceps, as described at the end of this chapter, and removed it, then treated the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the physician judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I then repaired it, and the wound was sealed, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	I have told you about the nature of extracting some arrows, so place your care on what I do not say, for books cannot encompass everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but wise masters compare well with great things, and with what is present and lacking, they find new work, and new instruments, in the descent of strange things that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows exit from the members in which they are embedded in two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	at the place where they enter, or from another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and when it jumps out where it entered, it is an arrow entering the flesh, and sometimes it may jump out immediately now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump out now, wait until the flesh around it is swollen and then ease the exit;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and if it is embedded in the bone and cannot come out, leave it for several days and soften it each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it will jump out; and if it does not, carefully cut around it with a sharp instrument until the area around it is enlarged, and then extract it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and goes to one of the sides of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have mentioned become apparent to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	do not remove it, but leave it as is for a few days, because if the arrow reaches the brain, it is fatal.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is embedded only in the bone and does not reach the surface, and the patient remains safe for several days without a bad outcome, then attempt to extract it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot be removed, administer cold applications around it, as I have told you;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the area until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is lodged in the body where it cannot be seen, search for it throughout the entire body;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, then draw it with some suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut as much as necessary so that the wound is large enough;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs that hold it in place, remove the flesh that is embedded from two sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the barbs so that you may pull it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and be careful that you do not break the arrow, as pulling it out would then be more difficult.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the area around the site is healed, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the bleeding from the wound opposes you, then administer what we have said about its treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and beware of cutting the nerve and the vein, and proceed cautiously so that you can draw out the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and place the patient in the position he was in when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest aid there can be, and if you cannot do so, then place him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another place, where it is apparent some part of it remains, or where the skin is swollen in such a way that it can be seen or felt clearly:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	Cut above, where the forceps can grasp, and then extract:
si saut fuer maintenant.	do it now with strength.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand around until it enters the bone, then expand the bone, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it be for now, and then restart the extraction until it comes out;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the shaft of the arrow is there, cut it off at the base;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if the shaft breaks off, and you wish to administer cautery, then apply the instrument cautiously so that the tip of the arrow penetrates into the blade of the instrument;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then cut forcefully, and if the arrow is embedded, apply the instrument with its tip entering in, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is contaminated, you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if possible, then treat the wound as necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow falls into the thigh or in the belly or at the bladder or in the groin, and it is close, and you can cut over it, do so;
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and be careful not to cut the vein and the nerve, then extract it, and then sew up the wound if necessary;
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and care for it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pliers used to treat arrows is like the beak of a bird, and see here the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways to do this:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the hair awl is also like the feather of a bird, to pierce at the tip of the arrow, as shown here is the form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the tongs for applying and holding is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are thirty-one veins from which one can bleed to health, sixteen of which are in the head, namely:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	The blows which are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech";
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries which are in the two visible temples;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the two veins which are in the sockets of the two eyes, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein which is on the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein which is at the top of the nose;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two jugulars which are in the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins which are on the upper lip, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and two veins which are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins from which one usually bleeds are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side, and laypeople call it "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the middle one is called "faste," and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and laypeople call it "vein of the heart";
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilic vein is on the right side, and laypeople call it "vein of the belly," and it is near the fossa, and this is the one from which one usually bleeds, which appears clearly on the forearm.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the saphenous vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and foot there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is near the curvature of the shin bone on the left side, and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle of the right side;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein called "nexus," which is at the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins near those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The treatment of veins that are behind the ears helps with chronic catarrhs and migraine;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	And the qualities of the surgeon, as I tell you, are that he raises the head of the patient, and rubs the place where the veins are with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then bind the patient's neck with a bandage, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	feel them then with your finger, and where you feel the pulse below your finger, make an incision;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lancet, and insert it below the vein up to the bone, then raise your hand along the entire length of the vein, and cut through both the skin and the vein well two fingers wide, and let out as much blood as you wish;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then strain and bind it until it is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already mentioned the incision and the cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The treatment of the two arteries that are in the two temples is worth for chronic migraine, and severe headache, and habitual ophthalmic conditions, and for the continuous flow of tears from the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of the practitioner are as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and the patient should squeeze his neck until the two veins become distinctly visible;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel the pulse below your thumb, and then cut into it;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Then lift the heart above the vein towards your thumb index, and insert the lancet beneath, lift the vein upwards, and cut it, just as you did with the other two veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then loosen the patient and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then bind it tightly, and leave it until it is healed;
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have already spoken about their cutting and extraction, at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The vein of the forehead is worth as much as the cephalic vein for treating old face diseases, and for migraine, and redness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting it, until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument called "fossaor", of which here is its form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then release the patient's neck, and tie off the vein until it is secure, and sometimes the work is done with a flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	Nevertheless, it must not be that the flame is too sharp;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and proceed carefully across, as the bone is close, and by chance the flame may break when it is fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The salve of the two veins that are in the two tear ducts helps the eyes, and for eyelid inflammation, and for redness in the eye, and for sties on the eyelash, and for diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of its application is that the patient should pull their neck with a twist using some kind of cloth, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then apply the salve, and let it be applied thinly, a little along the flame shape a little wide, because there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flames are fine, they might break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then let the blood flow as much as you need, and then cover it with cloth, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The vein of the nose is beneficial for fever, and for furious diarrhea, and for diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the qualities of the vein are such that the patient should squeeze their neck, then press their nose with your left hand, and take a fine flame long, and place it between the two nostrils, because the vein does not appear well otherwise, and the blood will now begin to flow;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your necessity, then bandage it for a night, for it heals very quickly;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The salve of the two binders helps in the constriction of the almaine, and at the beginning of mixing, and for many diseases, and for empetigo, and for corrosions, and for herpes, and for abscesses;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the properties of the salve are such that the patient constricts their neck below one and the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and let the master stand over the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a chair, then open the vein on the long side slightly, then draw blood moderately, as much as is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	Then do the same on the other vein, then loosen the bandage, and bind all the veins moderately so that the patient does not strangle;
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and leave it until morning, so that the wound may heal.
de la sainie des leivres	of the healing of wounds
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The healing of veins in the lips above helps with swelling in the mouth, and decay of gums, and splits in the lips, and nose, and around them.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the treatment is to have the patient sit before you, and bind his neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then turn the lip and examine the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, which can be recognized by their black color and by the small black veins around them:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	so then probe both veins, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, probe the larger one on each side, and do the same for the two veins above and below, because it is done in the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Remove the tonsil from the root
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The healing of the veins that are behind the tongue helps after the healing of the cephalic vein, and this is at the constriction of the throat, and in diseases of the eye, and in diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the qualities of the healer are such that the patient urinates into your hands in front of the sun, and he lifts his tongue, and you look underneath on each side for a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	treat then one and the other, but do not go too deep, for below are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the arm that are commonly treated are treated in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	either by cutting the entire arm with a sharp blade, or an olive wood scalpel like cutting knives, and it is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame of fire is very famous, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open veins that are full of thick, visible blood, and which contain thick and turbid blood;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtle and pointed, and is for bleeding fine veins, where there is fine yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that affect the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the physician to bleed wisely and to avoid the artery which is behind.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and continuous bleeding occurs, he must stop it, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and must not prick the flame, but cut as before.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not appear clearly, then you must extract it, and change to another one;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	where you want any vein of it, or heal in its place the vein on the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	it appears clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the cup to the flame as before, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to know the place of the healing, then you must extract the arm, and touch the place until you feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then mark the place of the bone, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein on the forearm;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and be careful not to hit the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is the artery:
eschui la donques.	avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it flowing upwards like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that this is arterial blood:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	hurry then, and place your finger firmly, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, as this often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	bind the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient;
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be under fear, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the wound is not staunched, and it is necessary, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it opens, for the head will follow.
et estainche li sans.	and staunch the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take the bark of figs, and cut it, and take one of the halves and apply it well until the other day;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if the wound is staunched, it is good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that staunch blood;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the stiffness is not severe in many positions due to the small area of the wound, and the strength of the arm's ligament.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The median vein in the middle helps to drain blood from the head above and the body below, as it is composed of the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it is necessary for the surgeon to be cautious near the nerve that is below, and if he presses too deeply, and finds the nerve, it swells and the patient suffers greatly, and perhaps cannot be healed;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	And this nerve is often apparent, and if it does not appear in some people due to its subtlety, then you must handle it with a tranquilizing instrument;
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And avoid the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then make the incision lengthwise.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The bloodletting of the cephalic vein helps to draw blood from the head and aids the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is necessary to bleed by puncturing with an olive blade or a myrtle blade, for this is the safest of all veins, as it has no nerves or arteries nearby.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Nevertheless, it is necessary to find the most gentle place, and do not worry if it is not possible the first time, and try again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And sometimes the area swells in some people when it is done for the first time, but it does not cause any harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the salve is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know about medicine is that it is not aimed except to preserve health and to avoid future diseases;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and let the medicine be administered through one of the three veins that are in the arm:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	that is to say, cephalic, facial, and basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should administer medicine at the beginning of spring, in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one should administer medicine on the first day or the third, after two hours or three of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The medicine administered for diseases has no fixed time, but should be given when needed, day or night, at any hour and in all seasons;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not appropriate to bleed children until they are fourteen years old, nor women carrying a fetus from the fourth month until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	And one should not treat the elderly who have surpassed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when someone wishes to be bled, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary for them to cleanse their intestines with a mild enema if they have retained much feces, so that the veins do not attract from the intestines harmful excesses detrimental to the principal limbs;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	nor should one bleed those who are overly full of meat, nor drunkards, until they have sobered up, nor hydropics;
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if one wishes to bleed after colic pain, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and frequent sexual activity, and labor, lack of sleep, and fasting, and anything that exhausts all the strength, whether from something in food or from the body;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then subtly thin the humors, if the blood is thick, through food and drink and medicine, if you have the power to do so;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, to thin the blood, and bleed from the vein around the elbow, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and on that day, guard yourself from work, and from piercing, and from excess, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be tied and joyful, and let the patient lie higher than the person being bled, and rub the arm two or three times, then tighten the bandage moderately, for if it is too tight, the blood cannot flow.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and can be felt;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	then moisten the needle with a drop of old oil, then place the thumb of your left hand on the vein below the area where you wish to puncture it, so that the vein does not move when pricked.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that move like cords when the needle is applied, and some are full of air, so that when you place the needle, it recoils from the needle, and thus cannot be opened.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if the vein is too narrow, then it is necessary that the phlebotomist be cautious in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein acts for the first time, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	if not, then recommence again a bit below that place or above quickly, if the area is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the area is swollen and the patient is frightened, leave it for one or two days and do not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	by chance, abscesses may come;
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	do not enter the bath, then restart the treatment if it pleases them;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the opening is small, cauterize the skin gently and if you doubt that it will not release as much blood as you wish, apply heat directly to that opening.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and work quickly, so that the area does not swell;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the area swollen, do not repeat the incision, and place a little poultice of oil on it, for it alleviates the body of blood, and the poultice is soothing in this place.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus apply the poultice of oil to each incision you make on the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and this same poultice causes thistle and pain when it is applied to the area;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	So carefully feel the pulse and divide it when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there comes a large abscess, which happens many times, especially when the force is not sufficient at the time of the vein opening being small, then hurry, and place on it a sponge moistened in warm water and vinegar for about an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the blood comes from the vein, and if a black or green discoloration remains at the site for several days, it does no harm;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you wish, place some substance of aloes or myrrh dissolved in juice of calamint, mastix, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And many times there is an abscess and swelling at the base of the thumb:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Place your hand on it, and if you find the spot soft upon pressing with your hand, then that swelling is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Avoid placing any of the things we have mentioned, for by chance it could cut into an artery;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but apply the dry poultice to harden the area, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each the blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it thick, let it continue until it becomes thin.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for one who is full and swollen, and needs to have blood drawn, make the incision wider, and let the veins be wide;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed them little and often, and this should be done by cutting across, not deep;
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this method of bleeding is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and is better than long or wide incisions.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for one whose body needs nourishment during bleeding, give moist bread in pomegranate juice;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If it is heated, let the blood flow three or four times. And if it has a cold complexion, before bleeding give him moist bread in syrup of musk, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and strongly scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints after the loss of much blood, it is necessary that he drinks broth of flesh, and fragrant syrup, and uses other things which we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to bleed his arm and let blood again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he lets blood a little at a time according to the quantity of his continuing strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wishes to bleed his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, should let blood seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wishes to be bled from another place should do so on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For it has much blood within the body which is already heated, and causes fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	so it is necessary to let out a large quantity of blood, and to widen the passage until it flows easily;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	after you have considered all the conditions for bleeding, and place your hand on the pulse when bleeding, so that death does not occur due to carelessness, as this often happens when bleeders are negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And it is not right when you wish to dislocate the arm, and let blood a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press firmly upon it;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	nor if he is crooked, that he extend the arm quickly, for it would be worse;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but leave it until it heals from the second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and you apply the tip of the flame, until the blood which has coagulated in the vein opening flows out, and put on a small poultice soaked in water, and press upon it lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not bind it, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, do so from the same vein, or another vein, or from the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein on the arm is bled in place of the head vein because it is composed appropriately.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of healing is that the patient immerses his hand in hot water until the phlebitis becomes red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then bind moderately so that the vein is well compressed, now apply the salve across it, not along its breadth or length;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And let the puncture be wide, and apply salves well near the joint of the hand, and if blood does not flow freely, then immerse the hand in warm water, and allow the blood to flow into the water until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it is winter, do not immerse the hand in warm water, for it is more appropriate to do so in summer than in winter;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the salve for this vein is safer than for all other veins, as there are no artery or nerve near it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The salivation of the right hand is worth for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	strain the hand, and put it in hot water until the veins swell, as one can see;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if the salivation goes sideways, and if you cover it entirely, then nothing will be harmed;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not go too deeply, for the nerves are completely bare of flesh, and then put the hand back in hot water if the salivation is frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn as much blood as is necessary, apply oil and thread to quickly close the vein, and do this for each incision.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The treatment of the left hand vein is effective for diseases of the spleen, and do it exactly as I have told you for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The salve of the sophene is worth for all diseases that are below the body, such as disorders of the legs, and retention of urine, and disease of the thighs, and of the old hips, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of this salivation is that the patient places their foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it bursts, and ties above the ankle joint;
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there are many veins;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	treat then the widest vein, at the ankle, for it is worth more.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you treat it above the foot, be careful of the nerves that are below, and treat it across as if cutting through.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the flame be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, then reset the foot to its proper position, and let the vein be thoroughly opened.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the treatment fails the first time, then begin again slightly above it the second time, for the place is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not fear the nerve, as we have said, and do the same for the vein of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The site of the sciatic vein is at the ankle on the inside, and its incision relieves hip pain when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the qualities of its treatment are such that the patient enters the bath, and applies IV fingers above the ankle in twisting, because otherwise the vein does not appear.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it appears, then heal it in all ways that you can, and by crossing.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is better that you cut it, for the place is below, and it responds well to many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, then heal any line that appears on the back of the foot and near the little toe, and be careful of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and let the blood flow as much as you wish, and then loosen the ligature, and put on cotton and bind it;
ele est maintenant sanee.	She is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	cupping treatments
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Suction cups are made of horns, or wool, or glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and suction is performed according to two methods:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	either by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this suction that does not involve striking is according to two methods:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	either it is done with heat, or without heat;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and the suction that is performed by striking and extracting blood is done at fourteen points on the body, of which one is entirely on the head;
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the other [dislocation] is in the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two others on both sides of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the windpipe behind the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the windpipe of both shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the windpipe above the buttocks;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the windpipes within both arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the windpipes of both legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the windpipes of both ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the windpipe treatment does not draw blood, except from small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken a person as does bleeding from a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And it is not appropriate that it be treated, nor with any fire or sense of heat, in any illness that comes from overfullness, until the entire body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if due to the necessity of illness it is necessary to bleed, or by habit, we shall perform it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and both in these times and throughout each period;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are those who, when they need to be bled, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and there are those who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and are spitting blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and there are some who dream, and see in their sleep blood and wounds and deaths and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we instruct them to bleed after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The treatment of the brain helps with the stiffness of the head... that affects the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of the entire body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this ventilation is in place of the treatment of the head, and it is not suitable for those with a cold complexion to use, or who have catarrh, as it causes them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for those reasons, it is not suitable for the elderly to use, nor for those who have cold diseases in their head;
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover from it frequently become forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to place the cupping vessel a bit lower due to the risk of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The ventosity is located at the nape of the neck and below the occipital bone, and for this reason it is useful for constriction of the stomach, and for splitting the channel of the groin, and for all purposes, and for distension;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and here it is necessary to apply pressure, because if it holds too tightly, it causes obstruction in the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The ventosations at the second vertebra of the neck are useful for headaches, and for ophthalmic pain and migraine, and for choking, and for pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is located at the nape of the neck;
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and you should instruct the patient to press gently without pressing on the artery, and to avoid bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The ventilation below the chin is beneficial for mouth diseases, and for the corruption of gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth;
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and it is in the place of the sinuses below the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventosation of the shoulders is useful for diseases that come from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The ventilation of the axilla is as valuable as that of the three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the surgeon not to cut too deeply, for the area is bare of flesh, and it lies near nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The ventilation on the buttocks is effective for hemorrhoids of the anus and for diseases below it; the cup should be large and made of brass, requiring good suction.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and by chance, if they were delicate, they would break;
et i fai grans plaies.	and make large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The suction cups on the legs provide strong relief because they draw blood from the entire body, and they are effective for old pains in the thighs, and of the back, and of the bladder, and reset the flowers;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and they are placed at the two shoulder joints, and the two ankles, and overall they weaken the body after long use, and cause fainting in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The method of applying the suction cup is to place it first empty, and then suck gently, and attach it quickly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this, until you see the area red and swollen, and feel the heat of the blood;
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then heat it, and apply cupping vessels, and be careful with the condition of the body, for there are those who have thin flesh, and clear pores:
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	It is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make wide incisions, and somewhat deep;
et suce legierement.	and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to open the pathway for thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to let blood little by little, we strike only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we lose a lot of blood, we often replenish it;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if the blood is thick, pierce it forcefully, and ensure that the incision is such that the heart perceives it suddenly, and for those who have thick and hard skin and small pores, you should anoint the wounds with oil that is stimulating and dispersing:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is available, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in spring, use watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess substances are thick and cold, use bitter oil, or balsam oil, or anise oil, and similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the person being treated has tender flesh and large pores, no oil should be applied, but after the suction, they should be washed with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain berry water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, let them rise from a decoction of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large excesses should rise from old wine, or juice of suc (honey water), or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar ones;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	And it is not appropriate to use cupping before a bath or in a bath, but after the bath for one hour or two;
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And do not let them sleep after cupping, and it is necessary for them to walk around when they should be cupped and when they have been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And be wary if the person who is being treated is choleric, and if the blood is too thin and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	then it is necessary for them to take cold things, such as pomegranates and endive and lettuce grown in the shade, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and drink pigeon soup, and eat turtle meat, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold constitution should take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and eat porridge, and eat thrushes and small birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day that he will be bled, he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and one should give some men occasionally trocar or nutmeg before bleeding, or after, to comfort the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the blood be thin, but it is not appropriate for those who are hot to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The cupping glasses that are applied without cutting are those placed over the liver, and over the spleen, and for gout, and on the abdomen and buttocks and thighs and hip, because these members do not tolerate cutting, and we only use them to draw blood from one part of the body to another, as we place them on the breasts when a child is sick;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	To remove the viscosity which is in the limb, as we place suction cups on the abdomen and on the neck to reduce the swelling of the limb;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and it removes the pain when there is an obstruction or stone, and by its attractive power it may remove the obstruction, or dislodge the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and it does this when applied to the liver and spleen when there is retained wind, and these suction cups are administered empty to suck only;
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and sometimes they are administered together with heat, and at other times filled with hot water, as in cases of pleurisy, and in such a manner that the suction cup is filled with warm water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cupping vessel administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And let it be two fingers wide and half a palm long, and let there be a small hole in the center, as for threading a needle, and it should be of iron, underneath so that it does not scratch the patient when placed on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and let there be across the center an iron or steel bar, to hold a candle securely, and let there be both large and small ones according to the illnesses and age of those who use them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the suction cups for children are different from those for the elderly, and for the thin compared to the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one should place this suction cup on the limb as follows:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	Take the candle of wax or linen, and place it inside the cupping vessel across from the shaft that is in the cupping vessel, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping vessel so it does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the limb, and hold your two fingers over the opening we mentioned, so that when you want to, the steam goes out, and then remove the cupping vessel;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and apply the dressing as before, and repeat it often if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping vessel used for treating pleurisy, there is no shaft or opening, and it is not applied except when it is full of fluid, and it is placed on the limb solely for that purpose;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Sandwiches are not applied except to members where cups cannot be placed due to their small size, such as the lips and gums, and similar places;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and on bare flesh areas such as the back or buttocks, and other similar places;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the use is that when you find sandwiches in mild conditions that are clear and suitable for treatment, take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and place them in mild water until they become accustomed, and have nothing in their stomachs;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then bleed and cup the affected area, then rub the limb until it turns red, and apply the sandwiches;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are full, and fall off, if it is a place where one can apply cups, then apply them, for this is very useful afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then lift the area with ease, and then with water, very well, and then apply pressure;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the swelling persists near the veins, moisten a cloth of linen in cold water and apply it, until the vein is relieved;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the vein is swollen, then apply powdered vitriol, or gall nuts, and similar things, until it is relieved;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	and you place half of peeled beans on the area, and leave them until they heat up in that spot, it will now be alleviated;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you need more, take other veins.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the veins do not want to be taken, rub the place with fresh blood, or insert a needle until the blood flows, and then apply them, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will harden;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they fall off, sprinkle a bit of aloes and frankincense powder, or ash, so they will now adhere.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Beware, foolish physician, that they throw themselves into this chapter, having never read any ancient books or letters about it;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason the science is strange in our land, because I have never found any good one;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing of it except through the knowledge of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have acquired understanding, and by experience, and by the habit of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described for you in this chapter what is contained within it, and I have summarized at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I have done in these two preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the main points of discourse and the chapters where the wise one applies his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain occurs to someone, you must hurry to treat the patient from both sides if nothing prevents it, such as weakness of body, children, or elderly;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the time is not very warm, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	And eat cold things, that is to say cold joints, and meat of birds and kids, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no fear of a hot abscess or spreading matter in the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the patient returns to a better condition than he had used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that promote thick and sticky healing, such as boiled wheat in water, rice, headcheese, feet, pork belly, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For such nourishment promotes healing and the broken bones heal more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the bones broken of old and infirm people cannot be well set or mended according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor can those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but do not worry, reset the broken bone with thick bandages that hold and join the limb together, until it strengthens as it was before;
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And do not exhaust him of his strength, and for this reason it is necessary to feed him on coarse meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the hip, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manners of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes along the grain, and another across it, like the shaft of a writing quill.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And for each method, let there be its own instrument, and its proper equipment in the restoration, according to what memory brings forth.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and the fracture of the bone is known by the fact that the limb is twisted, and it is clearly apparent by its displacement, and sounds hollow to the touch.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting or sound upon pressing, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it may still have twisting, or cracking, or small fractures.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not necessary to move it by hand, but apply the medicines that follow hereafter, and then gently press it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And you should know that for the fracture that goes into the marrow, and where the two parts are dislocated, they must now be set evenly so that healing splints may be applied.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if healing splints are applied, leave them on for some days until the swelling is reduced.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then place it evenly to the mold that you can gently and wisely, and know that the restoration of this is easier than that where there are fragments.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then secure it as needed subsequently.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if the bone is fractured into pieces, bind it from two parts, whether it is an arm or leg, or with your hand for smaller members, or with two bands, or with one band and your hand.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And place the limb according to its natural form, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, reset all the fragments in their places as much as you can, and ensure that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient;
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And properly align the two ends of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not right:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	if you set it properly, and do not pull it too tightly, nor press so much as those who cause heat and contraction in the limb through their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is properly set, instruct the patient well not to move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and ensure carefully that the limb is so secure that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels any pain, it is not properly set, and it must be placed in such a position that it does not feel any pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and ensure that it is placed correctly so that no curvature occurs when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs, such as arms and thumbs and similar:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	it is necessary to wrap them in soft and fine linen cloths;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those who are thick, such as thigh and leg:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	it is necessary to wrap with a wide and hard bandage, for the wide straps embrace the entire large limb, and compress it equally from all sides, so there are no gaps;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then tie around light rollers, three times or four according to the limb, and press your hand slightly on the entire bandage, then go above the break and compress it less so that the break can move a little;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and gradually loosen the bandage little by little until you cover most of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wrap it again above the broken area;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the part on the side of the fracture and compress it moderately, not too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first chapter above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place linen or cloths between the bandages so that they are all even, then wrap everything with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, place hot poultices that reduce the abscess and alleviate the swelling, and leave it like this for several days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then bind over your splints, and they should be half the width of a palm, made carefully from hazelwood or the wood used for skewers, or palm ribs, and should follow this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the splint which one places on the fracture be a little larger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and it should be as long as is necessary for the limb, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then press against the splints as you did in the first hour, then bind it with bandages, just as on the fracture in the first hour;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	tighter above, looser below;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and the bandages should be medium thickness, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the bandages are too thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who use twisted linen cords for their bindings, and this is a great error, because the binding cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not have less than two fingers' width between each splint.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is pierced by the points of the stars after being bound in their beds, place below them linen plugs, or wool rags, so that they do not become entangled.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the splinter, and the skin is broken, I will describe the treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And you should know that it is not appropriate to extract all the splinters from broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is large, one should not put on splints before five days or seven, or more according to your experience with a hot abscess ensuing.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and see here the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and take flour that is kept near the mill walls, and mix it abundantly with eggs, and apply this preparation, not too thick or too thin, and use it, and this is the common method of a plaster restoring fractures in many cases, especially for women and children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another method of a plaster restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take ten drams of aloes wood and styrax and anise and spikenard and gum arabic and mastic, mix them together.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	Take five drams of myrrh and aloes.
alechil VIIII З.;	Take nine drams of alecost.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and make it into powder, and mix it with the yolk of an egg;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	If the person's constitution is hot, use this plaster, for it is well composed, and quickly restores broken bones, and benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another method of plaster for treating sprains:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take mugwort and viper's bugloss, one handful each;
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	take myrrh and aloes, one pound each;
acaice VI З.;	take acetum, six pounds;
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	take Armenian bole ten pounds, and grind well, and mix with water or egg white, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another method for plasters for joints and bones out of place, to alleviate the pain that occurs, and for wear on the bone, and fractures:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	take new wool, and boil it in lard and oil, and apply to the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not heal, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and properly alleviates the pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way of applying a plaster to restore broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	take dried mulberry leaves and herb leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plaster for the restoration of a broken bone and to reduce the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take root of mallows, chamomile, violets flowers, flour of oats, of each one part;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix it with moist coriander water, or just water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to make a plaster stronger than the first one, when a hard abscess comes during the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take roots of mallows, and seeds of flax, almond, honey locust, and spurge, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of each one part;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and grind, and mix with salt water, or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates states in his book that one should not place anything on a broken limb to restore strength except for plaster made of wax and oil, and nothing more, and he says it should be neither too hard nor too soft.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen seems to suggest that for a broken limb, one should place dry and slightly warm things on it to restore strength, such as myrrh, aloes, and incense, and similar items, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another method of plaster for injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	take mutton and human fat, or bird feathers, and vervain, and mix equally, and grind them, and make a plaster and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then loosen it a little after, and be careful if the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place;
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	do not loosen it by hand for days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hurry, and loosen it, and remove the plaster now;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take a light cloth, and a sponge soaked in sea water, and dip it in water, and apply it to the area until the itching stops, and the pain is relieved;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the limb rest for an hour, then place dry wool soaked in water or rose oil on it, and bind it with a bandage until you are sure of a hot abscess;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then restart the gentle treatment, and a little plaster, and do not strain it as strongly as before;
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and gently until he is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is red and swollen and painful and inflamed are gone from all over, and you need ointment and linen, then restart it as you did first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if the limb shows no sign of what we have said, do not dislocate it before three days or four or five or seven.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and sometimes leave it for twenty days, depending on what is observed, until the break heals, and the bones come closer together.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then restrain it more than before, and increase its flesh, as I said before;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see the area dry more than necessary, know that no new flesh can come there;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	then apply warm water compresses every time you dislocate it, and do this every third day, and loosen the bandage a little;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	By this work then correct the nourishment to the limb, and quickly mend what those foolish doctors do, who abruptly reset the limb:
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	It is wrong, and such work is fearful, and I see nothing else but to leave it and do it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many kinds of fractures, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinct;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	for there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the force removes all the bone up to the surface beneath it, as if splitting wood or a staff;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and for this reason this kind of fracture is called a "splitting" or "chopping.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	When the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute";
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and the wound from these two fractures is large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded impact, or split by the neck of a stone, or falling on a stone, or other similar circumstances.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a break that approaches the membrane beneath the bone, whether it is on top of the bone or near it, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And there is a wound that is set in the bone as fine as a hair, and this crack is small, and for this reason it is called a "hairline" fracture;
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and there is a wound made by being hit by a stone, or by falling, or similar things, which causes a bone fragment to enter below, and the place is covered with hair as blacksmiths do when they hammer on their forge;
si entre li piere dedens.	and a stone enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often to those who have soft bones in their head, such as children's heads;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and in all these types of fractures, small fragments may become displaced as they do;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all manners of fractures by the depression above them, and by probing with probes, and by the corrupted flesh that is on them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair-like appearance is recognized when, after uncovering the bone, one rubs along it, and the fracture appears clearly black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, be wary of any adverse effects on the patient, and if you see any bad signs, such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, convulsions, paralysis, fever, and the eyes protruding and reddening, and other similar conditions in many circumstances, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any alarming signs, and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wounded person first comes to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day so that you can do so.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the skin under the bone does not rot, and the accidents we have mentioned do not occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the affected part as follows:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and it is that you take the head of the patient carefully, and expose the bone in all ways that you can, and around the shape of the wound as deeply as you can, and if blood vessels bleed upon exposing the bone, or an abscess forms, use appropriate assistance, and fill the area with cloths soaked in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and allow the wound to rest until the swelling subsides, and be assured of no further bleeding;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin to remove around the bone, and this is done according to two methods of work:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	one method is that you cut closely around the incision, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make the second cut larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second method is that you have various incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of iron.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and work gently so that you do not bleed the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and protruding, it is necessary that you pierce around it, thus administering incisions with files, not deeply enough to penetrate further into the skull bone, and it should have above the tip a margin or circle, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone;
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	And you must have several of them, so that each comes in its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have splinters for all parts of the head;
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And this is the form of the three kinds of splinters:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	To pierce around a broken bone, place one splinter on the bone and turn it until you know that the bone is pierced;
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	then place the splinter slightly further along, and do this all around, then cut with your incising tools the space of the bone that is between the holes, and do this as carefully and gently as we have said, until you draw out the bone either by hand or with any of the instruments you have such as forceps, pincers;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	And guard that you do not touch the brain or the cerebellum.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone, and drawn it out, then you must use an instrument that is prepared from the bone to all other similar instruments, resembling a scalpel, but it must be thinner and more delicate than other scalpels;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if anything remains of the small bones or any scales, then remove them gently with the instruments;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And the other method of work is that which Galen described, which is more skillful;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and he praises it very much, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to expose a part of the bone where the fracture opens up, so that when you have uncovered this part, you place below the head of this chisel, which has this shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut from one side, and the part to be cut is arched on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then tap lightly with a small mallet on top, so that you gently cut around the bone all around, and take great care of the skin below;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it is adhered to the bone, remove it gently, for it must be removed without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through to the membrane, and the bone is broken only slightly from above, with small pieces present, then it is necessary behind that roughness, to remove the scales with a fine scraper which you must have in various quantities, to administer at each place what is most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Start with large scrapers and then use finer ones, and do not stop using them until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other hair-like incisions and subtle fractures, you must manage them according to their direction;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	And it is something that is not answered by one who has devoted his study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is uncovered, then you should take a piece of linen, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another piece of doubled linen, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first layer of linen;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and apply this as lightly as you can so that you do not burden the wound, then administer another layer over it, and do not pull it too tight but just enough to cover the wound;
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and leave it thus for one or two days until the swelling is reduced, then release it, and administer medicines such as root of lily, and flour of vetches, and powder of incense, and aristology, and similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and from these things make powder, and apply it to the wound, and immediately administer cleansing medicines without caustic substances;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and ensure that the wound is immediately clean, do not leave any ointment on it, nor allow pus to accumulate, because when pus accumulates on the cloth of the brain, it can lead to corruption and putrefaction, causing great harm to the patient;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when something caustic is applied to the surface, it must be covered with another layer.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take care if any harmful accidents happen to the patient, as we have said, it is uncertain without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackness comes not from anything other than the medicine that you have put on it, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and add a little glue, and apply this mixture to it.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it according to the appropriate methods until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that sometimes the two parts of the skull above can be broken, or just one part, because these are two bones;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and the one below is made of cartilage and does not break, but can be pushed out of place or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, you should insert your small finger into the opening of the skull, and align that fracture with your finger inside, and outside with a pad, until the skull returns to its natural shape;
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this gently, and watch that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and your rod cannot reach that place, then you must place it equally on top of a slightly thickened rail.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is in two parts, then do likewise, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	unless, after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling has subsided, then apply to the head of the neck cloths of linen if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	And you apply another on the other side, if the fracture is there;
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and let the cloths be thick enough to fill the openings of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some practitioners say that the tents should be moistened with butter, and changed each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem right to me, but they must be moistened in a mixture of egg whites and flour powder;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then leave it covered until the bone is hard and the cartilage is hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And sometimes one inserts goose feathers instead of bandages, and if there is a small cloth around it, it holds the dressing, and the patient blows through them;
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	or do as you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if pus comes from abscesses in the nose while you are treating them, apply cerate or cotton moistened in rose oil, or a little bit of myrrh.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if pus does not come out, apply a plaster from the outside made of sesamum flour and powdered incense, mixed with egg whites, then put on light plugs, and do not bind the nose;
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract with suitable instruments, then sew the wound, and treat flesh wounds, and sealing, such as plasters and suitable ointments;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tampons, and place strips of cloth, until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fractured from the side, and there is no wound to exit, and the fracture is only inside, not broken into two parts but rather cracked internally, one can easily recognize it.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you place your index finger in the patient's mouth;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then place your index finger of the right hand, and gently push the fracture inwards, and support it with the other hand from outside, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jaw fracture is displaced in two parts, you must administer an extension to both sides until they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if the movement or fracture of the teeth occurs, hold them with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then place wax on the broken jaw, and put on two cloths;
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	and place on the cloth a large splint well made, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the jaw, and secure it as much as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the face changes shape, then loosen it on the third day, and then adjust what has changed.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and apply a plaster on top, made from powder of the mill with plenty of egg or sesame flour, after you have removed the wax.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and put on a poultice of light wool, and if the poultices adhere, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until they are healed;
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	many times it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if large abscesses come, then treat them as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is both a fracture and a wound, check if any piece of the bone has been removed;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	and carefully remove it with appropriate instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with flame according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and none remain, then stitch the wound if it is wide, and apply suitable plasters to it, to promote flesh growth until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The collarbone is often fractured multiple times near the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	where it is broken and separated into two pieces, with fragments, and this is the easiest to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	Where there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the work is such that when there is a fracture without a wound, you should have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the bone is broken;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other extends the arm towards the part.
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	Then place the fracture between your hands so that its form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or sign of displacement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to extend further, place under the patient's shoulder a round ball of cloth, or wool, and let it be as thick as necessary;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and extend and lift the limb, and hold the ball with your hand so that you can place the fracture evenly as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the humerus out due to its position, then the patient should lie on their side and place a medium-sized pillow under the armpit, and have the assistant push down on the shoulder until the bone of the humerus is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then align the fracture with your hands, and if you find it shattered, you must cut into it;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and gently pull the pieces apart, and if the bone cannot join due to any prominence, cut it with one of your incisors;
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but place the forceps away from this instrument to protect the surface;
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it appears like a spoon, and is not jagged, and should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it should have two heads, as you see, and one wide, and the other narrow, like the outline of the wound you made when you treated the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound open, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt it being a hot abscess, cover the wound with cloths and tents according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if abscesses come, wet the cloth in rose oil and honey and vinegar, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The binding of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a plaster made from powder from the mill and an egg white, and place light dressings over it, and place a pad under the splint if you need to.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very wide bandage one palm wide, then place a double cloth over the dressings, and the plaster.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a slender stick three digits wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and place the splint on the fracture, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy shoulder blade, and under the affected shoulder blade;
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and realign each part, and when you see that the ligaments hold the fracture in place, and clearly see that the splint does not move off the broken bone, then examine it every day, and when the ligaments loosen, restrain them;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and have the patient lie on their back, and place a small pillow under the shoulder blade while they sleep, to lift the shoulder up;
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	this will ease the fracture of the collarbone by lifting the shoulder, where you bind the arm to the neck, and do not undo it unless a bad accident occurs, until twenty days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	Then reapply the plaster if you see that it is necessary, and bind it in this way until it is restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and it is restored within twenty-eight days, and in fewer days for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It often happens that the shoulder is broken either widely or in the middle, and one can only know this by touching it.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	treat it according to the shape of the break and reset it according to its natural form in all ways that you can.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then place powder from the mill with an abundance of egg, and light bandages, and put on one double layer of cloth.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then place a splint wide and thin, a bit wider than the shoulder, and if the splint presses on any part of the shoulder, pad that area with linen cotton so that the splint rests evenly;
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	and then tightly secure it with a large bandage so that the splint does not move from its place, and check the binding each day;
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	and each time it loosens, tighten it again, and adjust the splint if it has moved from its place, and have the patient lie on their side;
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder should be immobilized for twenty or twenty-five days.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number of days is completed, then release it, and be careful, for it is not bone that will return to place easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes and points away from the heart, they cut it off, and do as we have said in the fracture of the collarbone to ease a hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks at the ends.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it inclines to one side, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks appetite, and sweats, and perhaps vomits blood, and the movement of the bones can be felt clearly through the skin.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is as follows: the patient lies on their back, and a cushion is placed between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and bring together the ribs of both sides with your hands, and gently align in all ways possible, until the shape of the bone is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then apply plasters and wads of fine salt, or some other light material, and wrap it in a cloth, securing it over the broken bone so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and turn the bandage tightly to the back, and tighten it gradually, and check each hour the bandage, and if it loosens, then tighten it;
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it is necessary to loosen it for corrosion or itching that comes in the area, or pain or abscess, then hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and address whatever has come from methods of treatment;
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	then reapply the plaster, and tighten it until it is secure.
de la brisure des costes	Of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the breakage of ribs comes rarely except from heavy blows to the back, and at the front towards the chest, and they do not bend easily because they are slippery;
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and one feels well at the inquiry of both.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is such that you place it equal to the fracture, as is necessary.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a splint if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the fracture of the ribs is inwardly displaced, the patient feels great pain and stabbing, as with pneumonia, because the bone pierces the tissue;
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and he coughs up blood clots, and vomits a lot of blood, and this is a serious condition, and the elderly are more prone to it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push out the bruise from within.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this so that abscesses do not occur there if they have not already come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have occurred, then heal them.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And some say to place suction cups over the area, to draw out forcefully, and this seems reasonable;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	still, there is concern that the suction cups may not draw out the excesses to the site due to the condition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say to cover the area with wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to make the application even around, then proceed with the treatment for pleurisy, of food and medication.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear from the bone piercing the tissue, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to cut into the area of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place an instrument underneath to protect the surface.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then one must cut the bone, and gently pull it apart, and then sew together the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if small abscesses come, place cloths soaked in rose oil on the area.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the area as needed for the abscess, and let them lie on their side where it is necessary, until they are healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck (or collarbone)
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes there is a fracture of the neck bones, and it can happen that they bend;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be well or not, observe if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when they are pinched and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and that the patient can be treated, if proper care is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you wish to know whether it is sound or not, observe if the feet are weakened, and if the symptoms that indicate paralysis are present, and on the back there is swelling and involuntary evacuation;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when it has been pressed upon its abdomen, there is involuntary evacuation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is lying on his back and wishes to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is deadly:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	do not attempt to treat it.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these accidents do not occur to him, then the matter is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is that you should apply heat if there is a hot abscess, and place on the spine rose oil or egg yolk oil until it subsides;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest;
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and let him not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone breaks, it must be set immediately;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and remove the bone, then sew together the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat it with an ointment that promotes flesh growth until he is healed;
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	And if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the humerus," place your thumb from your left hand inside it as far as possible, then equal to the other hand's power, then apply the poultice and the bandage if you need them;
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then compress it, and if there are displaced bones, cut them out, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	It sometimes happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does happen, there should be a slight reduction in the head.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	And it extends long, and inclines inward, causing the patient pain at the site, and swelling where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand upon it, until you are on the fracture;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and feel where the fracture is and its shape;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the fracture is only at the head, then set it equally so that it has a natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is lengthwise, where it inclines inward, make the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of that fracture is prepared.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have set it equal, then apply a poultice, then place a stick or board over it and bind the fracture so that it does not move;
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and pad the area under the ribs until the sides are even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if swelling comes, do not touch it, until the swelling is reduced, and then apply what we have said before;
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to the restoration, and compress it as is appropriate, if there is no harmful incident;
et c’est li maniere.	and this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The shoulder joint is what is between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, it should be restored according to one of the two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	one of which is that you take one staff filled with thick paste, in this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And tie the two heads with two ropes, and pull them up, and seat the patient on a chair;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then place the injured arm on the staff, up to the armpit, and have it curved within the staff, then pull upwards with some heavy object or have the assistant pull downward;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then place the splint equal to his hands together, so that the splint returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that you suspend the patient by his healthy side, and tie one hand to his neck, then command two ministers that one hold what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other hold below at the entire band, and stretch each to their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you wish for the extraction to be stronger, then remove the ligament below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the tendons on its side.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the splint is near the top of the shoulder, then you should place one band underneath the armpit, and the other towards the side, under the splint;
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	and similarly if the splint is towards the side, place one band lightly, without effort, so that the splint is even in position, and on the side;
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then place the splint evenly as it should be, and secure it, if no abscesses occur.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if abscesses occur, do not secure it for seven days, and place damp linen in a clean area with rose oil, until the abscesses are eased;
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then it is held in place, and the method of holding it in place is that you put the plaster on the fracture, then bring the arm up to the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or over the chest;
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and apply the bandage, and secure it to the shoulder and arm so that the arm is in a stable position, unless something prevents it, or if the bone has not moved back into place.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone will move back into place, use splints, and place on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have one thumb's width between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it extends three thumbs' widths on either side of the fracture;
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then press on the stars, as I said at the beginning of the chapter about fractures, more forcefully and without moving them apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the position of the bones and their compression as we have said, when you restore the broken limb, and you fear a hot abscess, then leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said;
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	then check the bandage every three days to ensure that itching or swelling does not occur at the site where healing cannot take place because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If he is treated as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accidents occur, do not remove the bandage before three days or more, and have the patient sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and place under the shoulder a cushion filled evenly with wool, and check each hour of day or night that the shape of the broken limb does not change, nor be softened the ligaments;
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if it is directed by the power of medicine, and give him the meat that we mentioned before, in such a way that the meat at first is finely prepared;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when he begins to recover, then let it be more substantial.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be reset in forty days total;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then it must be loosened and administered baths and ointment medicines to heal the area;
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is tight and stuck, then wait one day or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "humerus", of which one is small, and it is the one that contains the socket;
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the little finger;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	by chance, the large humerus may be broken alone, or the small one, and by chance both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small humerus is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	and when the large one is broken, the healing is difficult, and worse than when they are both broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small phalanx that is merely broken, then it should be gently extended and placed evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is the large abscess, then it must be squeezed more firmly;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and place it on the cushion, and raise the poultice of the hand higher than the others, and the small ones lower than the other two, and let the patient lie crossed upon himself, and the cushion in front of him raised, so that the patient does not suffer any labor;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	then extend the minister's arm to the side of his hand, or at the joint, and another minister on the other side above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the bone evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there are pieces in the fracture, place each one in its place, and if any are displaced causing pain to the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut it out as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the probe for wounds, I have spoken of it in the separate chapter;
si pren la cure.	then take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if in the beginning of the restoration abscesses occur, then apply a bandage made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and apply the bandage gently, until the small abscesses are alleviated.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then remove the wax, and apply a poultice made from powdered miller's flour with an abundance of egg whites, and place the bandages, with the one at the wound site being firmer and slightly wider than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and note that there should be six bandages on the arm in various positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	whether the fracture is in one of the bones or in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and hold it tighter near the fracture than elsewhere, and gradually less as you move away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the bandages on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let the thread used for stitching be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And examine the limb and its joint after several days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must sprinkle the limb with warm water until the itching is relieved;
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the limb rest without being too tightly bound.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then restart the compression, and if the joint is weakened and the bone dislocated, and similar things, address them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And be careful if the swelling cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must loosen it a bit, and leave it like this for several days until the swelling flows there, and then compress it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, do not dislocate until twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	When you examine around, then place his hands on his neck, and let his necks be even, and guard against movement and shaking, and sleep on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and sometimes in twenty days, according to the composition and the strengths of the humors.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and the sides there are few fractures, and it rarely happens that they become dislocated many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the palm of the hand is fractured or bent, then it is necessary for the patient to sit cross-legged and sit upright facing forward evenly;
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	then place his hand on the extended cloth, and the attendants extend the broken bones, and align them evenly, until they are properly joined;
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and apply the plaster and bandages, if no abscess forms, then place a splint according to the size of the area;
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and wrap it in a piece of linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is in the middle of the sole of the foot, make a pad of cloth and instruct the patient to bind it tightly to their fractured sole;
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then bind it with a long strip of cloth, and make the splint as thick as the palm of a hand, and secure it as is appropriate.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is on the side, then you should place a support above and another below the sole of the foot, so that the hand remains open and straight, then bind it quickly around the hand, and secure the binding between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the fracture occurs in one of the bones on either side, especially if it is a toe bone, place it evenly as is appropriate;
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and you press it with the palm, and if you wish place a small straight splinter to lift the fracture, and it does not move;
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the fracture is on one of the others, such as in the index finger or one of the others, set it straight and bind it with the healthy finger next to it;
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	bind them all together, which is better, or place a splint on them, like on a box;
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and be careful in the restoration and disposition of a hot abscess, and support those who come to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh bone
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bone of the thigh is often fractured, and it can be seen well when it turns forward and backward;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	And the restoration is such that one binds a bandage above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on their back, then each helper extends their bandage equally on their side;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and this is when the fracture is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then one of the bandages should be towards the groin, and the other bandages below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And if it is near the knee, then the bandage should be near the knee, and the extension below;
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then the physician should align the bone equally with both hands, until it is in its natural position, and then apply a plaster, and bind it, so that abscesses do not occur.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside before you return to your work and treatment;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	the ligature is made in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	You should wrap around the fracture one bandage doubled in two or three layers, and leave out the excess, then turn the leg until the heels align with the root of the thigh, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee from below, with the ends of the thread above.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	then wrap the bandage around the leg and thigh, then place splints on the fracture, and put a splint on the bone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then place a piece of cloth between the thigh and the calf to evenly distribute the pressure, then begin to bind tightly three times or four above the fracture;
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and as you go further up from the fracture, the binding should be less tight;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then take the two ends of the thread that you placed between the thigh and the calf, and bind three rounds above them, then go back under to the head of the thread until you reach the foot;
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and bind it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it as is, so that no abscess or swelling occurs.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it does occur, then loosen it and address what happens, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are bone fragments that cause pain, they must be removed, if possible;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if it cannot be done, it is necessary to cut the area and draw out the pus;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And sometimes the thigh is fractured in such a way that splints must be applied, as with the shoulder and arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	nevertheless, the patient will not suffer harm in such restoration.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in 21 days, or a few less or more, depending on the differences in temperaments.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the groove of the knee there is often a slight fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it fractures, it is merely a crack or hole, and it becomes like any other wound, and this is felt very well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is such that one sets even those who have bent knees, until they are joined as much as possible;
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Then apply the plaster, and place a round splinter if you need to, and bind it as is appropriate, then check all the preparations we have mentioned for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar conditions;
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply what is appropriate to each condition until he is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is properly called "mustel," and the other is called "foscile";
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	and any other fracture that occurs in the arm is treated similarly to how the leg is treated, and the work is done accordingly. And if both bones are broken together, then treat the leg from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen clearly;
et torne desoz.	and turn away from it.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then treat with extension, and place it evenly, and bind the splints equally;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but still, if the break is severe and there are multiple pieces, the extension should be gentler and lighter;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and proceed according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, take two bundles of wood to wrap around the leg from both sides, and let them run along the length of the leg from the knee down;
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	Then wrap with two layers one bandage above and below, and place it in the middle as well, so that at this point the leg cannot turn to either side, and thus it is secure;
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and some administer one splint along the length of the leg, and if it is wooden, they place it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly done this is used in fractures where there is an open wound;
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and move the leg each day to check for any abscess or other complication;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	treat it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the foot bones
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and at the two joints, and it happens that it breaks in various conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if it happens that the bones of the foot are broken, and you see these bones overlapping each other, place the patient's foot on the ground as if they were to walk, and then now put your foot on top of theirs where the bones are raised, and then press them until they return to their proper places;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then apply the plaster and plugs over it, and place under the belly of the foot a small tablet filled with two spoonfuls, then bind it tightly to the foot after wrapping it with cloths, and other things that you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if any of the two is broken, repair them as we have said about the two of the hand;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then place a splint on the broken toe according to its length, and make it slightly wider, then place under the foot the tablet that I mentioned, and bind it tightly;
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are two or three, or more, broken toes, place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in one piece of linen cloth, and bind the tablet under the foot;
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And let it stand on top of the table to expose the belly of the foot so that it is well covered.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And you must not forget the other things that I have said to the other surgeons, as we have mentioned;
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and treat each case as is appropriate.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone of the woman's pelvis is fractured, make her sit with her legs spread, then lean her towards the part of the back, and hold her from behind;
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill the area of the woman's pelvis with cotton, and place there pieces as thick as a finger;
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	then help the woman stand up, and lift her back little by little, and then push the cotton until it reaches the entrance of the pelvis, and return the bone with the padding;
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	and when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she has urinated, replace it, and do this for seven days or around that time:
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a sheep's bladder, tie a tube to the opening, and insert the entire bladder into the body;
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then blow firmly into the tube until the bladder is inflated inside:
la nature si revenra li brisure;	the body will return the fracture to its proper place;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then fill it with cotton, and leave it like this for several days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the thumb of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the thigh bone;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these nearby fractures are not hidden from one who puts his study and practice into them, and my book becomes understood.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fracture signifies in various positions the right way of restoration:
enten le donques.	understand then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the shaft, when it is fractured, take a goose quill and insert the shaft;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap strips around it, and leave it for three days or until the swelling subsides, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, to be treated immediately, so that the treatments we have mentioned bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then cauterize it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, and then resume restoring the fracture at the same hour, or on that day, unless abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses come, then cease the restoration until a new day, until the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it even on the third or fourth day, for you would cause harmful accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is apparent on the exposed chest, then it must be set gently with your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension is not available to match your hands, then use this iron instrument which is seven or eight fingers long, and its width corresponds to the size of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and for this reason it is necessary for the physician to apply three or four, according to what may be needed in each treatment of fracture;
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and let it be round and slightly thick, so that it does not bend under the pressure on the limb during your work, and let it be sharp at the front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called "palainche", for which the curved head should be placed on the top of the visible bone;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and push it in at once, until it fits, and let them be equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone until the instrument has sufficient grip.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot return the bone as we have said, then cut off part of it with an appropriate instrument, whether an incisor or saw, to your ability;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	Then raise that which is embedded in the bone of hardness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	Place it back in its proper place, then moisten the dressing with black styptic wine, and if it is inflamed, clean it properly.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not apply cerate or anything else with oil to the wound, as it may cause putrefaction and corruption;
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then apply bandages after you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering all around according to the size of the wound, taking care that the dressing does not compress the wound with the fracture;
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times foolish doctors have done this, causing the patient to die or be corroded at times;
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And let the bandaging be looser and lower than for other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that harm may come as we have said, and there is pain in the area, then you should not place anything on it.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but wrap it instead with hard cloths and bind them in place.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one day or two the wound begin to swell, remove what you have put on with all wine, and apply healing salve, such as tetratripapharmakon and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the member twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way that the swelling runs down gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass and it cannot heal but continues to swell, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must probe the wound with a probe, and remove all these displaced fragments that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what he says in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and protruding through the limb, such as in the thigh or shoulder bones, and other similar large bones, do not attempt to pull it out, for many times this leads to death, but leave it until it heals.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	by chance it will fall out after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, leave it as it is.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come upon the joints
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often see this after the healing of a fracture, especially when it is near a joint, and it is a terrible thing to behold the shape of the limb;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and as a result, the limb may not be able to perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take care then if the wound is fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	apply styptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others, so choose any of these things or all together, and mix them with styptic wine or egg white or oil;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and place them on the knot with plugs, and bind it tightly, and do not loosen it for several days;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then dislocate it again, and start over with another one until the constriction is removed;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	where you bind tightly on a well-made piece of plaster;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of the plaster is that it removes all the swelling from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the constriction has already hardened like stone and needs to be removed, then cover it with a patch, and the excess will become evident;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	where you return it to a barber for removal until it is gone, and continue treatment until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weak after recovery
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb remains weak and delicate afterwards, this happens for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there were too many bindings, and the limb could not receive proper nourishment;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or due to excessive bleeding;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or because of too many movements, not at the right time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because there is little blood in their body, so they are weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the treatment is that you should make the patient eat, and make the body soft, so that the blood increases in him;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and the minister bathes him, and gives him joy and ease;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then applies pitch to the limb so that the pitch attracts the swelling, and frequently washes it with cold water until the swelling subsides;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and returns to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the limb twisted after the sickness
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone is clearly broken, and the shape of the limb is ugly, it still does not lose its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	do not believe those fools who say one should break the limb anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and these practices are blamed, and great harms come from them, and by chance death results;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	nevertheless, if the knots and tortures are fresh, they should be soaked in hot water, or herbs that soften should be boiled, such as leaves of mallows, roots, hellebore, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and make an emollient plaster, such as well-made murtl, and take the mallows mucilage, and mix it with goose grease or sesame oil, and apply a plaster;
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	or take fat figs, and mash them with dried chicory root, and similar medicines that reduce inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the knot is removed to rub continuously and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let motion be given to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the tortuosity is inflamed and hardened, like a stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then it must be cut up to the bone, with a subtle and gentle incision;
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and apply cautery and careful attention in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in anyone, it must now be returned without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if one delays, the swelling increases, and by chance it is reset with difficulty to its place;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	for it is not appropriate to move it at the moment when it is swollen:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	it often causes spasms and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	still, when this happens, make the patient bleed, then leave them alone until the abscesses subside;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each limb as the treatment will come to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have organized the chapters on dislocations from the head down to the feet.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	It sometimes happens that the jaws become dislocated, and both dislocations occur in two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	where they are slightly out of place and are somewhat relaxed;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	or they are completely dislocated and hang to one side, causing saliva to pour from the mouth as it cannot be contained, and the patient cannot close their mouth, and their tongue wraps around the teeth.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is slight, it returns on its own with proper positioning.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and thorough, then you must reset it quickly and do not delay;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	And in such a manner that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts his thumb from one of his hands at the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other hand should be moved away, to place it equally;
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to relax his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the physician should place it evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if the resetting is difficult, especially if both jaws are involved, soak them in warm water and oil until you can reset them gently;
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	do not delay in resetting it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient clots well to soften, then place moist cloths in cerate made of rose oil and wax, then bind it gently with soft bands;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on his back, and place his shoulders between two cushions, so that he does not move to either side, nor strain himself, but take light food until the pains are gone, and keep the jaws still;
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then let him eat what he wants gently, and do not force him to open his mouth for eating and drinking until the jaw is well bound and healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset properly in one hour, and are not returned to their places, fever often results and may become chronic, and by chance there may be vomiting of bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then you know it is a sign of impending danger;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And many times the one to whom it happens dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	by force
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The dislocation cannot be reset from the elbow within the continuity of the arm and leg, and it is sometimes dislocated outward, which is clearly felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is such that the patient lies supine on their back, and extends their arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then apply the plaster and bandage, and secure it;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the head that is towards the side cannot be dislocated;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if not, and if it dislocates at any time, then reset it to its place, as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then apply the plaster and bandage, and secure it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are well;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And thus likewise is reset the head of the spine when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in no more than three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	one of which is that it dislocates at the part of the socket on the inner side;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is at the part of the bottom;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and occasionally it dislocates at the top part, and this happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inward towards the nerves;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and it often dislocates inward towards the socket, especially in those with little flesh, because for them it happens quickly;
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	For those who have enough flesh, it struggles to come out, and struggles to go back in.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And occasionally it happens to some men that they suffer a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	It is necessary then that you test it until you are certain;
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And a dislocation is known when it moves towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their differences clearly evident;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and beneath the armpit towards the top of the shoulder, as if it were an eye socket;
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move in any way;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And likewise, if it is relocated above, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly upon touching;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this type of dislocation is not to be returned when it is new, or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is that the practitioner lifts the hand of the patient above, then place your palms under the armpit, and lift the joint with force upwards to its place;
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	And the practitioner lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then places it underneath;
si venra hastanment.	it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the softening and soothing plaster, such as a decoction of hellebore and fenugreek and honey-sweetened water, let it be applied;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then let the patient lie on his back, and place under him a cushion of wool neither too soft nor too hard, then have the patient place his heel on the pillow, and lift the affected shoulder gently, and pull the patient's hand;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and another attendant hold the patient’s head so it does not move downward;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	the shoulder now returns entirely, and if you wish to reset it according to this method:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and make sure there is a man present who is taller than the patient;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and it should be straight towards the side, and put his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit up, so that the patient hangs down.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and another minister should pull the patient's hand downwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, then he may carry something heavy with him, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And it is also reset in another manner:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and one drives a long stick into the ground, where the head should be as round as a pistol, and it should not be too thick or too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then place it under the patient, but ensure that he has cloth underneath, and the patient should stand against the long part of the stick;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then extend his hand from the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not want to return despite all the things we have said, then do this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	take a rod two spans long and four fingers wide, which has a rounded head to easily enter under the armpit, in this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	then tie the head of the rod with a cloth strip so that it does not hurt the patient, then place it under the armpit of the patient;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and extend the arm over the long rod, and tie the shoulder to the rod, and the hand to the head of the rod, then place the arm on one rung of a wide ladder, with the hand extended downward, and let the body hang from the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint now revolves freely.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, however that may be, you must put under the seat a sphere of equal flax, then apply an ointment prepared with powdered from the mill, with incense and egg yolk over the entire shoulder and around it, then stretch it under the seat gradually, and wrap the bandage over the ointment, and embrace the hand to his neck, and let the hand remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And he should eat little until the limb is strengthened, for it will heal more quickly;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then eat more after five or seven days, and move it;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if it is hard and not softened, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is loose due to moisture that has come to it, or for another reason, you must administer cauterizations with three openings as described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, and after seven days it still does not heal, and the joint cannot be raised, and he cannot lift his arm, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are severed or stretched or weakened;
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation towards the hip, and the breasts, or behind, is done by impulse, and extension of hands, and another place is ministered.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and care for it until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing the limb becomes stiff and slow in movement, the patient should take many baths until the stiffness is alleviated and returns to its original condition.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the elbow
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated by bones, and returns to place by bones;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially front and back, and the dislocation is not resolved, for one can see and feel it clearly;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the diseased part with the healthy part, then you can see clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is displaced, and he cannot bend his arm or touch his shoulder properly.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And you must reset it as abscesses often occur there, because if abscesses were to occur, it would be difficult to treat them;
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and by chance cannot be completely restored, especially when it is at the back;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and often leads to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration is such that when it can be returned to place, you should extend their arm with both your hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	and their arms should be extended, and the hands of the physician around it, from above and below, and push the joint with both palms together, or at the base of their palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and presses with the edge of the palm on the dislocated part.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not return to its place, administer strong traction;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and it is when two ministers extend the arm, and hold it two ministers so that it does not move at extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped it with a cloth long and wide;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the physician joins the joint to the hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then forcefully set the joint until it returns;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, apply dry plaister with egg white, and hold firmly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then unbind.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, loosen the bandage and leave it;
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the joint is not tightly bound, then restart the plaster and bandage, and leave it like this for several days, until it is firmly set;
puis le deslie.	then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if he feels stiffness after the return of the joint and it moves, bathe and rub gently, and press until it is relieved;
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	and place a piece of fat lamb’s wool on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the wool back on, and then enter the bath;
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this two times or three, until he is healed;
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you wish, place moist flax heated with butter on it, and apply it;
si revenra a sa disposition.	it will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The dislocation of the fingers returns easily, more so than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Nevertheless, it is necessary to return it to its place quickly, in the same hour that it is dislocated, before swelling or a hot abscess occurs.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the method of returning it is to place the affected hand on a table, and have an assistant extend the hand, and you should position your hand equally, so that your palm lies over the appearance of the joint, and push until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	However, you must check if it is properly aligned;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	then place the patient's hand on a board for extension and return.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then the patient should place the back of his hand on the table, and the physician should place his hand upon that part of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, apply soothing plasters to the abscesses and leave it like this without repeating.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot place it back after several days, then the twisted joint will remain dislocated;
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and it will not harm the patient except that the hand is weakened, and cannot grasp anything properly:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	Then you know that the nerves are cut, or the artery;
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	there is no other remedy than to constrict with a cautery near the wound, and perhaps nothing else will do.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when it is in place, apply the plaster we have mentioned, then bind and leave for five days, then loosen and leave as such.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, then moisten with warm water, and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or on the front;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then they straighten the finger, and push the dislocation back to its sockets until it returns, then hold the head of the finger, and pull it towards the part where it is disjointed;
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and leave it for two days, and then set it equal on that day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and for the tooth as we have said, loosen it during the day, move it, and reattach it to the root;
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this frequently until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated at the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed;
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the back spine
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the dislocation of the back or neck is reset, if there are many resets, there is no cure, for death quickly follows the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that the patient faints uncontrollably and cannot hold it, and sometimes certain limbs become weakened, such as both thighs or arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the dislocation moves to four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	She who moves to the rear is called "gibosity":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	the treatment is that you observe whether the gibosity has come from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	there is no cure or healing for it at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And she who comes from falling or from blows or similar things, the ancient ways of treating such cases with great words yield no significant benefit in all respects;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated it according to my understanding, and have fashioned instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gibosity that occurs at the worst front, there is no remedy or health;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And likewise for the one that comes directly to the two sides, and cannot be treated except by the one properly coming to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And it is that the patient lie stretched on their face in an equal place, and have someone pull back behind them so they do not roll over;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then fix a stake at the head in the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a rope under the armpits of the patient, and one at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	And two ministers hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and let them be well closed, the torch as we have said, and the physician place his palms on the spine firmly, until it relieves.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not relieve with this cure, take a board three arms long, and place it under the side, and let the patient lie on their side, then insert the end of the board under the side, then put the middle of the board over the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and let the physician place his feet on the other end of the board, and press firmly until it returns to its place;
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you wish, do it with a wrench that turns with the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And place two torches at the head of the patient from one large arm and near the feet two others, and have between each torch, above and below, a palm's space apart;
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and have in each torch one hole where the flame turns, and let the torches be firmly fixed in the ground so that they do not move;
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each pair of torches have one rotating torch, upon which the ropes turn, and have two small torches of a palm's length apart in the rotating ones, for turning the flame;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the rope that is between the chairs to the rotating torch near the head, and the other rope near the feet to the other rotating torch, and each of the assistants turns their torch for the entire length of the rope, and the master sets the needle evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, place on a drying plaster with plenty of egg, and then the cotton, and then the splint of three fingers long to cover the location of the curvature and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with linen as we have said, and the patient should use gentle nourishment until he is well.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if anything comes at the end of recovery, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint that we mentioned above;
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and sometimes a piece of plaster is applied, and at times the appearance occurs in the rear spine of the back, and one thinks it is a dislocation;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it is the bone that shows, for which one must not have presumption:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	by misadventure it might bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that at the joints of the hip and the shoulder, only dislocations occur, not like at other joints;
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	inside and outside, and in front and behind;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and more inward than otherwise, and slightly dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the recognition of an inward dislocation is that when joining the affected leg with the healthy one, it appears longer, and the patient's knee appears more bent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee towards the fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the area which is near the swelling of the abscess is hot, because the knee comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of him who is coming to faint are contrary to those mentioned before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of one who is affected in front are that they stretch their leg according to the completion;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	nevertheless, they do not double their knee despite pain, and if one wants to make them go forward, they cannot advance, and they hold back their urine, and the groin swells, and when they walk, they step over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who is coming to a condition behind are that he cannot extend his knee or bend it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is in a position below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The treatment for this type of dislocation is that you observe whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, with no specific care;
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and it is not appropriate for them to have confidence.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in the one where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four types of dislocation, hasten to return the joint, and stretch it inward and outward, and move it right and left;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	and perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong minister, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with one ligature that is tied above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and another minister should stretch his hand above in such a manner that he places his hands beneath the buttocks, then bind it with a single tight ligature on the thigh;
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and some others hold the head of the joint;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend both up and down at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once, and suspend them.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to the four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, then you must apply treatment as appropriate.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is towards the inside, you must lift the patient onto their healthy side, then place the joint at the root of the thigh, and the area below the armpit, then extend the joint upwards toward the armpit, and toward the shoulder.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then take other assistants to hold his arms, and embrace the thick part of the affected thigh, and extend it forcefully outward:
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	It will return to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this type of dislocation is less severe than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot secure it in the manner we have described, then you must bind both of the patient's feet together with a strong cord just above the two heels, and also above the two knees, and let the affected leg be extended two palms longer than the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then suspend him from the top of a post, and let it be two arm lengths above the ground;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then instruct one minister to embrace the top of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the patient, who firmly embraces the thigh, because the joint will now quickly return.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is out of place, the patient lies down, as we have said regarding him who has gout, and tightly bind the limb on the affected leg, and also on the foot.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then place two torches, one at the head and one at the feet, then insert a torch between the thighs of the patient in the proper position;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and have placed damp cloths around it so that it does not burn the patient, then each assistant extends towards him, and the physician places his hand equally on the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place him on the table and press as we have said regarding gilbositeit, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to quickly extend the affected leg as I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And let the physician exert himself to be on the affected side, then press with the other hand, and stretch it down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is towards the front, it is not appropriate to stretch the patient downward or lift them up, but rather they should be positioned as if the thigh were dislocated forward, as we have said about the position when lying on both thighs;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and let the patient lie on their back, and the limb be stretched as we have said previously, and one should press above the joint onto the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and it will be correct when the patient extends their legs, and they will be even;
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	Then place the thighs together, apply the plaster, and wrap them tightly with a bandage so that the thigh does not move;
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and let it rest for three or four days, then remove the bandage and reapply the plaster;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are even, wrap them as before and leave it for three days;
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then remove the bandage, and have him walk gently, until the limb is healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knee is dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	that is to say, inward and outward, and backward;
et ne desalue point devant.	and do not reset before.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not rest there, know that it is dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take his knee in your palms, and draw it between your hands, then bend the two sides of the knee gently;
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and another minister extends his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he rests his leg on the thigh lightly;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and apply the plaster on it, and raise the leg at the thigh, and bind them together tightly for three days or four, then loosen it;
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and the patient does not work to walk until the limb is healed and strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not properly set, apply strong extension as we have said in the treatment of the thigh, until it is healed
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes completely dislocated, both internally and externally.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and feels soft in the area where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the reduction is easy, and it should be gently extended with his hands when he is slightly moved.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is quickly reduced, you must make the patient sit upright, and have one assistant hold him a distance away by the leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then draw the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then place it upright, and firmly push the foot upwards;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice, as we have said, both pushing and pulling the foot;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it returns, it is well;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	if not, then restart the work, for it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return in this manner, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and firmly place a lever between their thighs in the ground, and tie ropes around them so that the patient does not move;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then the minister should hold the thigh, and another minister should extend the foot with his hands or on a board, and bind it at the neck of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then each minister should extend equally, and the patient should be firmly between the thighs of the patient when they are stretching him;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then the physician should place the dislocation in his hands equally, and another minister should hold the healthy leg behind, and the dislocation will quickly return to its proper position.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is properly set, apply the plaster and bandages tightly, and bind the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are on the back of the ankle, so that the binding is not too tight;
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	then leave it for two days or three, and if the ligaments soften, then stretch it;
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	then loosen it on the third day or fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he walks before this期限，他可能会再次脱位。 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes up, you must treat it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both are dislocated, they must be gently extended without strain, and this is an easy task.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any notch of the back of the foot, you must have the patient sit on a flat surface or on a .ie. table straight, and place your foot against what appears of these joints, then press strongly with your foot until it returns;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is even, and nothing appears, place under the sole of the foot a board with II joints, then pull strongly, and leave it for III days, then untie it;
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and have him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and of dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	Do not be presumptuous in the treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and patient, nor bold;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and begin with things that soothe an acute abscess, and leave the patient in God’s hands if you see no hope for recovery;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope for recovery, now reset the limb to its place so that the hot abscess may come to life;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in place, administer things that soothe an acute abscess, and treat the wound as necessary with drying ointments;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones displaced, remove them, and do as we have said in simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	And guard against entering a path of fear as I have said, for it is your duty according to your Creator, and for the skill in your arm and your body.
