"I have completed this book for you, my sons," the author said, "it is a comprehensive textbook on medicine and its purpose is to elucidate and explain it so that you may complete it by reading through this chapter.
This work is most beneficial in our country and time, unless otherwise stated, it would be beneficial to study its science or be lost forever. However, the most rudimentary of its chapters remained in early books as corrected by hand and erased errors until their meaning was understood and their benefit obtained.
I have written this article on the path of explanation and clarification, being a part of the work to be done with haste; as it is from an increase in clarification and simplicity required for its completion.
The reason is that there was no skilled surgeon in our time, so the owner of surgery had to first learn anatomy as described by Galenus. Until he is familiar with the benefits and nature of each member, its attachment and detachment, as well as knowing the bones, nerves, muscles, their numbers, openings, veins, arteries, and all other matters related to them.
Therefore, Albucasis said that surgeons are many in name but few in practice and especially in the field of surgery; we have mentioned this at the beginning of this book.
Because if one were not familiar with the anatomy mentioned, they would surely commit an error that could kill people as I have seen many who imagine themselves to be knowledgeable but are ignorant of this science.
I have seen a doctor who made an incision on the vulva of a woman, and I had to apply some stitches in order for her blood not to be lost until she was dead at his feet.
I have seen another doctor who made an incision for the removal of a hernia in a man who had injured his penis, and he left it out with a part from his bladder. "After examining the patient for three days and considering his condition, I found that he had a severe illness.
"I saw another doctor who was well-regarded by some people in our town for medicine.
"Suddenly, Asad had a fracture in his leg near the ankle and also an injury on his head, so the doctor quickly applied bandages to both wounds without leaving any gaps.
"Then he released him and told him not to tie a bandage until his leg had completely recovered, as it might cause swelling.
"I asked him to heal the bandage, but he insisted on tying it too tightly and I couldn't remove it.
"The wound was trying to continue causing pain until death came.
"I saw another doctor who was a specialist in cancer and after several days, he said that if the patient had a severe infection along with it then they should not apply any iron treatments.
"Unless the entire body could be treated.
"This is to say that the work of the hand can be divided into two parts, one for healing and another for treating illness in many cases.
"I warned everywhere that comes from this book to be careful of it and refuse it.
"Therefore, if the ignorant finds himself in a difficult situation to say or do something, he should hold onto his wisdom and integrity without falling into deceitfulness.
"Use the best way to safety and avoid dangerous illnesses, if you can.
"Remember that he who fears to fall into doubts in his religion and this world, is saved from great doubt in the next life.
"Albinus" has said in his medical writings that doctors should not treat a bad disease with the same name, but rather they should call those doctors who specialize in treating that illness good ones.
This article was divided into chapters/sections.
The first chapter
In the time of fire and the plague, Galen prescribed remedies in his writings, which also include mechanical devices for use with one's hands.
The second chapter
In the vein cutting and ligature making, amputation and removal of limbs, and so on - all are mentioned in this chapter as necessary to perform surgery with mechanical devices.
The third chapter
In the treatment of wounds, healing, and so on - all are mentioned in this chapter as necessary for performing surgery using mechanical devices.
The first chapter
The first chapter
Before we begin with the use of Galen's remedies and their effects, it is important to explain how beneficial they are in general and what ailments or conditions should be treated by them.
The discussion of the benefits and drawbacks of Galen's remedies is long, precise, and secret knowledge that was passed down by generations of wise men.
They differed in their opinions and the simplest parts were left out to avoid excessive elaboration.
Galen's remedies are beneficial for all ailments, both those with and without materials (medicinal substances).
The remedies for the ailment that is cold and has material are debated, some say they are beneficial while others deny this, saying Galen's remedies cannot be used in diseases caused by heat or jaundice because fire is hot and jaundice is a symptom of it.
In the case of a disease that is both cold and hot, one must resort to hot remedies (hot baths or hot compresses), those who deny Galen's benefits say his fire remedies may help in relieving the illness caused by both cold and heat among people. "Because when you add human flesh and moisture to the fire of passion, your body becomes cold.
I would like to point out that the text you provided is from an Arabic medical textbook by Al-Bucasis, a 10th century surgeon known for his contributions to surgery and medicine in general. "Different temperaments (moods) of people and their illnesses, causes, symptoms, and durations are discussed.
"However, other diseases (except cold and damp illnesses) are beneficial to all physicians.
"Remember that the treatment of fire (which cures) is different from that of burned flesh, because the fire itself does not harm one person but only causes injury to another connected with it.
"The treatment of burned flesh (which may exceed the limit and even cause death) is different from that of fire, because fire itself does not harm one person but only causes injury to another connected with it.
"This was made clear through experience and attention to detail in the industry of medicine.
"Therefore, I omitted unnecessary details to avoid making this text inappropriate for my book and presented the fire's nature, effect on bodies, and prevention of diseases in a clear philosophical manner.
"Remember that they differed as to the time when the treatment is best, and made it better in spring times.
"I would like to point out that the time when fire is beneficial may vary, and damage done by it in a given time may take longer than benefit gained. "Furthermore, if fire is a strong necessity that cannot be delayed for what it fears may cause.
"Do not worry about it, children of the medical field and those who care for them know that he who is cured from a disease cannot return to being ill ever again.
"Do not be mistaken, children of the medical field and those who care for them know that he who is cured from a disease behaves like a remedy which relieves mood and dries up fevers, which are the cause of headaches.
"Except for being superior to drugs in terms of speed at which it is accomplished, power with which it acts and intensity of its force.
"And it can come back at a later time according to the mood of the patient and make his disease stronger, which makes him feel ashamed and causes him to lose self-esteem in acquiring knowledge from food and so on.
"Oh Lord, may the disease that uses the remedy be a mild one in both body and temperament. "Like the headache of the rooster, which cannot come back from it at all.
"Also, the general belief is that the cure for the rooster is a truth-telling remedy which does not go away after the rooster because they believe there is no medicine or other remedy to help it.
"And the meaning is that if we use remedies for certain diseases and they did not help, then using last rooster as remedy may work here. "The general belief of many doctors.
"The ancients said that the rooster remedy is better than iron remedy and they said so because gold has dignity and honor, but they also said it does not harm place of rooster, which means nothing at all.
"Because I tried it and found that he does this in some cases but not others, the rooster remedy is better than iron as they said, except that if you protected him from fire with gold, then you do not know when to protect yourself for a certain amount of time needed for rooster.
"Because of its rapidity in cooling and the relief it provides from fever, one should immediately apply cold water to that part when overheated, for fear of burning oneself if not done properly; so this is how we do things around here.
"This is the way it's done, from head to foot; we make sure everything is in order for our student.
The first chapter
On the head, one at a time.
This remedy is used to relieve headaches and forehead pain, excessive sweating on the head towards the eyes and ears, excessive sleepiness or toothache, and throat ache. In general, any disease can be treated with cold remedies such as headaches, fever, and convulsions.
This remedy commands a simple drug to be applied to the forehead for three or four days, according to how much heat and sweat one's head has
Then it commands him to cool his forehead with a towel, then lay him down between your knees, resting his head on his chest.
Then put the ends of both arms around one's neck in between their eyes, so that when the middle finger is applied to that spot, you have done your job perfectly.
Then apply the oily mustard oil which I just mentioned.
Reveal as much of your forehead or head hair that you can, and then apply your hand to the same part again if you did not do it properly. Until you see as much of your forehead or head hair that I mentioned, take something from salt and dissolve it in water and then apply a compress with it on the spot, leaving it for three days.
Then apply the compress with mustard oil, leaving it on until all of its heat has subsided, then treat it with four fingers to remove any remaining pain that may remain.
"They said that when a wound remains open, the cautery is better and more effective.
"Some of them suggested that one should cauterize the skin into the bone and hold on to the cautery until some fat from the bone is burned off, then proceed with treatment.
"Others said that one should apply the cautery very tightly until it has a strong effect on the bone, causing it to resemble either a large or small flame, and they claimed that after this, the affected area would emit a puff of smoke for a long time, leaving the wound open.
"Then he would treat it until the skin healed, and I do not see how cautery is worse than a bit of flesh left behind on the road to nowhere, unless there are people who leave cautery in place when they should be treated with caution because their head might swell if their natural connection is broken like we have seen in others.
"In particular, when the person's skull was weak by nature and one of those kinds of cautery is used to make it milder than in others, and he uses it with good luck.
The second chapter.
"Also in the skull.
"If a prolonged injury occurs in the skull and this persists, he uses needles, cautery, stitches, clamps, and sometimes even bone sawing to treat it but if that one cautery we described did not help him at all, look. "If the skull was weak by nature and it was very painful to treat but he found another one that helped a little more. "Then he cauterized the skin of his skull for a long time until all fat from bone was burned off and revealed how we described. "He used a cautery on his forehead in the area known as the third eye, and he found it very painful compared to all other scalp stitches, and I will mention that one in its place.
"The incision made at the base of the skull should be less severe than that made in the middle.
The third section
This is not a permanent injury
If an injury occurred at the base of the skull and caused a headache that extended to one eye, consult a neurologist for treatment with medicines prescribed for headaches or do nothing else if no improvement is seen. Either take strong painkillers or iron
Either take strong painkillers, or you can try applying one slice of the tomato to your forehead and cut off its stalk on both sides then make a small incision at the site of pain in order for it to penetrate into the skin beneath
Apply the sliced tomato for fifteen hours, bandage it tightly, leave it alone for two or three days and then remove it.
Apply olive oil on the pain site until it becomes numb, then treat it with strong painkillers if desired or do nothing else as prescribed in Section 8 of the medication list.
If you choose iron, apply it to the affected area until it turns pale and stays that way.
The incision made at the base of the skull should be less severe than that made in the middle.
Apply the iron, holding it gently with one hand and keeping it on until it turns pale as a bruise. After removing it, put salt on the site and leave it for three days. Apply olive oil to the pain site until it becomes numb and treat with strong painkillers if desired or do nothing else as prescribed in Section 8 of the medication list.
"I will keep this vein intact, please do not cut it.
Section 4
Permanent
"If you treated the vein as previously mentioned and also followed up on diagnosing the diseases, no treatment could be done or advised. "You should squeeze the vein until it becomes white after learning its length, half an inch or less and let your hand rest for a moment before you tighten again to cut off the vein.
"You should remember to avoid pressing the vein when massaging, as it might cause numbness or tingling in your arm.
"Be careful and keep an eye on any vein you cut while making sure to close the wound properly. "Neither should you do anything without knowing what it is or how to do it, and leave your work first.
"You should mention cutting off a vein on the face in your text, as you may see something from the disease that cannot be done by this method.
"I saw a healthy vein in the middle of the head, as mentioned and treated the wound until it was healed.
"If you used the method mentioned in 'how to cut a vein,' it is better than this and can work.
Section 5
In the ears.
"If there was a problem in the ear and numbness or tingling occurred while following up on diagnosing diseases, squeeze that vein where it appears.
"Then tighten around the ear all of them as they go or both of them if there was numbness in both ears. "After applying the bandage and learning its placement, pierce it with a needle at ten points in each ear or more like that, then treat the wounds until God wills.
The sixth chapter
"In every ear...
The wound to be treated should have the same type of needle that causes bleeding when inserted into the ear as mentioned in the chapter on diseases.
"Do not use a needle that causes nerve damage.
If you have treated this type of wound with scalpels, sutures, or ligatures without success, then it is advisable to use three stitches instead. "Pierce the bandage at one point in each ear and two points below from the lobe of the ear and another point where the cheek meets the ear.
"Do not use a needle on the sick side, as relaxation only occurs in the healthy side.
"Apply three stitches on one point of the ear above where the hairline curves slightly and two points below in the bridge, with their length to be equal.
"Make sure to use a needle that burns no more than half an inch of skin, as this is the image described and it's type of incision that I mentioned earlier. "After that, treat the wound as you described before until God wills it.
The seventh chapter
"In chronic stroke.
If you suffered a stroke and treated it as mentioned, but the treatment was unsuccessful or there is no improvement in the patient's condition, then use four stitches instead. "At each point of the hairline and forehead as described before, an incision on the bridge.
"Apply this method according to what I mentioned earlier, then add a stitch in the mouth and treat as before.
The eighth chapter
In it
A person suffering from dementia must not neglect their daily medication, such as tablets or ointments for the brain.
Then he should shave his head and apply a paste of mustard on it, as mentioned in the treatment guide; this will help.
Do that with the instructions you mentioned, and then three times each on the top of his head will be effective from top to bottom.
For every application and each other, apply mustard as instructed; if the treatment is intended for that purpose, add a middle one.
If you want to increase it, apply mustard on both sides first and then treat until it is gone; the treatment will be oily as described earlier.
The ninth chapter.
Relax all the body parts.
It is advised to apply mustard and the ointments mentioned earlier, then shave the head of the patient; then apply a middle one on his forehead, each side of his head, and finally the back of his head.
Apply mustard and the ointments mentioned earlier three times on the back of his neck, if you want to relax him more and it is strong; then apply four times each on the sides of his chest. Apply mustard and the ointments mentioned earlier, until they burn more skin; then treat as instructed until it is gone, may Allah help you; the treatment will be oily as described earlier.
The tenth chapter.
Epileptic fit.
The patient with epilepsy, who has had a seizure caused by dementia, must not neglect his daily medication including tablets and the others mentioned in this guide if it is severe and intended for medical treatment.
"If a baby cannot tolerate medication, it should use a syringe and the appropriate needle to inject food into its brain for several days before improving its appetite.
After that, tilt his head and feed him one spoonful in the middle of his forehead as you did before and another spoonful on the back of his head. For each meal, if the patient is strong and able to swallow, feed him the spoonfuls that you mentioned earlier as well as relaxing his neck muscles while tensing his back muscles. Make sure the spoon used for the forehead region is made of oil.
If the patient is a baby, make the spoonfuls gentle on this image.
The eleventh chapter.
In which way?
If the dysphagia is caused by severe and thick mucus, feed him the spoonfuls that we mentioned earlier as well.
If the dysphagia is due to mild fatigue and a moist body, soothe his throat as described earlier in the passage.
After that, tilt his head and make a precise spoonful from the oatmeal as you did before, then lower it onto his forehead with his mouth closed while supporting him in every direction. Take one drop of ancient honey from a dropper bottle.
After that, warm it gently until the finger can hold it if you put it in his mouth then feed him spoonfuls on his forehead and leave them until they cool down, do this with him every week as well while taking care of all other things so he is healthy again by Allah's grace.
If you want the spoonful to be small, a few of them without holding your finger in between and if this kind of oatmeal is good for brain hydration moderately.
Then put on it an oatmeal porridge or chicken broth.
The twelfth chapter.
In saline water in the eye
If you see the saline water in your eye, gently wash it off with clear water immediately to prevent any infections and scratches on your head.
After washing the back of your head, gently massage it into your scalp in the center and then apply two drops on both sides if water was initially in both eyes or one drop if it was just in one eye.
Then, cut the sutures and drain all the blood that is underneath the skin to ensure no bleeding occurs.
If you see anything, clip it immediately and we will do our best to drain the blood vessels and prevent further bleeding.
After clipping off two ligatures under the scalp gently.
The thirteenth section.
In the case of chronic tears.
If the tears in your eye are chronic and have previously been drained from both eyes, then you should wash it off immediately to prevent any infections or irritations caused by them. Gently massage it into the center of your scalp, apply two drops on both sides and two under the hairline, if needed.
The fourteenth section.
In the case of a runny nose.
If you have treated it as mentioned in the section but still did not improve, then apply three drops of olive oil massage into the center of your scalp for three consecutive days and then wash off with warm water. Then, apply a mustard oil drop on both sides of the hairline under the hair gently and prevent any bleeding by not clipping it off, this is the picture of mustardy oil.
The fifteenth section.
In the case of a gentle eye strain.
"When the eye becomes inflamed due to disease or moisture, wipe it gently with this compress.
"If you wish, press the compress lightly on both cheeks and separate your eyebrows, ensuring that each compress covers only one eyelid.
"Do not apply too much pressure with the compress; instead, press it gently enough to barely touch a third of your skin and ensure that its shape conforms to this description.
"The sixteenth chapter.
"On the eyelid compress.
"If the eyelids are inverted, place two compresses on them separately. "Or the compress with hot oil, or the one with burning medicine, whichever is more appropriate; if it's with the fire compress, command the eye to open and stretch out before applying.
"If you wish to blink at her, make sure she does not move until both eyes are opened and stretched out fully. Once they open and stretch, place the eye compress on it as shown in this book.
"Start by placing it near the eye, then put a compress soaked in egg white or bee glue on top of it.
"Then apply it gently and repeatedly, until its surface feels like a piece of paper that is smooth on both sides and clearly shows health work.
"After this, gently lift your hand and let it rest for three days; then apply a compress soaked in honey until the crust is removed, followed by a compress of cold water to ease any swelling that may occur after time has passed.
"Apply the compress to that area again, as before; if hair is on the lower eyelid, gently press it back into its natural position and do not cover the eye with the hot compress, but instead command the eyelids to open and stretch out.
"Then you must make a cloth image and take it from the oath, from the pledge-free strip; then from each of them, weight and measure, crush both at once. "Then put it on the cloth you made, which is image and stripe; place it upon one or both eyes, and smear a white eye-paint with egg yolk and the juice of beet.
"Put your finger on the medicine, and hold it gently while moving it whenever you feel dizzy from the medicine; if you still find pleasure in its taste, let go of it with your finger, but if you lose that feeling, put back the medicine and wash your eye with water.
"If you see the dizziness has increased, just like when it's near fire or a cut, then reapply the medicine on that spot where it didn't affect until you feel better and rub your eye with cotton soaked in vinegar.
"Then apply it with a warm compress or any other thing, remember that when you're working, you must keep in mind not to let anything fall into your eye after using the medicine.
"Then reapply it on that spot where you felt the dizziness, especially as before; then treat it until it's gone.
"Know that people may have different sizes of eyes, so please be careful when rubbing it, not just blindly follow the instructions.
This is a translation of a section title from an Arabic poem on ethics and etiquette.
"About the person who looks at you with eyes full of desire.
"If you treated the nafsus as mentioned in the sections on diseases, it is necessary to stay away from this trait.
Lift your head and hold it between your hands; do not move or strain it.
Apply the colored eyeliner to her eyes and then wash off the excess with warm water or lemon juice.
The eyeliner should be as smooth and natural-looking like the feathers of a rooster, whether you want it to cover one eye or both eyes. However, remember that this kind of makeup is more suitable for your work if Allah wills.
When the nostril is open, pull it out gently and clean it; if it's closed, open it up first then extract the hair from its base using your hand all the way to the tip.
When you are applying eyeliner, keep your fingers a bit away from the eye towards the nostril to avoid touching or irritating the skin; if you need a second attempt at reaching the base of the lashes, do it again.
Leave it for three days, then apply the cold cream and warm vinegar compress to help cleanse the area until it's free of infection; if after four weeks without improvement you should use the strong, quick-acting medication as prescribed by your doctor to clear out any remaining pus from the base of the lashes.
The other nostril should be gently pierced, then apply a soft patch to the same spot.
Apply a colored patch to his nose, hold it with your fingers firmly and tightly until the blood stops flowing; remember to apply a colored eyeliner to the eye as well.
If the blood clots and stops flowing, you can safely remove it; however, if not, make sure to apply a nasal strip in that spot specifically mentioned for this purpose as well.
Eighth chapter
In the middle of the forehead
When a cut occurs on the forehead, it is often called a scar and especially in children's cheeks, such scars are quite common if treatment with division as we described does not work out; then put a small, skin-colored band to cover this area.
To make it better, after putting the skin-colored band to cover this area in a scar on the cheek:
Ninth chapter
Occurrence of the lips
If the blister occurs on the lips, cheek or corner of the mouth and burst and remains open after cleansing: do not bandage it with a larger bandage than necessary on the lip area.
Then, put it on with a bandage in the blister area and hold your hand until the edges are sealed up tightly: do this once or twice then treat after that as we mentioned for healing until He is healed if Allah wills.
If the material breaks and bleeds, you should first clean it up and remove any excess blood as specified in our previous advice if Allah wills.
Twentieth chapter
Scabs and blisters on the heels.
If a blister is caused by moisture, and they appear on the heels: treat them with iodine and then put the band-aid over the affected area after that.
Then put the iodine on with a bandage, hold your hand a little to let it burn down until you reach the bottom of the heel and then take off your hand: repeat this several times after that, fill up the iodine in his mouth from salt water.
Leave it for a while and rub it: if the blistered heels become swollen, itchy and damp due to the bad moisture:
The tenth chapter and thirty
In the neck and the spine
If a chill or frost affected the neck and spine, in addition to medical treatment it could be heated with warmth or fire
Alternatively, if the neck and spine were affected by cold or frost, you could use a heated scarf placed on your forehead to warm up, then wrap it around your shoulder and hold it until it warms up. Then, put it back over your nose with a heated scarf as well and hold that one too, making sure both of them get hot enough to help alleviate the chill or frostbite in those areas.
Then repeat this process until the warmth reaches its peak, or you can heat up a scarf and cool it down to use on your nose as well, making sure both of them are warm enough to help with the chill or frostbite in those areas.
Alternatively, if you choose to use fire to warm up the nostrils or ears, make sure there is some space between them and a heated scarf so that the heat doesn't go into your mouth too much. Then, cover the face with the hot scarf and hold it until both are warm enough to help alleviate the chill or frostbite in those areas.
If the chill persists, you can also put a warm scarf in your mouth and hold it for an hour or so until the cold leaves entirely.
You can use whichever part of the scarf is more comfortable to use, that's one way to do it.
The eleventh chapter and thirty.
In the veins.
If the veins had been affected by cold or frostbite and medical treatment was not effective in quickly alleviating it, you could apply a cold compress to both sides of your forehead.
If you needed to warm up the other side of your forehead as well, place a heated scarf on it once and then again if necessary until its warmth reaches the center of the wound, which is especially important for small wounds.
Then let it be left for three days and then wash it with a moist cloth until it is free of soot, and treat it with alum and pitch to heal it, if Allah wills so.
The thirtieth chapter
In regard to the throat and constriction of the windpipe
If the mucous membrane of the lungs is congested, especially when this occurs with a cold, it is advisable for the physician to first administer gentle medications, and then apply mustard plasters at the base of the larynx in its lower part.
Be careful not to burn the larynx and only use a half-size plaster, then apply another one at the neck's joint in its lower part, so that it remains moist on the spot where you applied the previous one.
Then treat him with what has been mentioned before until he is healed by Allah's will.
The fortieth chapter
In regard to the diseases of the lungs and cough.
If the cough and lung disease are due to cold mucus, apply plasters above the ribs in low parts of the body and one plaster at the middle of the breastbone.
And the plasters should be moist on the spot where you applied them, and if you like it, use a cotton swab to clean off any remaining residue from their point as shown in removing earwax, have 30 points of them or more
Then treat him with what has been mentioned before until he is healed, and you can make plasters of three types on this pattern to expedite the application for one application of three plasters, and here's the model of the plaster.
The fiftieth chapter
In regard to poison.
If the tongue swells due to severe mucus or does not return after swallowing, it is advisable that he chew first before spitting as we have seen, and then spit at the slightest movement as required. Then place the wound on his back or the correct side, and raise the skin inside the incision with your left hand if the thumb is open.
Then squeeze both sides of the tweezers to close them.
Then press the skin tightly until it is pushed to the other side, forming four curls, and if you have tweezers with three prongs, each curl will be made by that kind of tweezers, making five curls in total and placing them on your palm.
This is a picture of tweezers with three prongs.
With that count, one more will make a total of eight curls, then apply the prepared dough with salt and hold the wound in place until it closes, unless the thumb is bent upwards to allow for a quicker closure.
When you raise one more curl tightly, either a single tight curl or many curls will tighten and the moisture will evaporate from the wound.
The twenty-first division.
Stomach.
If there is vomiting and diarrhea in the stomach, it will affect its mood and cause an increase in the amount of saliva production to relieve it. Then press three times on your palm with the tweezers. Squeeze the earlobe with a teaspoon-like grip using tweezers and apply two more curls below each of them until they form a triangle shape, leaving enough space to prevent them from touching when squeezed tightly, making three curls in total and spacing them apart as needed.
On this picture with no further detail.
If you want to apply one large curl in the middle of the stomach on this picture.
The tweezers used for this single curl should be round on this picture.
To treat vomiting and diarrhea in the stomach, first learn a point of how much you want to apply with a toothpick, then press it on your palm using a pointed tweezers, followed by applying the treatment that was given until it is cured.
The 72nd chapter.
In the liver
If the liver has become cold, sour, and bitter due to any cause, it will depart from its natural state with an excess of bile and a bitter taste in the throat, as described in the chapter on analysis (of food). It is advisable to feed the liver with three kinds of food, in this proportion and quantity, from below the ribcage where it reaches man's navel.
After each meal, make sure to cleanse the stomach and ensure that it is straight up and down without holding back your breath.
Do not let more than half of the food you eat go to waste, and ensure that the liver is straight on your feet, unless it's bent then straighten it up, this is how the liver works.
You can also feed these meals to a donkey, if you have one and it has the right kind of digestion and knows how not to waste food as described in the chapter on analysis (of food).
The 82nd chapter.
In liver heat.
If the liver is inflamed and you want to know if it's in liver or spleen, then it will be heavy with phlegm without any heat.
And if it is in the spleen, then there will be very strong phlegm and you should feed the liver where the problem is with food.
Then heat the donkey with the donkey's milk like this, as described in the chapter on analysis (of food). Feed it one meal until all of the food is burned, then cleanse it with purgative remedies until it's clean again.
This method of treatment is to be used exclusively in the art of medicine, and it has been repeatedly proven effective for treating these diseases.
The 9th division
In the treatment method
Take one long cucumber from the cool storage, cut it into pieces and sauté it in oil until tender, then remove it from heat. Then, put one drop of this treatment on the crease between your elbow and wrist, a few drops to the side near your armpit, and many drops to the sides of your breasts in between the third and fourth fingers.
And then put one drop between the fifth and sixth fingers, a few drops behind your waist, another on top of your chest, three to the back from below (between elbows), two under your back (between thighs).
Do not massage your hand with the treatment, but rather it should be applied externally and may some people use this iron-like paste to protect them and apply them between fingers until they become one with the tumor.
The procedure is similar to that for liver tumors, either the patient will die within a short time or there may be no more recurrence.
The 30th division
In the treatment method
If you did not get cured after treatment with the division as mentioned, then you can try using it on three or four fingers along your belly.
As mentioned in the liver treatment, do not massage your hand with it and apply it externally on all fingers or more than one finger to cover a large area of the liver, but still keep the elbow picture near his face.
"The other part of the incision is to lift the skin flap towards the elbow and then to release it after making an arc along the arm.
"After completing the first skin flap, protect it with a dressing until you are ready to remove it from the other side as well. If desired, you can also cover the second skin flap with dressings.
"After leaving it in place for a while to harden, this treatment is more effective than any other.
"The twenty-first division.
"For skin resurfacing.
"The scar treatment is especially effective if you used the remedies mentioned in the division, but it will not be beneficial to apply four incisions around the scar and one incision on the stomach.
"Another incision on the liver, one on the back of the neck and shoulders between incisions, to be close in depth to the scar, then leave it open while hardening.
"Do not remove the skin flap after the incision unless you quickly apply the dressing, and for the back of the neck and shoulders picture will be smooth like what was shown, but one on the back of the head will have a greasy appearance.
"The second division.
"For the lower limbs and thighs.
"If you used the scar treatment and filled it with a clear fluid, then make incisions on both sides of the incision between the shin and knee.
"Keep your hands covered with dressings, do not remove them and then lift your hands again so that the clear fluid is applied.
"Then apply two incisions each on both legs, and the skin flap should be positioned to the side of the knee, one below the knee and another above it along the leg.
"Leave the incision open for a while and then treat it with all that we have mentioned.
The Thirty-first Chapter
In Acute Gastroenteritis
If it is acute gastroenteritis, the treatment includes gentle measures to soothe and calm the stomach with milder medications prescribed by a doctor for its severity. With a thermometer in one hand and four drops of the tincture on gauze, gently apply to soothe the stomach pain above the navel area.
If you see diarrhea and fever, treat it gently with a poultice on the groin or armpit area, and possibly add two small compresses on the stomach close to the navel for good luck.
The Forty-first Chapter.
In Hemorrhoids of the anus.
If hemorrhoids are chronic, or if they were single and accompanied by cold spells or feverish diarrhea, treat with all that we mentioned in the previous lesson, and apply a poultice on the buttocks below the waist under the table gently.
With a poultice below the belly button and perhaps, your stomach has become acidic or your meal is not digested, apply a large compress on top of that, and another one over the abdomen. And another below his back with a poultice and leave it open for a while, then treat him until God grants relief if He wills.
The Fifty-first Chapter.
In Typhus Fever.
After cutting it, if you cut the fever blisters, apply a poultice that resembles a mild heat to it and then place it in the remaining hole of the blister with your hand, until you can rub the poultice into the sweat from which the blood flows, do this once or twice.
"If the sutures are many, each one should be tied individually to what we have described and then treated with whatever remedies are appropriate until it is healed. If they are also large on cotton, that was more beneficial.
Section 32nd
In the nasopharynx area and its surroundings.
If a wound is not cleaned and treated as we described in its location, you may heal it by rinsing with a gentle sponge.
Then know the amount of vinegar in a sponge and then wash with it in the nasopharynx area to disinfect it thoroughly until all the rotten corpses are destroyed, once or twice or three times according to your need.
Note that if there is a great itching and the nasopharynx may lead to urethral or rectal discharge,
Note that in all those areas, if it is not infected and you have determined that, then treat the area until it heals. If you close the area and remove the materials and stay as long as necessary, you know that he has healed completely.
If not, you will need to treat it more thoroughly until the discharge is resolved or the area becomes infected with a rotten substance, as mentioned in its location.
Section 33rd
In the kidneys area.
If there is a problem in the kidneys and you find that bleeding or excessive sweating has occurred, it is advisable to wash your wound with the saline compress mentioned above three times until it heals completely.
Section 34th
In the urethra area.
If the bladder experiences weakness and spasms, causing difficulty in urination or retention of urine, a pessary should be placed at the bottom of the urethra on the bladder side to start urinary flow and another one on the top of the urethra on the bladder side.
After inserting a pessary on both sides to the extent possible, place one more pessary in the lower back area if necessary and make sure that it is inserted correctly as described above.
The thirty-ninth section.
In uterus.
If there is a mass in the uterus causing obstruction, preventing urination and leading to bladder damage or pain when passing urine, you should use three pessaries around it as we described for the urethra, but remember that this may not be applicable if the obstruction occurs elsewhere within the urinary tract. A pessary can be placed on the cotton below the back or two and a pessary should be used, ensuring it is inserted correctly as described above.
The forty-second section.
In urethra.
A urethral blockage may cause urine to come out in the wrong place and signal a need for another pessary near the urethra as described above, but remember that this may not be applicable if there is no obstruction or if it occurs elsewhere within the urinary tract.
After learning about the urethra as described above, place a pessary in the middle of the circle and use three more pessaries around it like we described for the vagina pessary if you didn't get this pessary placed correctly make sure to use one more pessary near the vaginal entrance hole.
Stretch the vagina as far as possible, until it is relaxed and ready to empty if God wills.
The fifty-first and forty-third sections.
In vulva.
If there is pain in the urethra and its cause is a urinary tract obstruction, try to ease it by using lubricants such as mannitol or glycerin and others that are used for urethral lubrication.
"Then he [Al-Bucasis] inserted his hand into the wound and applied pressure either with cauterizing drugs or fire, sometimes both simultaneously on different parts of the body.
"It is appropriate for him to perform four incisions, one on each shoulder and the other in the middle of the arm near the wrist; he can also apply fire to remove a single incision.
"The band will burn all the flesh, a characteristic of cauterization in female anatomy if the pain persists near the arm and does not extend to the leg or thigh.
"If it extends to the thigh and leg, he will make a fourth incision above the wound near the elbow with four fingers; its depth should be just enough to cut through the skin without causing any harm.
"If the pain extends to near the fingertips, he can perform three or four incisions at that point; if it extends below the knee, one incision is enough.
"Remember to refrain from burning a large artery or vein in your incisions, and do not mention this on the physician's note.
"I have seen two people who cauterized above the elbow and burned both thighs all the way down to the calves, causing gangrene and death in some cases.
"Some wise men in the art of surgery make a small incision with a steel lancet, its depth being half an inch or less; and inside that incision another one is made and then a third.
"The incisions are made at equal intervals, and the edges of them can be closed with a ligature made from steel; this is their appearance.
"Firstly, cauterize the wound until it becomes red and blisters appear. Then place a poultice on top of the incision, holding it in place with gauze firmly applied to the correct side, and apply three repeated incisions once. After that leave it open for three days before dressing it up with linen.
"This treatment is rarely used due to its pain and discomfort, but it may be beneficial for those who can endure the pain.
"The cautery with corrosive chemicals is to make two incisions, one in which a red substance such as alum or iron will be applied, and the other incision should be left open.
"Between the two incisions there should be a certain gap, or they can be made in one piece and held together on this side.
"Then apply a poultice on the incision, holding it in place with gauze firmly applied to the correct side and leave it open for one hour. After that bandage both wounds separately using hot water soaked lint and wrap them tightly so they will burn like fire.
"Let the pain subside, then remove your hand from it and rinse all of the wound with cool water, then leave it open for three days and wrap it up in linen until the burn subsides.
"Then treat it with poultice until the pain subsides, wrapping it as you did on your arms or legs, and this is a characteristic of corrosive substances.
"Take alum and vinegar separately, wash them both thoroughly, place them in a new bowl that has been lined with a thin layer of gauze, put one under the other so they overlap by about as much as you could fit into your palm. Put it on top of the wound.
"After you have squeezed the juice out of both lemons and ginger, place one of them on a juicer and press it gently to extract the juice completely from the lemon or ginger. Then take that extracted juice, pour it into another container, repeat this process for the other lemon/ginger as well.
It would mean that Albucasis, the 10th century Arabic surgeon and writer, was knowledgeable in a wide range of medical treatments and remedies using various ingredients such as saffron, honey, ginger, and lemons.
Galenus, an ancient physician and writer, is said to have told a story of a man who was cured of impotency in one go and claimed that he did not need any other treatment after being healed once.
It is possible that Albucasis, the 10th century Arabic surgeon and writer, used a concoction from a hot bath to cure impotence, but if green ginger was not available, he would use black pepper instead for curing impotence in various parts of the body such as the groin or legs.
After leaving the concoction on for three hours or as long as your body can bear, then put it into a container and if his impotence goes away he should be healed by God alone, but if not after ten days another application is needed.
Albucasis, the 10th century Arabic surgeon and writer, mentions that Dioscorides said that saffron could benefit men with impotency.
The remedy for this condition would be taking saffron mixed with oil and applying it to the area between the scrotum and anus, where the impotence is located closer to the anus first, then proceed to apply it elsewhere on the body.
After burning the mixture, apply it to the saffron and leave it until it is dry, then proceed by applying this remedy on other parts of the body as needed, until the feeling of impotence subsides due to excessive use or is cured entirely with God's help, using a recommended concoction called "Beverry".
The second and forty chapters
In the morning
The pain in the back can be caused by various factors, such as stiffness or strain or even a chill or coldness of the body part itself, and is typically experienced only during that region.
In order to determine the cause of back pain, you should try moving your body in a particular way after experiencing the pain, holding onto an object and performing it five times or more, depending on how strong the feeling is.
You should do this exercise three times or four times in case you are using a stationary bar for it.
The third and forty chapters.
Starting from the beginning of the pain.
This affliction often affects young children and is taught to them as a sign of shortness of breath upon movement, resulting in a final cry of pain that overtakes all other cries.
If you see this and want to stop it, make sure your circle is tight on the same picture. Take the exercise on each side of your back with a tight grip and hold it for two or three seconds, then release to treat the area until it feels better as mentioned before.
Remember that you should use the exercise when your pain is from a pinched nerve.
The fourth and forty chapters.
Pain in the neck or joint pains.
If joint pain is due to cold numbness in any part of the body, it would usually be referred to as a specific nerve compression.
If the cold nerve compression was not a cause for joint pain and it persisted, you should try moving your body in a particular way after experiencing the pain, holding onto an object and performing five times or more, depending on how strong the feeling is.
"If you want to prick the face of a man, do so with a sharp point, and if it is not in his face but elsewhere on his body, the prick will enter into three joints or four joints at most from that direction.
"If you need more than this, prick him only with a needle and not use your finger, because the prick will enter into his back or neck; if you are in doubt about where to prick him, just prick him as we mentioned before.
"If the prick is only in your hands, you should prick him around his wrists as if going one by one; and if it stays on his fingers, prick her or both of them on every knuckle, because the prick will enter into the elbow or bicep.
"If you prick them from both sides and do not miss the vein, if you eat well and let your bowels rest in peace, He will heal with this needle; if God wills.
The fiftieth chapter
"The Fiftyth Chapter.
"If you prick in the artery and lowered some of his bowels, it was a first sign of bad luck; but you should command him to leave one bowel unhitched every day and use a needle as prescribed by our book.
"Then tie it between your hands and his arm, so he will hold himself until he passes the bowel or bowels; then prick him with a finger as we mentioned before in order to see how far the finger goes.
"Then close her up like this...
"Then bandage her up like this...
"Then bandage her up like this...
"Remember your promise to stay pure until you return and don't let it be ruined, either by death or great sorrow; know that if you do not fulfill the vow, then your work will fail, so strive to be gentle with children and kind to the elderly.
After three days, apply aloe after removing the bandage until it is completely healed and then treat with various remedies to ensure its quick healing; this must be done within forty days for a good outcome of the injury.
It is important to keep your fasting during the healing period so as not to break your fast, after that if you want to resume after forty days, then use a strong bandage and wrap it for another forty days, while reducing food, drink, and strenuous activities.
If you use this method with total relief, then I will mention a treatment for the abscess in its head if God wills it, and if there is an incised abscess that increases from it, do not increase it further than what is suitable for its extent. And if you burn from the skin like one-third, then treat it as mentioned above and do not increase further, may God forbid. Some elders said to apply a soothing bandage on this matter.
After learning how to treat an abscess with a bandage and you draw the line in the upper side of it, then lower down another line until your middle finger is in the middle; the first one is easier and better if God wills it.
The 60th section.
In a sealed abscess.
If there is pain or swelling in some part of the body for a long time and no treatment can be done with medicines, you must apply a poultice to every member according to its size and strength.
With the help of its swelling and pain, one can remove the first ulcer; but if not, it will return to cause further harm in a similar manner as before.
The thirty-seventh chapter
about ulcer
Ulcer patients can benefit greatly, especially if the ulcer is caused by a strong acid reflux and excessive sweating.
If you want to heal the ulcer, if it is new and treated with what we mentioned in the previous section without stopping or reducing, then five ulcers will occur on the head. One on the middle of the head, two below it going towards the forehead at the end of hair, and then one on both sides, one from behind on the neck crease, lightly touch with this to effect in the bone, slight effects.
Then, it will relieve the itching and pain from them as well; if the ulcer has persisted on the same part of the body that we mentioned before, it is recommended to use these ulcers in the head. Ulcers on the nose, two on the cheeks and knees, six on the spine, one large on the forehead when there is a shortage of elbows, another above in the same meal, two on both earlobes each, and one at each elbow. Two on the elbows, one at each elbow, two on both kneecaps, six on the spine, and a treatment for all joints of the fingers and toes as well as each leg.
Remember that the nerve endings on both calf backs should not be burned, and a treatment for bone marrow as well as another on the liver, know that more ulcers will mean better healing.
"Beware that the remedy does not find for a patient what it finds to be correct, in order that his body may recover; and complaints must be made about smallness as well as greatness according to the characteristics of the members.
"The patient should be treated with honey and other remedies until Allah wills it to recover.
The 84th section.
If a member of the members is swollen due to edema and medicines, ointments, or dressings have not been effective in relieving it, then apply ice packs lightly on the affected area as recompense for its importance or insignificance according to its size.
"Treat it with the mercury until it recovers, and if a hernia appears on the scrotum or penis due to its exit from an affected nerve, then let the hernia go.
"Unless one is aware of the openings and exits of the nerves responsible for his body.
The 94th section.
The hernia.
If a hernia cannot be helped by any medical means, apply ice packs lightly on the affected area until it heals and changes color.
"Treat the hernia with honey and other remedies, mixing all of them together, until it recovers.
The 50th section.
Cancer.
"If cancer is new and you want to stop it, apply a cold compress around him as he moves; some wise men say that one should use a strong compress in the middle.
"The correct method is to surround him with a cold compress, or apply many packs.
The 51st section.
In the beginning of the artery
In the beginning of the artery, if it is obstructed by either a blockage caused by the doer or an obstruction caused by the time, you should apply small, quick remedies to unblock it quickly.
If left untreated, she will speed up in her recovery; if you want to help her faster, apply the quick remedy that makes her look younger.
Bring it down to the middle of the artery until skin circulation improves, and then treat it with what is necessary to cure it.
The second and fifty sections.
In the beginning of the artery.
The artery is clogged with a blockage, so you must apply the quick remedy that makes her look younger in order to unblock it quickly and effectively.
After applying the remedy from all directions until all blockages are removed and nothing remains, then leave it for three days and apply a mixture of garlic oil to unblock her completely and remove all blockages.
After three days, if you see that the meat has sprouted healthy sprouts with no blockages in it or else proceed to apply the quick remedy as before and treat her with a strong medicine.
He then applies fire faster than ever, mentioning the quick remedy and takes it when needed.
The third and fifth sections.
In the reverse arteries (vasceae) and non-reverse arteries
Often, this ailment is seen in the extremities of a man and it's something unpleasant that affects both sides; either you apply fire or cold water to it.
"To cauterize the inflamed sore that resembles a bird's beak, hold it firmly and then apply heat to reduce its size by creating a small hole in it with your finger.
"Leave it for three days to heal, then add a hot compress and leave on overnight. In the morning, you should use a sterile swab or cotton swab to clean the wound.
"It often appears on the skin, especially in the hands and legs; it is advisable to apply a compress of honey or iron wire on the abscess or boil. Then, take the compress soaked with hot water gently.
"Hold your hand while you gently press the compress to get it into the abscess and let hot water flow in, gradually pushing it further into the abscess until it is at its deepest point.
"Then leave it as the abscess heals, do this one by one until all of them have been treated and then treat any remaining ones with a dressing of honey or a poultice made from the roots of the bird's beak.
"The fourth chapter.
"In addition to...
"If a vein is affected in the arm or leg, press with four or five compressions between each stroke on the back and chest. "On his face, apply a compress soaked in oil to reduce swelling and speed up cold relief.
"The fifth chapter.
"In case of hemorrhage on the skin...
"First, cover the bleeding with a compress soaked in cold water or a compress made of cold iron wire.
In the initial stage of applying this treatment, avoid increasing or reducing the dosage beyond what is recommended by the expert only after consultation with the specialist has been done.
Sixth and Fifty.
In case of a hemorrhage at the site of the incision
A common occurrence is bleeding from an artery that has been cut during a procedure, either outside the incision site or in cutting and removing of organs and so on, which makes it difficult to control the bleeding.
If this occurs to anyone, act quickly by applying pressure to the artery with your finger and compressing it firmly until you see that no more blood is coming out from under your finger. Then take a small cotton pad soaked in iodine solution for adults or a cloth dipped in iodine solution for children and apply it on the wound repeatedly until it becomes completely healed.
Then take one, either small or large depending on the injury and location of the cut artery, apply pressure to the same area after removing your finger and hold it until bleeding stops.
When you remove your finger from the artery in the mouth, apply another bandage immediately and keep doing this repeatedly until bleeding stops.
Be cautious not to burn any skin as bleeding from the artery may make it difficult to control and stop, especially if it is a large one unless you have cut it or you know how to tie off an artery with your bare hands. If the artery narrows and bleeding stops, or if you tie off the artery tightly with sutures or apply medications that stop bleeding and constriction of blood vessels strongly to control it.
However, if someone tries to control the bleeding with a tourniquet or by compressing it tightly, or by placing things that can harm and so on, then only in rare cases will this work unless there is no doctor available or medicine, you should apply pressure to the wound itself as we described.
"It is very important that the blood clot be broken up and removed from above the wound, on the vein and the fingers, while not being washed with cold water so as to prevent its freezing and cessation of bleeding.
The second book
About surgery and wounds, among others.
He mentioned in the first book that all diseases are cured with fire and medicine, its roots and causes, as well as their symptoms, to this day
And I proceed from this book which makes it easy for the student to accomplish his task.
Before I begin, please note that this book is a sequel of the first one on medicine.
To prevent that, a warning in this book is more severe because bleeding frequently occurs due to wounds of different nature such as ulcers, cuts on the flesh, cuts on the finger and so forth, which often leads to complications like gangrene or death.
I recommend you to consider the fact that in this book, there are people suffering from different diseases and some of them have even died.
Due to the severity of the diseases and their extent, it is important that you do not help those who are afflicted with these diseases any longer.
Be more severe than your desire and caution, do not provide anything of that unless you are certain it will lead to the best outcome. Use all your knowledge and warnings in treating your diseases.
And may Allah bless you, O sons of guidance and ward off evil spirits; He alone is the bestower of good fortune and victory.
"I have compiled this textbook in sections from the beginning to end, so you can get what you want if Allah wills it.
The first chapter
On treatment of water mixed with infants' heads
Many infants suffer from jaundice when they are born if the caul (the protective membrane over their heads) is squeezed without a cushion, and also may occur due to hidden jaundice that cannot be recognized.
I have not seen this disease in infants and all of them who were closer to death, therefore I saw that it was better for me not to work on it, and also see infants whose heads fill with water each day, causing the head to swell up every day. Until the infant is lying on itself in order for its head to grow bigger and get more swollen, until it dies.
This moisture can either happen between the skin and swelling, or it can happen under the swelling itself. In this case if there is a small tumor on the head one must cut in half horizontally and then make sure that the length of the incision goes towards ten centimeters to remove the moisture.
If there is more moisture or swelling, you can make a horizontal cut on either side of it like this.
If the moisture is under the swelling and you see that there are open wounds on all sides, then water starts to go down if you put your hand into it (to remove), but not because of hidden jaundice this time you must make three cuts in order for this operation.
After the cuts, remove all the moisture by tearing and pulling them open, then soak it with broth and oil on the fifth day until the stitches dissolve and heal the wound using honey and milk do not leave the head swollen and feed the rest of your body with dry food that has little moisture.
Another option is to look where the swelling of the tumor and water gathering occur, as this may be more in the back or front or side of the head.
In order to remove a tumor, you should apply water and make incisions on it until you can cut through the bone without any more bleeding; then you will notice blood flowing from the incision.
The second section is missing.
Cut through both common arteries known as the carotid arteries.
If someone experiences severe bleeding in the eyes or chest and no medical treatment works, then cut through both common arteries known as the carotid arteries.
If you want to cut through both of them, first make a deep incision on the neck and hold it with a strong thread so that the artery is visible; then pull up your shirt tightly around the wound to slow down bleeding; then look for the two common arteries located behind the ears and note their positions as they are usually hidden in some people.
Then, learn how to cut them with a sharp knife until the bone is reached and this will be visible in front of you; if desired, insert the incision below the artery and pull it up towards the top by cutting it; the length of cuts should reach as far as two fingers on each side.
If the artery is cut, then bleeding will stop and visible red flow can be observed moving forward; if it does not show at the front of the ear, then you should check for three fingers' width after, learn how to cut them with a sharp knife until bone is reached, which must be done.
The blood will stop flowing and may appear more or less, depending on the strength of the artery and extent of bleeding; if you still see bone after cutting, then cut it further.
If a very hot tumor is exposed and the wound is tightly wrapped around, treat it with cold compresses until it cools down completely.
The third section is missing.
Cut through both of the carotid arteries in the neck.
If a person has recurrent or severe headaches due to tension in the head and neck muscles, for example, we have tried applying bloodletting methods to those affected by those diseases as described before.
In the case of bloodletting, one should shave the affected area and apply a visible vein so that you can see its pulse and learn what is hidden from others about it.
Or, if you are shivering from cold, let the leech suck your blood through its cloth until it becomes hot and then apply a heated needle to reveal the vein clearly. Then take note of that location Then, with a fine needle and thread, make the incision as close to the vein as possible, draw it up through the skin until you remove it from the skin and then tie off any remaining veins that are left all around the area that was once covered by it. Then, make a small cut in the middle of both ends and draw it up tight so that if it does not bleed or stop flowing immediately, you know that no blood has been drawn at all from those points.
If the vein is large, it's best to tie it in two places with strong thread so that if any bleeding occurs before closing the incision, there won't be too much loss of blood.
Then, cut off any excess and tie it again with a strong needle thread in such a manner or at some other time so that the bleeding may be stopped when needed.
Do not use leeches if they are in a bad mood or suffering from fever as this may be harmful and could lead to more harm than good, especially since bloodletting is already being described before for its benefits. After tying off the veins, apply a solution of opium and mercury to heal the wound and tie off any remaining veins with a strong thread after that.
"If you are performing surgery and bleeding occurs from the incision, immediately apply pressure with a cloth or something else to stop the bleeding, until it stops on its own if nothing else is available; keep your finger pressed down until the bleeding stops.
"Apply a very cold compress, making sure it covers the entire area and press firmly until you feel relief; doing so is even easier than tying a tourniquet after learning how to apply two bandages.
"Place it on your forehead immediately until you reach the bridge of your nose and the bleeding stops; this is a tourniquet picture.
"The smaller tourniquets are similar to the larger one, but they are less intense than a tourniquet often used; if both of them were very tight and blood stopped quickly, in that case you can grab them with hot hands.
"The bleeding was stopped quickly; this job is better than all other jobs and easier, let the tourniquets remain on until your finger has cooled down.
This section does not contain any text that needs translation into English.
"Treatment of persistent, burning tears in the eyes.
"If persistent tearing and the nosebleed are not relieved by applying pressure to the forehead, seek medical attention as your finger may become numb. "A needle wound is treated with a scissor cut; the treatment of persistent tears involves this job, known as the 'scissor' method, in which you instruct the doctor to cut your hair at the back.
"Then, make three parallel cuts on the forehead, with one cut each at the midpoints of your eyebrows and another slightly behind where you keep your fingers when resting; this is a scissor method for treating persistent tears.
With the fingers on both sides and separated by a certain distance, do not connect them together; instead, make three joints with the thumb, leaving it free to move as much as possible
Then bring your two fingertips together at their closest point. After bringing your two fingertips together at their closest point, then move them in a circular motion towards the center of that space between them, making all the skin you pass over smooth and taut as possible. Then repeat this motion from the middle point to the third point, and finally release both fingertips. And in addition to the first sharp scissors, there is another type called a fine scissors on one side and blunt ones on the other. This was their appearance.
The sharp side is moved towards the attached skin and the blunt side is moved towards the rib cage, moving in a circular motion from one side to the center point and then back out of that space, leaving all the arteries between your head and eyes untouched as you cut through them.
After that, repeat the motion from center point to the other side and then release both fingertips when you've made all the cuts smooth as possible, finally applying pressure on each cut with a bandage soaked in oil or honey, or olive oil mixed with vinegar.
If after three days the stitches are healed and all wounds have been treated with a warm, wet towel, then you can use the finer thread to sew up any remaining cuts or sutures until God wills it otherwise.
The fifth section.
The treatment of tears and streams towards the eyes from inside the head.
If tears flow frequently and uncontrollably from both eyes, with weakened vision in them and the eyelids swollen and tearing, you should seek medical attention immediately. And in the center of the forehead, it's accompanied by severe pain and persistent twitching; you know that these tears are coming from a deep vein; and best treatment for this condition is to cut one slit down the middle of the forehead as if making an X.
And in the center of the forehead, it's accompanied by severe pain and persistent twitching; you know that these tears are coming from a deep vein; and best treatment for this condition is to cut one slit down the middle of the forehead as if making an X. "Start by gently making a small cut in the left corner of the wound and then continue with the right corner, so that you start at the smallest part and end at the largest one, leaving your hands free from both wound edges until all the bleeding has stopped.
"Make a small cut with the blunt edge of your knife, or shave it off close to the bone if you prefer, and then proceed by shaving the edges with oil and vinegar to prevent any hot burns when finished.
"Then treat the cautery, which is a tool used to plant garlic or carve onions into pieces, by getting powder from wheat and scallions, and prepare them for treatment and use them in making plants like this.
"The sixth chapter.
"The sixth is about healing of what falls into the ear.
"All that falls into the ear are four types: mineral or semi-mineral like iron and glass, or plant substances such as garlic, onions, and others, or something oily like water and vinegar.
"If an animal falls into the ear, if it is a bat or other animals that do not fit in the ear, then you must accept it and try to remove it by turning your head or shaking it gently. "Cover the ear with a cloth or cotton wool and gently press it to remove any small objects that may have fallen in.
"If you couldn't remove it by gentle touch, try to use a blunt needle and gently push in the other end of the thread into the ear.
"If none of the above worked, you can use a strong and blunt needle to pull it out gently.
After a nosebleed occurs and the nostril is inserted into the nasal cavity with care, after drying it of moisture to prevent any infection occurring or swelling. If none of what was described by us comes out then proceed immediately to cut before any dangerous swelling arises.
After inserting the forceps into the nostril and removing blood to its full extent, hold it between your hands and twist it up while bringing the ear towards you and make a small cut in the base of the nose when there is swelling from that location.
The cut should be as close to the hump as possible, then remove it when you can with your tools, and treat it immediately until it heals.
If the bleeding occurs from one of those swellings that grow and inflate, try to remove it as described, if you are unable to do so proceed with a small incision lightly on this situation.
Try to cut that kind of swelling in the nose if you are sure it has been moistened by the moisture inside the nostril, then remove it with a small incision gently or by wiping softly and treating immediately until it is gone completely.
If it is easy to remove, but if there's water inside the nostril then use a soft cotton ball first and squeeze it into that nostril where water has entered.
After taking several small incisions along the fingers, warm them slightly with fire and put one into the nostril carefully while holding the other leg up in that direction and strike a hammer on the ear to that side.
He will continue doing this until all the water is out, and may take it from a cold or a brush one and put just one into the nostril while heating up the other with fire to cause more damage, then repeat another stroke again.
"Do this repeatedly until all the water is discharged or suction is applied as mentioned, and if inserting an animal into it, see that its size is like a small bladder and treat it accordingly.
"If its bladder is large, try to extract it using a catheter and suction, as it would be simpler than all the methods mentioned earlier. However, if you are dealing with an infant's ear canal, treat it accordingly.
"If you notice anything in the ear, remove it using suction or a soft cotton swab if nothing else is shown.
"Apply a lubricated soft cotton swab into the ear as much as it can be inserted, then suction strongly to remove all the wax if you cannot get out.
"If not, use the cotton swabs mentioned and tried them earlier in removing wax. Also, apply drops of the medication into the ear with this device.
"As you see, make it from a sponge or gauze with a small opening at the bottom, and if you want to use suction on that swab, then make its tip a tightly wound bandage.
"After applying the drops or other medicines in your ear, insert a soft cotton swab from above and gently squeeze it to remove the wax.
"Apply the ear drops inside, and make sure not to apply anything too hot or cold into it as the ear cannot tolerate that.
"The Seventh section.
"Earwax blockage treatment.
"Some children may have blocked ear canals and eustachian tubes from birth.
Some people may also experience a blockage in the ear canal after an injury or flesh wound inside, which could cause temporary hearing loss that cannot be seen by sight.
If the blockage is just outside of the ear canal and can be seen by sight, then it's in most cases a temporary issue with hearing that requires no further action. However, if the blockage is deep inside the ear canal and cannot be seen, this could indicate more severe issues such as vertigo or dizziness. In this case, you should put your ear to sunlight for relief. If the blockage is visible, gently remove it with a soft object such as a tissue or cotton ball can help alleviate this issue temporarily.
If the blockage is only minor and limited to one side, try not to irritate your ear by keeping it clean with a soft cloth or cotton ball. However, if the blockage occurs inside the ear canal due to flesh wound that has blocked up the ear canal, gently massage it out slowly and forcefully until all of the debris are removed.
If the blockage is deep inside your ear, gently warm it up with a mild heat and then apply a small amount into the ear canal, but if you feel any pain or discomfort while doing this, please avoid putting more pressure on it.
Remember to avoid piercing your eardrum, even if it's a small incision for cleaning purposes. If you need to pierce your ear canal after an injury or surgery, make sure the hole is large enough that any debris can be removed gently by soaking cotton in salt water and applying it softly into the ear canal.
If your ear is swollen and hot, please remove the cotton ball and replace it with a new one that has been soaked in warm water until the heat subsides.
If bleeding occurs, apply a cold compress or ice pack to the ear and follow up with any other treatment provided for hemorrhoid cuts in this guide.
Eighth Chapter
In the treatment of fractures in bones
This chapter, which is used in the bones of the eye, may be brittle and easily broken if held too tightly or pressed against a hard surface without proper care
If blood flows from it, treat it with a gentle lancet and do not cut into it frequently as it may bleed again if its origins are left intact. If it is burned, the origins will be destroyed and it will no longer work.
Ninth Chapter
Treatment of the cold in the bones of the eye
This often resembles frostbite in terms of severity and duration.
Therefore, it was called frostbite because of the severe and prolonged numbness in the upper and lower bones, and if there is a frostbitten appearance on the surface of the bone to move away from it quickly with an incision across it.
Then, tie it with a needle and cut it if necessary, as otherwise you must leave the bone uncut until it is healed. If the incision is large, sew up to heal it properly.
If it is small, then you can ignore it and just stitch it up; if the frostbite seems to be going towards the inside of the bone, then twist and sew up the skin in that direction without needing to cut into the bone.
If you have cut into the bone, then there is no harm done; after treating frostbite with saltwater and applying proper care to the area until it heals completely.
Tenth Chapter
Treatment of the eye injury.
Frostbite is a burn that occurs in the upper layers of bone, it often affects children and makes their eyes heavy, causing them to lose sight during cold weather and not able to look at direct sunlight. "For their own good.
"And they should always keep their heads covered and their ears under the hijab, for fear of exposing them to wind chill or being seen by others.
"Then take a pair of scissors and trim the edge of her hijab to make it as wide as possible, so that the scarf covers his ears from all sides; next, tuck both ends inside the circle you've made with your fingers, gathering them into the center.
"After gathering the ends of the wet fabric, make a diagonal slit from one ear to another, as wide as possible; then cut all the way through the skin until you reach his ear.
"In some cases, the ear may protrude as a white piece of flesh, which you should gather into your hand and pull it out to the side; be careful not to make too wide of a slit or it will be visible.
"If the ear does not protrude on its first cut, you should make it smaller so that it does eventually protrude; then gather it as described and put a bandage over it if someone cuts through the flesh.
"Let the slit fill with moisture until it softens, then treat for a while to dry out; if there is an infection and boils start developing around it, apply some heated compresses to heal.
"The tenth part of treatment.
"For eye itching.
"If you rub the eye lid excessively and it exceeds the natural margin under the eyelid, this will be harmful to the eyes and cause conditions like chronic conjunctivitis, itching of the eyelids, crusting, or even blindness.
"Either with cautery or the harsh treatment, as it is mentioned in the chapter on cautery and incision, or to be performed by cut-and-sew if I remember.
"Apply the cautery to the forehead, then turn it over with your left hand and twist it into shape or not as mentioned in the chapter on the forelock and incision, or perform a cut-and-sew if you remember.
"After applying the cautery, you should cut it in half along its center line without cutting off any excess hair with a small blade or scissors. Then tie the thread beneath the forehead and bring it up through the incision above.
"Just like a piece of paper, you should shape it to the degree that suits your preference for raising the forehead, as some people need only part of their forehead cut off.
"For others, less or even none of it may be cut off depending on how relaxed you want the forehead to be, and then make one cut starting from the larger part towards the smaller side, being careful not to cut through any natural hair.
"Then apply the cautery to one side of the skin, burn it completely, and tie a fine thread with both ends through the needle, wiping away blood as you go and tacking any excess threads onto the eyebrows using some more elaborate stitches.
"If you want to do that, go ahead and if not, then leave the stitches tied for three or four days, or let it heal by itself as long as possible. If you still want him to elevate his forehead after the wound has closed and sewed up, use stitches.
"This is the kind of cautery that was mentioned by the ancients, except it can be used without pain and there's no need to worry about it, another one in cautery as well which is to learn how to shape the forehead like a piece of paper as we described. "Then raise the gauze with three fingers, making it neat and in a bundle on this picture.
"Then cut off any excess of the gauze gently on this picture.
"If you are unable to hold the gauze and there is no needle available, take a thread in your hand and insert it into the center of the shape, then another one near the larger corner and another one near the smaller corner. Bring them together gently with both hands and raise them neatly.
"After raising the gauze as instructed, gather it with thread and tie a knot to hold it in place, making sure not to leave any exposed stitches. If you encounter or feel heat when cutting or sewing, cool down the area with cold compresses.
"You may also lower the gauze by turning it over, ensuring to use the same cuts and stitches as before with hot compresses or cold compresses, depending on your preference.
"The gauze should be applied in this manner, turning it over and making a cut inside as described, then sewing two or three stitches parallel to its length, with the stitches placed closer than those on top.
"You should secure the ends of both sides with thread, then gather them gently on top of the gauze and tie them tightly, leaving no exposed stitches. If the bound gauze is too tight or uncomfortable to leave it as is.
"If the bound gauze begins to fall off by itself, tie it down with a cold compress and let it heal naturally. If you feel that the gauze is too heavy on one side or if the corners are crooked when making stitches, adjust them as needed.
"The twelfth chapter.
"In raising a sunken eyebrow with a needle.
If you have a single or multiple stiches, work on it with a very fine needle and thread of soft silk, then knot the two ends together to form a gentle bow tie.
After tying the second thread, leave it loose in the nostril and tuck one end into your mouth; then tie a bow with both ends of the thread at the base of the excess hair.
Pull the excess hair through the nostril and knot it to form a single bow at the base of your natural hairline, or leave some loose ends in the nostril if there are more than one.
With your free hand, pull the excess hair through the nostril until it comes out with the nostril at the base of your natural hairline. If you have a second excess hair to remove or more, tie an additional bow using that thread below the first knot so that both ends come out from above the nasal cavity when pulled back.
After pulling out the excess hair, tie them together and pull back on your eyebrows so they are both visible to your eyes; then remove the stitches and thread, and pull it tight until you see the hair coming through from above the nasal cavity. Leave it loosely in place for two or three days until the hair grows into its original position and is secured with a stitch.
If the excess hair is short, you can either add a longer piece of your own natural hair or leave it as-is for some time; then remove and reattach it after another day passes by.
What does "الخيط" refer to in this context?
The thread refers to the thread used to tie off a stich after pulling out excess hair from the nostril.
The stich that is being referred to in the context of this text can be either a natural stitch or an extra stitch, depending on whether it is part of the original incision made while performing surgery or added later as needed.
In this case, you should divide the stitches and part your lips apart to make a gap between them large enough for tying; do not use anything that might tighten or contract in order to heal it.
"If you have done that, return the verse with its worst consequences; use the things used in it, such as the razor and the quill, dipped in water which has cut off my fingers; I brought the camel's blood and mixed it up with honey, so as to treat.
"And do not use any trick, so that the verse may return to its original form and place; this work mentioned before is just a repair of the verse.
The fourteenth chapter.
"In treating the verse which is in the lower vein.
"This verse which is in the lowest part of the vein, being called 'the truth', normal and exposed; exposure may occur from a cut or wound.
"In this work, you take a needle and thread; insert the needle into the meat and sew from left to right until the needle is in both sides of the meat then lift the meat over the needle and cut it with a broad blade.
"If you return the vein to its original form, otherwise, take a razor and put it on the cut; turn the vein while cutting two cuts from inside of the vein until they meet in one place; then become that place into a corner. "If you have met, the form will be like this:
"It is the Greek letter lambda, and then you unmake that meat as far as possible from below of which vein; then gather up the scattered parts with two threads, tying them together with a thread like sinew, then treat it with what we mentioned earlier.
"If the verse is exposed from a cut or tear, it must be necessary to make two simple cuts without shaving the edges of what was mentioned before; then divide between them with threads as we mentioned.
"In the section or below if there is work to be done according to what has been prepared for you, it may vary in meaning.
"Your task is to translate the given Arabic sentence into English, preserving its original meaning and structure as much as possible.
The fifteenth chapter.
To suture a cut eyelid to the upper or lower one.
This surgery may cause complications for people who suture the upper eyelid to their lower eye, as it can make movement difficult and interfere with normal activities.
You can either elevate it and secure it with a soft ligature, ensuring that the incision is not too tight to cause discomfort while working, or cut it in such a way as to minimize its impact on eye movement during work.
Until the eyelid returns to its natural state and the suture is completely removed, you can then rinse it with a saline solution or cut through both the eye lid and eye brow using scissors.
Apply an eyelid patch soaked in white egg white after one day, continue to use the adhesive strips until it has healed completely.
The sixteenth chapter.
In cutting a tendon of the arm.
The tendon may be either muscular, resembling a soft and slender nerve-like structure or non-muscular, resembling a white, flexible and rubbery substance if it is stretched or pulled with adhesive strips.
There should be no adhesive used, and both forms of the tendon start from the larger one to cover it and prevent light and eye movement while allowing for cutting work where the eyelid is positioned as per your instructions.
After he opens his eyes and raises the bandage with your hand, then gently remove it using a small needle; place it above and repeat this procedure for each one of them
Make a small incision with scissors and release the sutures, leaving enough to hold it in place gently or using a scalpel to cut off the excess flesh.
To prevent the bandage from sticking to the incision, you can apply a small amount of glue or tape over it.
Be careful not to apply glue or tape directly onto the incision, as this may cause pain and delay healing. After removing the bandage with a piece of gauze or gauze strips, you can apply some salt powder or starch to cover it up for one more day, and then treat it accordingly until it is healed.
If the bandage was not sticking or you were unable to insert a needle into it, then in many cases you can treat this type of wound with medication and let nature take its course as described earlier. If you want to cut it off, simply open your eyes.
Take a small, thin bandage on this picture. If you gently remove the bandage from above, and it tears or looks like it's coming off, simply hold back your tears for a little while longer by using gauze strips, red tape, or starch powder to cover it up for one more day.
Then, continue to work on it until all of them are gone except if you feel severe pain in your eye, leave it and treat the hot sore until it heals, then start again with gauze to cover it up until it is healed.
If the sutures cause severe pain in your eye, simply hold back the sutures and cut off a piece of it to prevent further damage; then use gauze strips or tape as described earlier until it heals completely.
The seventh chapter.
In the eyelid when superfluous fat accumulates
In some people, excessive fat deposits in the eyelids can cause them to grow and protrude over the eyes or near the corners of the eye sockets, potentially turning the eye sockets into external parts resembling swollen eyelids.
This is a technique where one would apply a compress to the forehead and then gently lift up the lower eyelid while applying pressure, causing any excess fat in it to be removed by suction with approval from that action.
Or, you could apply gentle pressure with a pad or gauze and then cut off the excess fat one by one until all of it is removed by cutting, to ensure that your eye is not harmed during this process, which can be done using either the method we described in the eyelid cut-off technique or with a smaller piece. What do you mean by "this way"?
If you cut off all the excess fat and fill your eye with salt water, wash it out with a warm cloth to prevent any burns or damage to the eyes.
If there is still some fat left, just leave it and apply a warm compress to your eye until the pain subsides as well. Then gently squeeze out any excess fat from that area.
It is important to avoid any treatment for a weak eye by rubbing or pressing with your finger, as this could damage the eye and cause harm, so please make sure you do not touch it in any way until you confirm that member is definitely fine.
The eighth chapter.
In the eyelid cut technique.
The eyelid fat technique, which can make it difficult to see and weaken the eye over time if not treated properly, only applies when the affected eye is strong enough without any other disease present.
"When you give the order, the surgeon should place his head in your lap and tie a single or double bandage according to convenience. The bandages should be gentle on this occasion.
If you prefer two bands tied together in one body, for the picture.
After tying the bandages gently, hold them in place for a while to see your eye. Then remove them and allow the blood to coagulate at that spot of the body. Remember not to cause injury with the bandage ends or work half day towards the sun.
You should definitely not cut the other bandages when you are free, if it is green or red in that eye and there's still some blood left after eating it to its limit. If you can't get all of them off at once, just leave part of them and bandage the pain.
Leave it as is until the pain subsides and then bandage the inflamed area to continue your work on this occasion.
The surgeon should place the pupil's head on your lap and wipe off any blood and then apply gentle pressure to close the eye, leaving it in a half-open position until you are satisfied.
Tie one bandage gently on the upper eyelid and leave it alone, leaving only one in the corner of the eye.
Apply gentle pressure between the middle and outside of your hand, then tie another bandage below the bridge and above it gently, hold them together with a light touch until you see both ends raised or cut off whichever one is smaller if necessary.
You should continue applying gentle pressure until both ends are raised and do not cut the bandage off, if blood or mucus comes out.
Then cut off the excess from above and below so that only the bottom part remains on the surface, if you can put it down gently; this is better for some people.
If you cut off excess tissue that burns and stings when touched, leave it to heal naturally first before working on it again.
The nineteenth section.
Return the ear canal to its original position.
Doctors call it a nasopharynx, if treated with heat or hot medication as previously described and no relief has been found, the only remedy is to cut off the tumor when it appears and extract all of its moisture or pus.
When the abscess comes into view, lance it with a lancet here:
The abscess will be cured by applying the Indian ink quill to the affected area, massaging it gently until you know that the infection has been removed.
Do this repeatedly, and if the abscess is closed but pus still remains within it, you will have to continue the treatment for another 40 days without any recurrence or pain occurring there.
If you know it has been cured, if not there is no other choice but to lance the nasopharynx again here:
The lancet should be triangular and rounded, lance the nasopharynx in such a way that it is inserted into the opposite side from where you see it, then place it over the abscess and gently press down with your thumb while holding your other hand slightly away to feel for the abscess and locate its discharge.
If the abscess is lanced and the pus discharged, then you will have to continue with a strong, cold treatment on that area until it heals completely; may God's mercy guide us through this process.
Section Twenty
In the beginning there is light
In the beginning there is light.
Then, put eye drops on with patience and persistence, as well as perseverance and endurance, then gently squeeze the eye to release it from above, applying many tears. If you take care of each tear for four times, you will make many more.
Then, apply one drop at a time as needed to the eye, then gently squeeze it with a strong firm grip and release again without delay. After that, remove the drop and leave the eye moist for one day or night.
If you relax the stitches in this way, it is necessary to gently squeeze them after one day and night as we said before. If your eye returns, then remove the bandage and eye drops immediately; otherwise, reapply the stitches, eye drops, and gentle squeezing until the eye returns.
Section Twenty-One
In the beginning of a chain.
If you cut across the thread in the woven fabric, then remove it and unravel the warp as if for a loom; after that, you want to cut it off doing what I mentioned before.
And that is to enter a needle at the bottom of the warp, from below to above, and then enter another needle in it, as if you were threading a needle on one side; after doing this, leave the first needle where it was.
Then, cut the thread where it was first bound and tie some warp around the needle tightly; after that, remove the needle, then put eye drops on with both egg whites until all of the threads come out, and then treat the eye as prescribed.
Until the wound is healed, and gently squeeze the warp from all sides with many tears to increase its strength; then apply a few drops of white egg whites to lubricate it; after that, squeeze it some more until you are satisfied; this will cause the eye to become moist again and release the eye.
The 20th chapter.
In the treatment of dropsy (edema).
The treatment for dropsy involves elevating the affected limb on a board or bench, and then gently lifting its head with both hands to drain the excess fluid from it.
After applying the treatment, observe whether the excess fluid has drained off completely by lifting its head gently with both hands again. If not all of it has been removed and you suspect water retention (oedema), proceed with further treatment until the patient is completely free from symptoms.
If not, lay the limb flat on your lap and make a small cut in its skin near where it is attached to the affected limb with a scalpel until the excess fluid drains out of there as well.
If only one eye has been affected by hot or cold water, treat it with the usual treatment until it is free of symptoms.
The 21st chapter.
In treating a dropsy of an eye, you mentioned several types earlier. Take one and apply it to the affected area by gently placing it on the patient's cheek near the sun or in a well-lit place.
Tie the affected eye securely with a bandage, and gently lift it off your hand using your left hand if the affected eye is on the left side of the face or your right hand if it's on the right side of the face.
Then place the bandage gently near the affected eye, touching it to the inner corner of the eyelid on its smaller side and then apply pressure as you hold it with your hand while massaging it until all excess fluid drains from the eye.
Once you have applied the bandage and it is in place, make sure to gently massage the eye until all excess fluid drains from the cornea as well. Then, move the bandage slightly upwards towards where there may be water.
"After washing it downward, downward, the water will go away from its own time, and the physician sees what he opened with his eye in that time, then he stays a little while; if the water goes up, he takes it back without leaving the patient.
"If it remains stable and does not go up, gently remove the patient from water in your hand little by little until you dissolve a bit of salt in the water; then wash both inside and outside with that solution.
"With saffron and egg white, tie up the eye properly; but for us of our time, put on it the excoriant with egg white, because some people may have a very solid eye. "You should take the face which has this appearance:
"You should gently touch the ulcer, do not squeeze it; but only you can place the cream where we mentioned, and when you are done, put the patient on a comfortable pillow in a dark room to rest.
"Do not make any movements, except for swallowing; keep your mouth in its normal position and do not move your head or arms at all. And the bandage should stay as it is today until tomorrow evening when you try to see.
"Then you try to see after a while, remove the bandage by tomorrow evening and do not try to do it at the time of treatment or after an ulcer in your time, because you should avoid doing that if the water rises suddenly.
"In case of a severe ulcer, you should heal the eye before tomorrow and cure that as long as it stays healed; then when it gets healed, you open your eyes and put on face cream gently to see again in this dark room.
"He exits the house gradually and moves about his limbs, knowing that a physician does not miss any opportunity to work; some Iraqis say that he makes an excoriant ointment that absorbs water.
In our country it was not found and no one read it in the first books, which might have been altered. This image is a type of inscription that can be held on ignorance.
It was made from copper and has an extremely thin side, like this
The 24th chapter
In the treatment of nasal mucus.
The nasal mucus can thicken, some of it resembling a camel's hump and others being cancerous and having a gray color, while the rest is benign and non-cancerous, light in color.
Do not touch the food with your left hand, hold it up to the sun and open it so that you can see what is inside, then take a knife from one side and cut off whatever you have seen as being harmful or suspect, leaving the rest untouched.
When you learn that all the meat has gone bad, whatever of it you couldn't cut off will be spoiled and rotten if left untouched, so keep them away from light to avoid going bad.
Do it as quickly as you can, and when all the meat has been taken out, wash your hands with water or vinegar to remove any germs that might have remained on them, then open your mouth and suck up anything that is left in your nose.
If you know it is spoiled, if moisture does not reach the part that needs to be removed, then in this case you need to take a thread from cotton and sew up what remains of the meat on top of any holes or cuts made by the knife.
You take each piece and hold it up to the sun, counting how many there are, or less than a finger's width; then you pass one thread from your hand through them all in order, starting at your nose, and breathe deeply until they reach the top of your head.
"When a thread is opened, often children do this action in books and it's easy for those who want to, then they gather the two ends of the thread that came out from the mouth into their nose.
"Then, using the thread in the meat to perform this action will help you understand that the meat has been cut with the thread and then came out of the mouth, so after removing blood from the nose it enters into the nose for three days or more.
"Until you eat all that is left of the meat, then it will enter another thing into your nose until a shot arrives, unless you need to treat and use it.
"Here's an image of the thread used in snorting drugs through the nose:
"The smaller loop is open and the bigger one is blocked.
"If you want to close the nose plug and snort the drug, it should be unblocked.
"The thread is held in its last part as you see and grasped by if you snort it or any other substances.
"The thirtieth chapter.
"In the thirty-first verse of the nose passage.
"Often, in the side of the nose, pus forms and purifies over time until it looks better.
"Therefore, you should cut it as soon as it appears and drain all of its contents then apply either a cleansing agent or an ointment that functions like the one used to heal wounds, but if it is completely dry and brown, indicating severe infection, it will need medical attention.
"If you do not treat it with iron, the wound becomes cancerous and often I have seen that after cutting this thread the person gets a big lump on them, even if the cut is brown and shows signs of healing. "Remove the abscess and incision should be made with caution until it is free from discharge, so that it may heal.
The twentieth chapter of a work
In the surgery of the nose and ear. If a ligature is broken, only then may the operation be performed on some people.
When any part of that is seen, if the wound is dry and the ligature has joined it up tightly then treat him immediately until he heals; but if the ligature breaks and tears his lips open, stitches must be used to close all the cuts with clear visible glue so that they heal.
Then gather the lips with ligature and tighten it, put powder on the wounds to cover them up temporarily or any other type of powder, leave it in place for 2-3 days then remove it.
Change the medicine and leave it until the stitches fall off by themselves then treat with glue to heal, a ligature can either be done as we did in belly surgery or using thread like how you're used to seeing it there.
The twenty-seventh chapter of the work
In cutting a knot on the lips.
Some people may have knots in their lips, similar to those you find on the surface of a sponge or larger; it is important that you gently rub them and cut each knot and tie it with thread.
Then cut them from all sides and put powder on the wound after cutting until bleeding stops, then apply salt paste to close wounds so that they heal completely.
The twenty-eighth chapter of a work
In excess of chewing fat in the gums.
Often, a buildup of excess fat in the gums is called halitosis (bad breath). To treat it, you can use mouthwash or apply a paste containing zinc to the affected area and leave it for 15 minutes before rinsing with water.
If the excess fat buildup is gone after treatment, it often returns if you don't treat it again.
The nineteenth part of the division.
Using iron in the gums
Iron may accumulate on the teeth's surface both inside and outside of it, causing stains, discoloration, and even decay that can harm the tooth structure itself.
You should hold it between your fingers and tongue in a closed fist, scrub the bristles gently with water or soap until there's nothing left of it. Also, avoid using any harsh chemicals that may cause irritation to the gums.
Once you have removed what is there, if not repeated treatment may occur as needed and repeat the process until you achieve your goal. Keep in mind that the bristles need to be changed often depending on the work you're doing.
To make it clear, the brushing of the bristles within is different than the one outside and also on the teeth. These are several types of brushes that you have available.
The thirty part.
Toothache.
You should treat the bristles with all means available to prevent it from becoming stuck if you cut off, as the bristle is a delicate and valuable tool that needs to be handled properly.
If your toothbrush gets stuck in the gums, you should remove it gently and try again until the toothache goes away. Toothaches often deceive the bristles, making them think they're doing it right when cutting off but still leaving pain until a sick brush is replaced. This has been observed repeatedly from the actions of barbers.
If you have a toothache and the affected part is on your cheek, first try to gently massage around it with some force until the pain subsides. Then, if necessary, extract it using your fingers or dental floss, slowly and carefully, until it comes out.
Once you have managed to calm the pain, try applying a cold compress over it to prevent further movement of the tooth and reduce swelling. If the tooth is not coming out on its own or if one of your larger teeth is blocking it, then gently insert one of those tools into that area from all sides slowly and carefully to extract it as you would have done before.
If the tooth is stubborn or stuck, try filling it with a cotton swab and sealing it tightly using a quick drying sealant to prevent movement while you gently massage around it with dental floss to ensure it comes out.
Remember that force may cause damage to a tooth if it is stubborn or stuck, and please note that you can perform the same operation on other teeth as well.
It often happens to people that a tooth breaks off and leaves all of its roots or some of them behind. Or if you manage to loosen a part of your jaw as we have seen many times before, then apply some oil or salt and massage the area gently until it comes out again.
If that doesn't work, try using dental floss tightly and gently around the tooth to prevent it from breaking off when you grab it. This is another way of doing this:
Make the floss tightly and gently, so that when you grab it without giving yourself any movement or bending at all, let it be of a very hard material or one made of iron with very tight binding threads in its sides to ensure a firm and secure grip.
"The cooling parts must also be strong in fixing.
"Severe frosts and heatwaves.
"In fractures of the jaw, open reduction and internal fixation are performed.
"After the broken bone has healed, apply a splint for one or two days to allow it to heal and then insert the screws. "The wings of an airplane are called 'winglets' and this is what a splint looks like:
"If you were unable to remove the screws, it is necessary that you perforate through the bone and expose all of the flesh before inserting a machine similar to what this picture shows:
"If the part is very short and might break, it would be better not to remove it. Instead, use another tool similar in shape:
This picture shows a small tool that you can use instead of removing the part if it's too short or might break.
"We can also use this tool with two blades, which is shown here:
"We can also use a large screw driver, as shown here:
"The parts and tools used in fracture surgery are many, so a skilled surgeon might invent his own tools according to what he learns from work and diseases.
"Even if the disease is not named in the first tools, a broken bone of the jaw or any other bone can be treated with one of these machines and splints mentioned for removing the screws.
"We use such pictures:
"It will be held in place until the bone is out, and after that it can be removed if needed. If there is a fracture then treat it with drugs suitable for that, remove any infection and heal it so it can be fixed again.
Second thirty-one
Do not disturb the new arrivals (or: Do not obstruct the new entries).
If a new arrival is disturbed on another's body, that will cancel the picture and particularly so if it occurs in women; one should examine whether there was an obstruction by another part of the body behind where the new entrance occurred.
It cannot be erased or corrected, unless there was a blockage by another part of the body behind where it occurred.
It is like a small scar, and you should let it heal completely over time; otherwise, it may disturb the new arrivals. If there was an obstruction by another part of the body that cancelled its picture, correct it with the help of a needle.
It would be all from a needle, and you should let the scar heal completely over time; otherwise, it may disturb new arrivals. If there was an obstruction by another part of the body that cancelled its picture, correct it with some stitches later on.
If a scar had broken off part of it, speaking would be painful; you should also remove that part until it is healed and speech is clear again.
Third thirty-one
Use tweezers or gold threads to pluck the hairs.
If a new arrival is disturbed and it moves or shakes, the physician cannot find anything wrong to treat that; but he may treat it with strong remedies if no treatment was done before.
The trick is to use gold threads or tweezers and gold is better because the hairs get tangled and spoiled after a certain time, but gold never becomes rotten; it's also thin enough in length that it can be used on all the small scars.
The trick is to take the thread and put it between both scars, then sew one of its ends into each scar; that way you can close up all of them by sewing the threads together on the other side.
"Once you have reattached the sutures, gently hold them with care and precision so that they do not move at all, and ensure your needle is securely in place at the ends of the stitches. Then, cut off the surplus thread neatly between the two active threads, knot it together, tuck it inside the correct stitch (the one you just finished stitching), and cover both with a piece of spare thread.
"In order to avoid any confusion, after you have reattached the stitches and left them as they are, if it has unraveled or separated at all, simply stitch over it with another thread. This is how sutures should be tied when there are two active threads.
"If you want to tie one or two sutures after they have fallen apart and been rejoined, as described earlier, do so skillfully, just like a skilled craftsman. "This is how it should be done when there are two active threads.
"The forty-third chapter.
"In the cut of the sutures that lie beneath the tongue, it prevents speech from being spoken.
"This suture could either be a natural one that is born with humans, or an artificial one resulting from an injury that has healed.
"In this process, you would open the tongue and its head in your palm, raise its mouth, then cut it with a scissor to release it from being held by another stitch if there is any left over after healing.
"Be careful not to cut into the tongue, as it would expose blood vessels and you could damage them. If there is any left over thread after stitching up, soak it in a mixture of saffron water or cold water and cotton, then place it beneath the tongue so that the tongue can hold on to it every night.
"In case of bleeding, if the area is swollen and you cannot apply pressure with a clean cloth, use powdered saffron to cover it. "Then he performed all kinds of treatment until he was cured.
Section Fifty-three
By inserting the newborn mole under the tongue.
A mole under the tongue may cause a swelling that mimics the appearance of a small mole, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function and potentially filling the mouth, requiring one to open the mouth towards the sun and observe the mole for any changes in color or size.
If you see it as a dark color or solid black and cannot feel the mole, do not expose yourself to it. It could be cancer even if there is no bleeding from it due to its dryness; however, try making a small incision with a soft blade and remove it on all sides.
If blood flows when you work, apply a powder to stop the bleeding and then resume your work until it is completely removed. Then soak in salt water to heal the wound.
"Then perform all kinds of treatment that agree with his cure, until he is cured.
Section Sixty-three
For treating a wart on the tongue.
The glands that cause warts, which are usually located outside the tongue and treated similarly to the wart on the tongue, may not be cured when treated internally in a manner similar to the incision if they have not been treated before.
If the mole is dark or solid black and you cannot feel it, do not expose yourself to it with iron, as this could cause bleeding. Either leave it alone until it heals naturally or gently squeeze it so that it may explode on its own.
If the mole is white and soft, it must be cut off; before working on it ensure that its redness has completely subsided or there are no visible signs of inflammation.
When you do this, hold the tongue between your thumb and forefinger tightly, pressing it downwards with a tool of that sort.
"Use a thin thread or hair, as fine as silk, if you put it in the mouth and show him the tumor and its location to be seen by the eye, then pull out the needle quickly and sew up the wound without delay.
"And then cut it with a scissors, similar to the blade but with both sides bent sharply towards each other.
"If you don't have that tool or something like it, then cut it with a pair of scissors.
"One cut sharply from one side and the other smoothly from the other, then after cutting one sew up the other in this manner, or wash it with cold water.
"And if it continues to bleed after washing, you will have to treat it until it stops bleeding and then treat the wound.
"A woman had a tumor that grew in her throat, making it difficult to swallow and breathe; she was also not allowed to eat or drink water.
"The tumor eventually came out of her throat, after she used the needle to sew it up and then drew a healthy thread from another part.
"Then she cut it at the other side of her throat, did that with another incision in her throat and then opened her mouth and put out her tongue; she sewed up the wound there as well and only left a little bit to bleed.
"The woman's throat opened up and she continued to drink water but was not allowed any food, the tumor kept coming back over and over again until it left nothing but a little bleeding.
"The tumor was cauterized in the throat, and I stopped the bleeding but did not know what had happened to me after that.
Section 37
"The tumor was cauterized in the larynx.
"The soft palate is called the uvula if it descends into the larynx and remains white, but if it is swollen at its base and narrow, it is called a pharyngeal tonsil.
"I saw the tumor had subsided and was thin, so I left it alone and it remained flat without any feeling or color, so I must avoid cutting it.
"In such a case, if you see it on the uvula's side, as I mentioned earlier, cauterize the uvula with fire and burn its base to close it.
"Pull it down and cut it with one of the scissors mentioned earlier, be careful not to cut any more than necessary as cutting from it can harm speech.
"After cutting, use what we mentioned in treating the ulcers and apply it until cured; do not be afraid or hesitant, but only put its head into your mouth.
"Then, cauterize its mouth with the tool mentioned earlier and apply hot water mentioned in the section on ulcers; squeeze it gently until it is not doughy or soft, and fill it this machine.
"Its side where you apply the medicine will be cauterized like that of a knife, and put this machine on its uvula so it won't let any liquid from inside run out onto its throat to prevent anything harmful.
"Then hold your hand with the medicine and apply it to the wound, allowing it to stay for half an hour until the wound is healed or you may take a bandage and wrap it around on one side of the medicine.
"And put the bandage on top of it until you apply the bandage, do this repeatedly to achieve what you want from the bandaging then leave it for three or four days and if you need to reapply the medicine, re-prepare it.
"After you have cleaned the bandage with a wet cloth and cleaned what was around it, then apply cold water to rinse off and treat it inside as well until it is healed, this type of treatment is more gentle than cutting and farther from fear.
"Also, the alcohol can be used as a gentle alternative to scissors in treating lice and other insects by collecting them all or some of them into a bowl and soaking them in vinegar.
"So, you should warm up the bowl and put it in the middle of the blanket so that a pestle can be moved over this area to knead or stir anything inside.
"Then put the bandage with vinegar in the mouth of the poultice until steam is applied to the wound on the bandage until it is cured, you can do this treatment every time.
"It is often good to apply steam and also do not hesitate to do it when you feel hot, if this machine does not work for you take a poultice with vinegar on one side of the face so that it cannot burn your lips.
"Because the poultice made from eggshell prevents hot steam from burning, this is a good treatment with its safety.
Chapter Eighty-Three
During the trachea and esophagus without any other object
Frequently objects in the trachea or esophagus are seen after removing them with a light object, as when the tongue is pressed against it by hand at dawn.
In the esophagus, you may see something that was not visible before and spit it out of your mouth if you feel like it is stuck or hard to swallow.
Or swallow a piece of stale bread or take a bit of white fish floss and tie it, then try to swallow it in case it reached the esophagus.
Frequently, objects get stuck or stuck there and are removed; otherwise, use a spit to remove this object.
Spit is the most common way to remove things stuck in the throat, or use a finger or hand to gently pull them out when you can't spit it out.
The best way to remove something stuck in the throat is through the esophagus, or use a finger or hand gently to pull it out if you can't spit it out.
Chapter Eighty-Nine
Removing an object stuck in the esophagus
If you did not remove it with the removal of food and drink, look at your throat after eating something to see if there is anything stuck.
If you see something in your throat, try gently or forcefully pushing it out of the esophagus with a small stick or soft finger, if not successful, take a hot spoon and insert it into the esophagus near to the stuck object and then into the mouth.
"Do this often and patiently wait for a complete day, then take an empty cup of cold water, open your mouth in it, and sip slowly without swallowing any part of the water until you're thirsty again.
If the spittoon falls from its place if you feel thirsty, and do not come out with what we have described in this passage, spit on a piece of cloth that the Lord had mentioned, continue to do so often until it falls.
In the spittoon, take a full cup of hot water and cover it with a cloth in its middle, hold onto that cloth and then receive the spittoon by placing your mouth on the spout and closing your lips to prevent the spitting until you know for sure that the spittoon has reached your belt.
If the spittoon falls from its place, continue to spit it repeatedly and patiently wait for thirst until you eat salt and vinegar. Do not drink water, but rather come out with this gesture, as that hand will attract the spittoon if it is in your mouth's sight.
It resembles the collar but has this property that it enters the throat and its mouth resembles a bird's beak in its coolness if you spit on anything, do not leave it.
Another machine covers the mouth and is a wide loop made of iron, about as long as you can fit your mouth into it. It enters your mouth on one side and remains open without the will of the tongue until she pulls away from it.
The machine that opens up your mouth to this size with its eye.
Forty division.
It makes the words in the cavity and cuts it open.
Tumors are many and different depending on what one says in this book, they differ from their shape and cut to a certain extent, for example, self-contained tumor and its moisture content.
The second type of tumor is in the brain, which does not include tumors in the rectum or any other location except for lipomas.
The second type of tumor is located in the brain, excluding those that occur near joints and are not fully healed.
If a tumor occurs near a joint and remains untreated, it may cause damage to the nerves or ligaments surrounding that joint, potentially leading to issues with that member or even affecting other members of the body as well.
If you neglect a tumor until it is fully healed, this may cause damage to the primary member or if located near the rectum, but would not be fully healed, neglecting the tumor can lead to infection spreading inside the affected organ and becoming infected with the surrounding area as well.
Neglecting a fully healed tumor may cause it to remain infected, and you must always remember the signs of cured tumors such as complete disappearance of ulcers, redness, swelling, pain in the head or any other symptoms.
It is better to perform the incision below the affected area if possible, as this may make it easier for healing to proceed downward or in another location on the body depending on where the tumor was located and how far along in the healing process you are at that time.
All areas of muscles, tendons, nerves and veins in all smooth surfaces that do not heal themselves should be treated with incision, but if the tumor is in a specific area like the lips or other sensitive areas you would ideally leave it untreated to avoid harm.
Until the wound has healed as we previously mentioned, if you neglect it before that happens, the pain and swelling may continue or worsen, possibly causing damage to your lips and ears, and some tumors might be neglected due to its location or necessity of healing in another area of the body.
In small tumors, one should use a needle and in large ones, a scalpel that is wide enough or many incisions to the extent of the tumor may be necessary if it has become like a knot.
Certainly, in some cases the tumor may be likened to what is described in many medical illustrations and descriptions; it could have incisions made at three angles or cut out like a sheet of paper with the edges frayed from rough handling.
In some cases, the use of a single incision or incisions like those used for staples might be necessary if the tumor is very large and has been held in place over an extended period of time.
If some of the tumor was removed, it would be held in place for another day and then some more of the sutures were cut, repeating this process repeatedly until all of the tissue is removed.
In particular, if the animal is weak or old, pregnant, a child or an infant, then the likelihood of recovery may be lower and it is important to proceed with caution as removing the sutures could result in the death of the animal.
After removing these tumors, one should clean the wound and observe it closely if it was a small or single incision; use gauze made of cotton or muslin to cover it over. If the tumor is large and there are many incisions, you need to be very careful in closing them all back up again.
You should try to match all the incisions, even if some of it was removed from the skin or cut out; make sure you cover them with a bandage made of cotton or muslin and close them three days later.
Then remove and treat it as necessary to heal, if you notice any bleeding while working; use cold water and salt after rinsing them in cotton balls and holding them over the bleeding spot for a few times.
"If a hemorrhage occurs and the affected area is very sensitive, apply a hot compress or warm oil.
"In summer, if the affected area is sensitive to touch and swelling persists for three days or more, apply a compress made of cold oil.
"To treat a tumor, you need to know the specifics of how to cure it.
"The acute phase and the forty day period.
"On tumors that appear on the scalp.
"On the scalp are small tumors that have characteristics of chickenpox and other types with conditions similar to scabs or dampness.
"And there are types that have dampness similar to a rash and others that are solid and all of them do not cause any harm, unless they are cut or removed with force.
"The purpose of this is to first apply the ointment, which you learn about later, and then cut it in a simple way that exposes only the affected area.
"Start cutting from the line ~b~ to the line ~c~, and if you release dampness remove the sack that contains it completely.
"Then put a small gauze soaked in salt water on the wound and leave it for one day, otherwise you can soak it in saline solution and reuse it later.
"Until you are sure there is nothing left in the sack, then treat the wound with gauze to heal it.
"Surgical incision must be made on the affected area, and all veins in that area should be closed, except for the vein containing the wound; if you encounter a blockage, make what is required of you after consultation with your physician, or if it is obstructed by a clot, then make an incision to remove it.
"The treatment should be as you mentioned, and the incision on a obstructed vein is simpler because it has less blood and moisture; sometimes these tumors in the head do not have much moisture with them, so I made an incision to remove that one.
"The woman's brain tumor was as white as snow, and it wouldn't even bleed if anyone tried to cut into it; the other tumors in her head were nothing like this one that affects children.
"When you cut through the auricles, make sure to close them as easily and quickly as possible; take care of the patient's condition according to their treatment.
"The second part of this text is missing.
"In the incision on varicose veins, often these tumors appear in the legs and buttocks as well; some of them are multiple and can be developed from others.
"All of them can be in a specific vein, as some are found inside the affected area and others in the blood vessels; there are also ones that do not respond to treatment or contain harmful substances.
"What I saw was a good tumor, as it appeared very close to the skin and moved around in all directions without any vein restriction or bleeding. "In order to perform the incision, make it from above to below along this line: ~B~ to ~G~.
"Close all veins in the area, make incisions to remove them if necessary as we mentioned for brain tumors; remove them slowly and carefully so that they do not cut through sweat or nerves too much.
Do not touch or disturb the wound unless you absolutely need to; if you touch or disturb it, then cut off what is unnecessary and work with what remains.
Leave the wound undisturbed until it heals and becomes soft, at which point you should examine your finger to see if there is anything left; then cut off any remaining debris and clean it.
If the finger wound is very deep, you should not cut it off but instead tie it tightly with thread and leave it to scab over on its own; then wash out the dirty dressing in a hot Egyptian mixture of water and vinegar before treating the wound.
If you have cut off all the finger, then tie it up and sew it up as soon as possible after learning that some of its flesh is still left; if you see that only a small piece remains, then cut off just that part and clean it thoroughly before treating the wound.
If you cut off the tip and leave only what is necessary, and if no remaining debris remains in the finger wound then bandage it with a simple thread where it appears to be healthy; and do as we have said.
Then use a hot Egyptian mixture of water and vinegar to clean out any remaining infection from the wound until you see that it has healed completely, then wash with warm water only.
30th chapter
In the section of a throat wound that occurs inside it.
The ancients mention this section in the throat, but we haven't seen anyone else perform it and their words are unclear; as for those who engage in mutilation of the throat, they must avoid cutting it because there is no benefit to doing so.
In order for all the airways to be clear, and those who have a hot throat wound in the mouth or throat or larynx if there is no obstruction in the trachea; if it were not possible to do so then the cutting of the throat would be necessary to escape from the danger which might arise from choking.
"If we wanted to, we could cut the incision under three ribs and two ribs on each side, so that there is a small gap between them as shown in this figure.
"Since the larynx and vessels are far from the meat, if a surgeon is unskilled, he should first clamp his glottis with forceps and then make an incision until the vessels become visible.
"Then, he should make the incision that we described and outline it with a cut on the larynx as it comes out of which vessels are interrupted and there is no sound. If the time has passed in fear of choking, the surgeon would have to close the wound by cutting through the skin.
"And the line alone, without the glottis, use the drugs that cause blood to flow until they are released, as said by the author of this book, the explanation for a phrase quoted earlier.
"The glottis was closed by mistake and they themselves had to make an incision in the throat so that they could breathe again, and only allow them to open up after three days.
"Then, they ordered to sew up the incision and treat it so that he could be released, while I saw a doctor who took some of his lungs out and treated them, then found him collapsed just like the dead, revealing the wound.
"I found the blood that came from the wound to be clear, so I thought she hadn't cut through any arteries or veins and the lung was coming out of the wound, so I sewed up the incision and treated it until he was released, except for nothing but a small sound.
"After three days returned to his normal state of health here we can say that the incision is no longer dangerous, but...
Forty-fourth chapter
In the forty-fourth section, a tumor is found in the larynx outside of it.
This tumor that is called laryngeal polyp can be a large mass on the body and is very common in women, but it also appears in men.
Either naturally or abnormally, a laryngeal polyp may be benign (natural) with no treatment needed, or it can be malignant (abnormal), in which case one of the polyps is similar to laryngeal cancer and the other is like a polyp that causes obstruction due to narrowed airway passages, both are serious conditions. Do not expose it to iron unless it is very small, as examination and inspection with a mediastinoscope showed no relation to any blood vessels and its cut was similar to that of a polyp. If it is in a cyst, drain it if possible and then treat the location with necessary treatment depending on the condition of the polyp.
Forty-fifth chapter
In the fifty-first section, about various polyps.
Polyp is different from polypus or cyst, as polyp can have heat and pain, while cyst has no such symptoms that help relieve the pain. The cyst is different from the polyp as it does not have heat or pain, and it has its own specific location on the body and may appear like a blister at first and turn into a boil larger than life itself.
Either a hemorrhagic cyst or one filled with moisture, there are many different colors mentioned in the passage, if you want to treat it first examine and inspect it using the device known as the mediastinoscope to see what kind of treatment is needed.
"Remove the swelling, and examine what comes out of its effect; if it is discharge, a watery one, then make an incision as I mentioned in other tumors, but not to come out from the tumor, know that she has inflammation.
"Make a small incision as I taught you, and fasten it with stitches; remove the skin on all sides gently and preserve the sack if possible to bring it out correctly.
"If the sack is torn during work and cannot be brought out correctly, it often leaves nothing; if there's something left then undo the stitches.
"If you are left with a little of it, make an incision gently at your leisure and close the wound over it with hot compresses; heal it as usual.
"If you have a fever or if the bleeding is not controlled, immediately wash the wound with salt water and keep it bandaged until the infection has subsided; then return to cutting what remains of the abscess.
The 64th section.
In images.
The three types are large ones, medium-sized ones and small ones.
"A big abscess image.
"Medium size abscess image.
"Small abscess image.
The images of the incision are as follows: big ones, medium-sized ones and small ones.
"Medium size incision image.
Small incision image.
"The best instrument is made of steel; the second-best one is made of silver, and the third-best one is made of brass.
This excerpt is taken from the 10th-century Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis, and it's a short segment about various types of needles used in surgeries.
This excerpt describes the different sizes and types of needles required for a particular procedure, depending on the size of the incision. It mentions that there are three types: long ones, short ones, and small ones.
A picture of medium-sized needles.
A picture of small needles.
There are many types of needles, including the basic ones with a single slit (three types), large ones and medium ones (also three types), small ones (also three types), pointed ones (three types) and curved ones (three types). There are three types of needles with multiple slits, including the basic ones (three types), large ones and medium ones (also three types), small ones (also three types). Each type is needed in its own place. A picture of a simple needle that can be used for surgery. A picture of a small basic needle that could also be used for surgery.
An image of an oversized pointed needle, which is not recommended for use in surgery but might have been used for other purposes such as piercing or tattooing. A picture of a medium-sized pointed needle that could be used for some types of surgeries with care and expertise, despite being potentially dangerous if misused.
An image of an undersized pointed needle that may not pose the same risks as larger ones but is still capable of causing injury if mishandled or used incorrectly for surgery.
A picture of a large curved needle with multiple slits, which can be used in some surgeries depending on the specific requirements and expertise required by surgeons to ensure safety. An image of a medium-sized curved needle with multiple slits that could be used for certain types of surgeries if handled carefully and safely, as it is more specialized than the basic needles commonly seen in medical settings but still falls within the guidelines set by healthcare professionals. An image of a small curved needle with multiple slits that could potentially be used for some types of surgeries, depending on the specific requirements and training needed to use it safely in medical settings, as smaller specialized needles are not commonly seen.
A picture of a large needle with three slits that could potentially be used for some types of surgeries if handled carefully and safely by experienced surgeons who have the necessary training to use them effectively, as it is specialized compared to commonly seen needles.
A surgical instrument is in the middle of three handles A small surgical instrument with three handles
This is a picture of a sharp, large cutting and excision instrument.
A medium-sized sharp cutting and excision instrument.
A small sharp cutting and excision instrument.
It is important to use a sharp cutting and excision instrument that has limited sharpness on one side, so as not to cause any harm during the process of removing the tissue or tumor.
This is a picture of an incision that cuts deeply and makes incisions, it's large in size.
Make from a semi-mace like instrument, which has one sharp point and can be used to cut both inward and outward at will, as you wish.
This is a picture of an instrument used to open incisions between fingers during surgery, which has three types: large ones, medium-sized ones, and small ones.
This is a picture of an instrument used to cut blood vessels, which has three types: large ones, medium-sized ones, and small ones.
Make from a long flexible instrument as you wish, and it should be able to reach the fingertips, remember that these types of vessel cutters are large ones and small ones for cutting blood quickly when necessary or without any medication in case.
Do not use in every part of the body, but only on certain sensitive areas such as the calves, thighs, arms, abdomen and other sensitive parts of the body.
"They make smaller versions that resemble the handles of scissors on this picture.
"If blood flows from an artery or vein, they can make a tourniquet on this picture.
"The 40th chapter of the book.
"In the presence of men.
"The handles of the women's scissors may swell, causing discomfort in some people; therefore, it is advisable to cut a tourniquet diagonally on this form.
"From line B to line J. "Then squeeze the entire artery, add the hemostatic agent to the wound and tie it down tightly until it stops bleeding; then elevate its extremities as if you were treating a woman.
"It is advisable to cut the higher ends diagonally, making one end of each cut meet at its other end on this picture. "Then squeeze the skin between lines B and J, tie off the artery by tying one end of a hemostatic agent to each cut, apply what we mentioned earlier in the passage about stitches and tourniquets, then treat with care.
"If you are unable to cut the artery, use a tourniquet on the limb above and below the injury until bleeding stops, then treat with care.
"The 41st chapter of the book.
"In the scrotum which is exposed beneath the buttocks.
"These tumors which are exposed beneath the buttocks, contain cysts and some do not; therefore it is advisable to make a diagonal cut on this picture.
"From line B to line J, if you have squeezed all that is in the tumor out of it, tie off with a tight tourniquet and leave it for another day; then remove the tourniquet.
"In cases where the tumor is of the type that requires incision, it shall be incised in the same manner as with the knife on the ribs; and if the wound heals after cutting into the ribs, use the same method for any other wounds.
The 94th chapter
In cases where the tumor is exposed by a rib or artery and is called an ulcer
If a vein is cut, the skin above it often becomes exposed and may expose both ulcer and ulcer sores as well.
The signs that indicate whether the tumor and swelling are caused by a vein or by an ulcer on the artery if it is from a vein, it will be a straight line in depth of the body; but if the tumor was caused by your finger you can feel as though there is a pulse.
The one that is from an ulcer will be a rash on the body, and incisions into these ulcers are dangerous, especially in the thighs, buttocks, and neck areas of the body, it is very important to avoid using iron treatment.
And also in the limbs or on the head, it is very important to avoid; if they are of swelling from a vein cut into the skin and make an incision lengthwise then open the incision with stitches then seal the veins and remove the wounds.
Until it is exposed, insert the needle and inject into the other side, tie off the veins with stitches in both places where you mentioned tying off the veins on the thighs; then close by a few of the place between the two thighs until all the blood comes out.
After it is healed, use a treatment that heals the ulcer until you tie off the sutures; then treat with iron in accordance to heal it.
If the tumor was from a cut vein, you must hold onto your finger with enough skin and then insert the needle below that location and inject it with stitches in there to remove it on the other side. "Then, tie the knot tightly to the tumor with a thread as you instructed for tying the knots between the two sides of the thread. If you fear that you may unravel the stitches, insert another needle under the tumor at its crossing point.
"After tying the stitches in four places, cut through the tumor at its center so that if anything comes out of it, you can cut off a strip of skin and leave the rest tied up, then apply a dressing moistened with wine or oil. "Then use a treatment that is soothing to both wounds until they heal completely.
"The 50th section.
"In the tumor which affects the nerve.
"Likewise, the tumor affects the vein and artery as well, affecting the nerve if there is excessive pressure or trauma.
"In every joint where the joints move, a tumor that resembles in color to all of the body is usually located deeper than other places and if there is severe pressure on it, you may not be able to feel its deep location.
"Sometimes, it is below the skin and moves in all directions instead of going forward or backward; if nothing comes out through any incision made for this purpose, you may not need to insert a needle.
"Cut a small incision, if the tumor is small and remove it from its original place, or cut it off with scissors and leave the wound closed up until it heals completely.
"The fifty-first section
"In a hernia which affects the belly.
"A hernia which affects many people in their belly and all of the abdominal cavity may be called inguinal as it resembles a grape, its original small size becoming larger as it turns into a swelling.
"I had seen a man with two ulcers in his stomach, which looked like the whitest and most delicate part of the flesh, but when I opened them up and examined their interior, they were filled with pus.
"The operation involved cutting them open and looking at their interior, which looked like the whitest and most delicate part of the flesh on the outside but when I opened them up and examined their inner condition, they were filled with pus.
"If you have a lot of blood, it's best to leave them open for inspection. If the vein is pale and you fear cutting with iron needles, use a needle made of steel that has been hardened and tighten the ulcer after allowing two days then loosen up by tightening again.
"If the ulcer is too tight that it may become self-sealing and heal on its own, but if it's deep or has a severe wound to begin with, cutting might be necessary.
"Afterwards, leave it to heal on its own first and treat the wound until it's completely healed. Be careful if you suspect that an ulcer might look cancerous or have signs of cancer.
"The second half
"The treatment for wounds (or ulcers)
"Wounds (or ulcers) can be caused by many things, such as a rupture in the stomach lining or from a blood clot that protrudes out of the vein, or even from an abscess.
"If it is caused by a rupture in the stomach lining and the ulcer looks like a part of the body, you have no reason to worry because there are no signs. "If it is caused by a blood clot that protrudes out of the vein, its location will be different as well and you'll see signs like discoloration or increased swelling upon entering the bathroom.
Do not remove any part of the hand, do not add or subtract anything from it, and if there is a tumor before it [the hand], then this marks it with a dot (the tumor becomes visible), but if there is no tumor before removing the hand, then it remains invisible and only one mark is left.
If the hand was touched by wind, we should examine it carefully to see if there is any scar from a vein or artery or wind; in that case, avoid treating it as you were taught about ulcers that occur due to veins and arteries.
If the wound was caused by a scorpion or spider bite, the healer should command him to stand in front of you with arms outstretched and then teach him how to apply the remedy all over it. Then command him to lie down on his back and gently apply the remedy all over it in the area you taught how to use the medicine, then pull the middle of the wound up with a strong thread or needle and tie it tightly closed.
The knot should be tied tightly, then you open the middle of the tight wound and insert your finger to see if it has been pulled out; if so, unfasten the knot and push the venom inside the belly (if not, just apply pressure with a needle).
Cut it open, if a vein or artery is obstructing your view of the wound, tie them firmly and pull them out as you work, then tighten the wound in four places with two needles inserted into it after making an incision.
If you want to remove the needles and leave the area until it softens on its own or cut if it heals itself, then treat it as instructed with remedies until it heals completely, which is only applicable when the wound was caused by a hand injury.
"Avoid cauterizing the tumor and instead let it drain, or remove any pus that is found there.
The thirty-fifth chapter.
In curing cancer.
We have discussed in the division types of cancer and how to treat it with drugs, and we warned against treating it with iron, as well as discussing a cancerous tumor in the womb and warning about its treatment.
We mentioned that if the cancer was in a place where it could be removed all at once, like a small cancer in the thigh or elsewhere on the limbs, it should only be removed without delay, especially if it is early and large tumors are not recommended to remove them unless absolutely necessary.
If I were to remove anyone or see otherwise, and if it is feasible as we mentioned before, proceed with the treatment until it becomes black, meaning it has been treated successfully.
After the ulcer has been treated successfully, proceed to cauterize it from all sides with skin, until nothing is left of its roots and blood stops flowing immediately.
If a large amount of blood flows from the wound or artery, control it with your hand or medical tools until bleeding stops and then treat as before to heal completely.
The thirty-sixth chapter.
In treating heat exhaustion.
We have discussed in the division types of heat exhaustion and how to treat it with drugs, but only iron is used for severe cases alone, not on other types such as mild heat exhaustion or heat stroke.
If you have treated severe heat exhaustion with drugs and the treatment was not effective, then see if there is any weakness or another illness besides heat exhaustion in it.
"Do not touch the abscess, nor squeeze it; for if you do, you will cause its growth to increase. "Remove the pus by pressing it with your finger and squeezing it out towards the anus. Then take a hot compress to apply on this area.
"Keep the finger clean and dry, except for when you use it to squeeze out pus towards the anus. After that, apply a hot compress on this area if needed.
"You should squeeze the abscess with three fingers towards the anus, if it was caused by liver disease or right-side appendicitis. If it was caused by left-side appendicitis, use three fingers on that side.
"Nor should you make the cut on that side if it is weak, to avoid bleeding from that location. Then wipe off the machine and put your hand into the incision.
"Apply the bandage between your finger and nail, covering as much of it as you can cover with one hand without leaving any gaps or uneven thickness, then fix the bandage so that it covers a hole made by squeezing out pus towards the anus and wiping off excess water from there.
"It's like a bandage made of gauze, lint or adhesive tape that has a small hole in the bottom and three holes on the sides.
"You can use it as a clean cloth wrapped around your finger to apply pressure towards the anus when needed.
"If the machine reaches water, it will lower itself off of your finger and you should try to wipe off excess water as much as possible without allowing any more water to accumulate on the bandage if that is necessary.
"The doctor will make an incision to save his life, but only up to the extent of his strength and what is left for him are the signs of good health, including the strength of his pulse and the color of his skin, then he leaves the machine and collects water, so that it may be held by the machine within a certain time.
"Because of the skin that holds the scar, it told me to remove it from that appearance and then another time I saw him healed for this.
"He also leaves the least amount of water, do that again on your back and hold it until there is not even a little left from the water, then he gets rid of him in the hot sand.
"And he gets sunburned in the bathroom and sun, his thirst is cured by cool medicines until he feels better again, then drinks water after removing it as mentioned earlier.
This may be a section title or an image caption from another work of literature that contains many sections.
"In treating children who are born with hemorrhoids or their anus is not in its place.
"Some boys may come from their mother's belly and scrotum are not properly closed, it is forbidden to remove the stitches at that time.
"In a few words on this picture:
"Then, insert a small needle in the scar and tie it tightly, hold for three or four days if he wants to defecate again, but don't let the stitches remain unless you want him to close his anus.
"However, if the scar is narrow, it will be treated with stitches as mentioned earlier until it stretches out, and those who have the anus in a wrong place can not control to defecate forward.
"Until the anus is raised and not defecated by himself because he cannot reach his penis in a straight position, which is extremely bad. And work should be done on his back.
"After you have made a small incision with your left hand, proceed to make another one in the center of the wound that is being treated.
"Remember, if bleeding occurs frequently and does not stop after applying pressure, you should treat the wound further to prevent infection.
Sixth chapter.
In the sixth and fifth chapters, Albucasis discusses how to prevent adhesions between the skin flaps of wounds or ulcers.
In the sixth and fifth chapters, Albucasis warns that bad pus from a wound can often lead to sepsis (a life-threatening condition) and should be treated with gentle suction as soon as possible.
And remove it until all of the pus is removed, then apply a gentle suction on the pus-filled wound to treat it further and prevent infection, but if the pus is black in color you should use gauze after cutting and cleansing,
If the pus in the wound is both inside and outside, you should first remove it from within to prevent further infection when removing it from outside.
Because if both wounds are treated together, you may leave the flap intact as it was not affected by treatment. And in women and ulcers, pus can also appear on skin and wounds, so all pus should be removed to prevent infection.
After treating with honey, apply gauze soaked in the prescribed solution and further treatment to remove any remaining pus until it is completely removed. If bleeding occurs, use gauze soaked in a mild compress on this spot:
If the gauze is not effective for both wounds, meaning bleeding and infection or wound healing has been hindered, then you should apply a tube made of thin rubber tubing to drain any excess pus from the area around the wound and prevent further complications. And if an adhesion forms between the skin flap and the underlying tissue, this must be treated as soon as possible.
"When a knot is correctly tied and not tightened, it may be pulled taut by a wound or a tumor.
"To distinguish between them, it's best to slit something from the knot and then cut through it gently with a sharp knife in cold water, so that both won't stick together.
After cutting the knot free and making sure it is loose enough to separate from the wound or tumor without sticking, you can treat it with a cold compress.
The 7th step and 50th step.
In the purification of infants and treating what may come upon them from a mistake.
The knotting is not like other surgeries, except that when done with our intent and use in infants, it must be done as best we can.
The easiest way to safety, I say is that the first mentioned tying without using it at all because they do not use it and only what we have learned.
In my experience, I found that the public of infants and young people use purges with salt water, compresses, sutures, ligatures, and cuts, having tried all these methods.
I found that cleansing with salt water and using sutures is not the best method because purging often makes the wound more prone to bleeding, as sometimes when you cut through the knot, there might be an upper tear remaining while the lower one has been severed.
I tried cutting, and it continued bleeding. And cleansing with ligatures doesn't promise the same thing as using thread for cuts because sometimes the knot might have gone through the suture, causing damage to your work or making the infant's wound short due to its length.
Often, they are born without being cleansed and I have seen this happen. The cleansing with the sponge on top and wiping with lint has shown me that the sponge is better suited than the one from below in terms of effectiveness for cleaning purposes.
When you compare the sponges and cut them at the same time, it seems like lint is almost as good to wipe clean as a sponge of higher quality.
However, if you only connect the lint to your finger and let it dry naturally, it is still effective at wiping off whatever residue may accumulate on it without causing harm to yourself or your intellect. Then, stop holding it between your fingers when it has reached a state of flatness in order to continue using it.
Also, if you hold a sponge in your hand or below the edge of it and there is no residue on either, then take one's finger to clean its surface until only the tip remains above.
After cleaning off any residue, you take the taught thread and tie it around your finger as before but then tie a loop below at one end and hold both ends between your fingers tightly to cut the knot in half. Then, quickly raise the lint to a height and pull off the tip of the sponge until only some remains on its surface, then clean it with a wet cloth and gently rub it free from any remaining dirt or dust residue; this is better than anything I have ever tried before in terms of effectiveness.
Then, quickly raise the lint to a height and pull off the tip of the sponge until only some remains on its surface, then clean it with a wet cloth and gently rub it free from any remaining dirt or dust residue; this is better than anything I have ever tried before in terms of effectiveness. Then, hold the lint to a height with a damp cloth and gently rub it free from residue on top of its surface over time until it is free.
This picture shows how to clean a sponge correctly:
The sponges should be flat and have no knots in them, with equal length whether long or short; it is also important to note that after using the sponge you will need to stretch it gently on your finger before using again in order to prevent any residue from sticking to it.
"If you cannot cut it with a knife, please cut off the infected part of flesh as soon as possible and leave only the healthy tissue.
"Cut it off as directed by a physician, and leave no part of the incision untouched if you must cut something from its root.
"If you need to cut less than the recommended amount, do not worry; follow the instructions given and ensure that no part of the incision is left untouched.
The 50th chapter.
For bladder stones in urination treatment.
If you are dealing with bladder stones in the urethra, urethra obstruction or any other urinary conditions; treat it according to the treatments mentioned in the chapter on treatment of stone blockage.
If the blockage is due to urethral stones, try massaging it gently and sitting on a hard surface with your back arched towards it may help relieve the obstruction; otherwise proceed with medical advice as needed.
If that doesn't work, and the obstruction continues to worsen on urethral massage, please use an instrument called a catheter.
Create a thin, flexible tube with the consistency of a peacock's feather, long enough to reach up inside you and gently narrowed at its tip; by using this instrument you will be able to draw urine in or tie it off as needed.
To insert the catheter, gently push one end into your urethra and tie it off securely to prevent urine leakage; after this, lubricate the catheter with butter or egg white cream and sit on a chair.
"Pour the oil and water, mix them thoroughly, then insert the catheter gently until it reaches its tip in a forward direction, after which you will pull it out.
"Once the catheter has been inserted, pull it gently until its tip is close to the anus and then withdraw it as you sense a full feeling in your rectum.
"You should make a hole in the urethra, which will be used to pass urine through it. After inserting the catheter into this urethra and pulling urine out using it, remove the catheter and try again.
"Do not stop until you have emptied your bladder and feel a relief in your rectum.
"The ninth and fifth sections.
"How do I inflate the balloon?
"Inflate the balloon with a syringe. It is called an enema machine and its appearance is as follows.
"It is made of gauze or a flexible tube with a long spout, leaving three holes on both sides and one hole in the middle.
"The urethra, where urine is passed through it will be filled as much as you can until you pull out something from the urine and then withdraw it to empty.
"If you want to inject urine into the bladder, insert one end of the enema machine in the urine and pull it out above. The urine will be sucked into the hole of the machine then inserted into the urethra as described for the catheter.
"Once the urine is in, you should gently pull it out until your bladder feels full.
"You take a sheath, cut it at the top so that its edges are sharp and pointed like a needle's tip. You then insert this into the urethra of the patient, where you tie it with strong thread.
"You heat the moisture slightly on a fire, then insert one end of the catheter into the urethra (urine channel). Then you apply pressure to the bladder with this moist thread until it feels as if the moisture has reached the bladder.
"If the catheter is not inserted into the bladder, you can make a circle from it and thread all its holes tightly then insert a strong thread through this opening as it rotates. Then tie off both ends of the circle with another thread to hold in place what you want from moisture, urine, and semen.
"Then tie it into a machine as if tying off your urethra until the moisture reaches the bladder.
The thirty-second chapter
"Chapter 32: Bladder Expiration
"We have explained the types of catheters and their treatment with medication, we have discussed the difference between urinary catheters and bladder catheters as well as its signs. We also mentioned catheter insertion techniques.
"In particular, we have discussed the bladder catheters that are inserted into the urethra and characterized by a short explanation.
"Male bladder catheters are more susceptible to infection and symptoms that urine may leak from the urethra, similar to water leakage.
"It appears red and erect, it may be painful or itching frequently with pus formation in many cases, causing urinary retention in boys under fourteen years old and making it difficult for the elderly.
"If the catheter is longer, its treatment will be easier than if it were smaller; otherwise you should first check for a catheter before administering medication.
"You should straighten the penis, then release it and lower it to touch the anus, stop if it is too high; hold its base between your hands, with the palms down, so that the entire penis bends downwards.
"If the tip touches your anus, stop immediately and wipe it with the left hand if you are male or both hands if female.
"If the penis is fully erect, insert it into your anus and gently move it towards the urethra (the tube that carries urine from the bladder out of the body). Then grip it with your finger(s) and withdraw it to another location where you wish to cut off.
"Instruct the surgeon to grip the urethra with one hand and instruct another assistant to extend their right arm for women, extending skin there towards the location where you wish the cut. Then take the handle of that instrument.
"Cut between the anus and the vulva to the left side, making sure that the incision is wide enough from outside but narrow inside so that it can easily be pulled out.
"Do not force too hard on the handle of the instrument when cutting, as it may have angles or curves that make it difficult to pull out.
"If the handle of the instrument is rough, it may be easier to pull if you grip or hold it with a firm hand, having one side as a cutting surface.
"If the handle is slippery, do not let go of it and either enter a gentle instrument with a smooth side or widen the incision slightly if you cannot use it.
"If there are more than one, first apply the large to the urethra and make a big cut; then afterwards apply the smaller ones in the same way.
"Either he dies, or the urine always comes out because it is not blocked in that area; however, try to expel her by using catheters until she finally passes.
"When you are done with your work, wash the wound gently and patiently; then tighten it up and cut around its edge lightly using oil or water, but do not sew it closed until the third day.
"When the wound is cleaned with oil and water, gently apply a poultice made from bitter almonds or basil to heal it; then cover it with hot cloth and wrap it in bandages until he feels better, because urination may become obstructed.
"Put your fingers in the wound and if it still bleeds, that means his urethra has been damaged; then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt until he feels better.
"In times of treatment, make sure to tie the bandages tightly to hold in place any medication that is applied on the area; if the stitches are small and they have blocked the urethra so urine does not come out through them, try pressing them shut before passing.
"Many times I have used this treatment without making a cut, I tried that and it worked as follows:
"Severely constrict the urethra, then tie a stitch tightly around it to prevent urine from returning; after that insert a needle and thread into the incision gently until the needle reaches the same stitches.
"Gently pull the needle through the same stitches from one side to another, and urine will flow out continuously until the urethra is completely healed.
"If you have not prepared the treatment, it will hinder your ability to do so. Then tie a thread under the sheath and another one above it, then cut along both sheaths at the same time on the penis between them, and take out.
"After tying the knots, remove the clots that have formed in the wound. But make sure to tie one thread under the sheath so that if it comes undone after removing the sheath, the skin will return to its place and cover over the wound.
"Therefore, if you tied the upper knot, lift the skin up so that it returns when you are free and covers over the wound as we mentioned earlier.
"The third section and the 20th
"In removing the sheath for women.
"If a woman has not given birth to the sheath, it is difficult for anyone of them to have treatment and many are embarrassed by this because they may be virgins or cannot find another woman who will consent.
"If she is virgin or has a hymen, the third point that you cannot find another woman who practices this profession and especially with hands, and the fourth point that the place to cut on the sheath for women is different from where it should be, so you need to make an incision elsewhere.
"In that case, it is necessary to find a skilled and young woman or else take an unskilled one who knows about women's needs, as there should be some indication.
"Take her in and tell her to examine the sheath first, because if she is virgin you must insert your finger into her vagina and examine it, pressing on both sides.
"Then tell her to cut it, unless she is virgin and hymen-bearing then tell the capable one that she should insert her finger into the vagina of another woman who consents after placing her left hand on her clitoris and pressing hard.
"If you find it, spit it out of your urethra and bring it down to the base of the penis until its discharge ends at the root of the penis, then cut it off at the point where half a fist meets the penis from whichever side that reaches for it and feels the semen in that direction.
"Its foreskin should not be retracted downwards, and if you make a small cut at first, then insert the meat of that small cut; if you feel semen in it, you increase the cut until the semen comes out.
"From small to large and erect, smooth or hairy, flat or rolled up; you know their types and can use them for what you want. If your blood gets congested in that area, put on a bandage, hold it until the bleeding stops, then return to work.
"Until the foreskin is removed, make sure you have with yourself some tools that you mentioned in ejaculating for men to assist you in your work. If blood clots and you learn that it is a sign of congestion, put on the fingers at that spot.
"Tie a bandage tightly and leave it, do not touch it or remove it; you may lose the foreskin if you tie it too tightly. If after some time the area becomes swollen and infected, return to work until you remove it.
"Second part/sixth part.
"In a small cut on the urethra.
"The urethra, otherwise known as the urinary canal, is a tube located beneath the foreskin that surrounds the bladder and is lined with mucus from birth in one of the testicles.
"It is only in rare cases, and the urethra can be found between the foreskin and the urinary canal that surrounds the bladder.
This moisture can be of many colors, either it may have a color similar to rust or may be bloody red, or may be dark brown, or may be milky white, and most importantly, the marks that identify them are known
When water is in a white vein, it can be extended slightly, like an egg yolk, without revealing the stain because moisture surrounds it from all sides.
If the moisture is in a white vein, then the clot may be extended slightly at one end like an egg yolk.
This causes humans to think that there is another egg, and if the moisture is between the top of the glans and a white vein on the shaft, it feels like it is under sensation, but if you want to know its color, rub the clot with the medical probe you have already provided images for.
If you apply iron treatment, it is important to instruct the patient to lie on his back if possible and place him on a slight incline, then put many small cuts onto his back, then sit down at his feet.
You instruct the attendant to lie on his right and stroke him from one side of the glans, towards monitoring the belly, then take a small swab and make an incision in the middle of the penis lengthwise towards the anus.
Make the cut at an angle similar to the one that divides the penis in half, so it goes towards the white vein on the shaft and stops just before the anus, then seal the incision and remember to leave enough for closing if possible.
Then apply firm pressure and let the semen out, then separate the cut with stitches or stiches as much as possible, do not touch the glans on the way up to avoid damaging it, and make an incision at any point you can reach while avoiding touching the anus.
"If you did not remove the stitch, then it won't return to its place in your body, and when you finish cutting off the thread, collect both ends of the needle and sew them tightly together.
"And then apply a treatment for all other wounds until it is healed, and if the egg has become infected due to another illness, make sure you tie off the veins in the gallbladder to prevent further bleeding, cut open the gallbladder, and then treat it as mentioned earlier.
"If both veins are blocked, you should know that it's two cuts as if the first one has already been made; whether or not they are separate actions, then wash the blood.
"Put the cloths in the cuts, soak them in oil or vinegar and squeeze out any excess fluid from both sides; then put one soaked cloth on top of another to cover up the cuts and keep the abdomen bandaged. "Bind it with a six-thread knot, like this:
"Then take the two soaked cloths and wrap them around like this, using one as a scarf or wet cloth to tie it up in an elastic waistband; then put one end of that into the collar and go over your shoulder.
"The second one goes around the back and both sides of your thighs, and then wrap it all in an elastic waistband; you can also make this bandage instead of cutting open.
"And it is that you take a soft cotton swab, cut off the thread of the needle, and then put another bandage on as we have described to reveal the white thread soaked with water.
"It is similar to the Greek bandage, and then you bandage it with a bandage as we have described, leaving all of its moisture behind; then you close up the bandaging material by stitching them tightly together.
"Know that this work is the most beneficial and further removes blood, better than any other surgical incision; if you are faced with a painful boil or bleeding, then treat it according to what has been stated before.
"If the patient is stubborn and refuses this treatment, then use the cautery as prescribed; otherwise if it relieves your symptoms according to what we have mentioned before.
"Electrocautery should be applied to a raised table, then burn the tumor beneath with a wide-open flame; afterwards apply the cautery over the entire body and make it as broad as possible until all the blood is burned away, and then put on a bandage and tie it tight.
"After all the blood is burned away, treat it until it heals; otherwise if you burn too much while cauterizing and this is due to a white membrane obstructing its way out of the wound.
"In this case, you need to introduce a needle or a machine that extracts the coagulated blood mentioned before in order to open the wound slightly.
"Know that water may come back and coagulate after six months or so; if it does, then cauterize with the same means.
"The thirty-first chapter.
"Surgery on the livid skin and its treatment.
"Know that an incision on the third degree gangrenous skin will usually lead to death, so it is best not to perform this surgery and let nature take its course in most cases.
"Then I would say that many tumors occur in the bodies from which there are only female connections, and this is due to many reasons either from freewill causing harm or from a blow that leaves no mark.
"It might be covered and sometimes even mummified, with a dark color like mud or no feeling at all; it may also be due to the constriction of veins and their swelling.
If you have a knife in your hand and want to cut it, don't leave any of the flesh on; if there is swelling from a vein, do not remove anything except that part which swells because of the vein
If you've already cut the kidney and have removed it from its white vein, you should remove all the vessels (arteries) along with the kidney and then tie them off to prevent any bleeding after removing the kidney entirely.
You should remove the kidney and cut it off, even if there is a clot between any of its vessels or arteries; you should make sure to clear all that clotted material away.
If the flesh is stuck to a place where you've made an incision, remove it and cut off the kidney as we've said; if your work has been done, wash out the wound with hot water or wine (to prevent infection), then treat the wound with other treatments until it heals.
The 40th chapter
Treatment for hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids are swellings of the veins, similar to those in women and difficult for a man's movement and sports, and treatment is given attention as mentioned before.
However, I must remind you of what was said at the beginning: that if there is a swelling from a vein, do not remove anything except that part which swells because of the vein.
Take the hemorrhoid, squeeze it firmly and then cut through with a sharp knife until all vessels are exposed; then tie off all the vessels as mentioned before in tying off the veins of the scrotum while you're inside inserting an arrow there.
Tie it first at the parts where you've exposed the hemorrhoid, tie it also in its last part; then cut through it across as mentioned before on how to make a straight cut along the body while removing any clots that might have formed there.
"After treating the hernia as you would treat other hernias, if you desire to leave it open for a certain period in order to remove the vessels that nourish one of the women, there is no harm in exposing all the vessels so that only one woman may be taken out without affecting the others' nutrition. "If the vessels are cut off and serve no purpose, it makes no difference.
What is the translation of the phrase "al-fisal wa'l-sittun" in English?
In the treatment of a hernia.
This incision is made to expose the abdominal cavity, through which the incised area may be brought into contact with one of the women.
This incision can either be made through a slit, or extended and happens in different ways such as blows, bruises, kicks, carrying heavy objects, and so on. The key thing to note is that if it extends the sac, only a little bit at a time over a long period of time will happen.
It does not cause death and can be treated by exposing the sac, which means if it happens through a slit, it will happen at first and then become more severe, causing the tumor to protrude visibly under the skin nearby.
This means exposing the sac and allowing it to exit outside of the sac, which may cause a hernia and suffocation, and in some cases they can be accompanied by suffocation.
Because it happens very hard and painful, especially if prolonged, treatment of this condition is risky, so the patient must be cautioned to return the sac into its original position as soon as possible.
Then, place your hands on it and lift both of its legs up until the skin next to the incision is raised as much as needed in order to open the incision.
When you have cut away from the egg as much as possible, then squeeze out the shell pieces that are stuck to it until a white sharp point is revealed on all sides of the egg at which time insert your thumb into the other end of the egg.
Between the white point and the second shell crack, try to separate them from behind the egg, then with your right hand insert it into the other end of the egg while holding on tightly. Simultaneously, move the white point upwards using your left hand to raise the egg in a straight line towards the first cut.
Command the servant to lift the egg and loosen completely the connection from behind, then gently check with your thumb whether there's anything stuck in it as you lower it downwards towards the first cut.
Then take a thick needle and thread with ten threads in it, insert it at the end of the crack that follows the first cut, then cut off the ends of the thread until there are four threads left. Then wrap them tightly around each other, and tie them with a strong knot on both sides of the crack that follows the first cut in order to prevent anything from going through the threads you've tied to get to it. In order to prevent it from getting too hot and to further strengthen the knot outside of the first one, you should leave some length on both ends of the first knot that is away from the crack in which your thumb is inserted.
In order to prevent it from getting too hot and to further strengthen the knot outside of the first one, you should leave some length on both ends of the first knot that is away from the crack in which your thumb is inserted. Then cut off the rest completely and remove it from the egg, then make a small slit in the shell that follows where you lowered your thumb as described earlier, after which he will use the soaked gauze on oil and put it over the wound using the knot we've mentioned before.
If the white point that we mentioned after cutting it carefully begins to bleed a lot, leave the knot and then use hot water to soak it until it falls off on its own.
Then treat the wound like you would other wounds until it heals.
Section Six and Seven
In the artery, first, you should not try to treat it with iron as was mentioned earlier; rather, once the artery has been severed, connect its vessels below carefully and gently.
Then make a cut in the middle to treat the clot, and once the vessels have been severed and the wound is treated as mentioned earlier until it heals completely.
Section Seven and Eight.
In an artery that has become blocked.
If the blockage in an artery is treated promptly, it will not lead to necrosis of the tissue and will return to normal condition in all times.
However, if the delay is too long and the artery becomes severed, it can lead to necrosis of the tissue and the blockage in the veins may extend as described earlier. That is, it will be extended to an artery and then heal in the vein, and its treatment as described earlier will continue.
To treat it with iron, first compress the wound as you would for any other injury; then cut through the wound and make an incision below where the artery has been severed to a distance of three fingers or more. Then connect the vessels beneath the skin carefully and gently.
Until you have treated the white clot that follows, take a gauze pad and press it onto the wound site; then wrap it around your abdomen to secure it in place. Then tie the two ends of the gauze pad together.
Then secure your tourniquet and do not cut the artery or touch the gauze pad; rather, treat it as you would for other wounds until the wound heals completely.
If you cut off your tourniquet and treated the wound, it will not recede any further.
"The best location is at this place because it is closest to safety.
Section 8 and 9
In relaxed position, the patient lies prone.
Often, the patient lies prone on a table in order to relax and prevent rigor mortis from setting in.
After laying the relaxed skin on a stiff surface, you should then close your lips and make sure they are completely closed. If desired, you can open it up to three or four times, keeping it tight until you cut between them.
Then treat it as you would any other wound and remove the stitches when healed.
Section 9 and 10
In relaxation.
Relaxation in our practice is forbidden.
Therefore, I should not mention it in this book and only mentioned him to two purposes: one is that knowledge of the doctor if asked about it; and the other is that we often need relaxation some animals for our needs.
In the case of camels and cats, for example, relaxation can be achieved by either being carried or by cutting it up; if you do so in order to relax your muscles and make them limp, then that would mean carrying the camel in hot water until he relaxes completely and stops moving.
Once you have relaxed it by hand until it is completely limp and cannot be felt, cutting the animal and severing each flap with one cut can follow if desired.
Once the wings have been cut off after you have relaxed them and left only one small incision on each, which is a common technique for relaxation; this cut is better than that of being carried or by cutting it up entirely.
"Because sometimes the male may not have satisfied an woman, then he will treat his sexual injury until it heals.
Chapter Seventy
Treatment of female genitalia
In men, the clitoris can be in two forms; one is when it appears like a small pouch or glans penis in between women as if it were an extension of the female vagina with hair and sometimes urine may flow from where it is located (glans penis).
In women, there is one form and it appears on the clitoris as if it were a small pouch like that of a man but with two others which are like those between men; both are external and the third is internal.
The two forms of men and the one form for women should be cut away so that its effect is removed, then treated like other wounds until it heals; but if the second form in men which produces urine from glans penis does not have a sheath or cause urination, there's no need to treat this as an injury.
Chapter Seventy and Seventy-One.
In the removal of foreskin and penis from women's clitoris.
Circumcision sometimes increased the natural process until it becomes numb and looks like a penis in some women, causing them to become sexually active like men and becoming an intimate part of sexual life.
It is important to hold your foreskin gently or with a knife and cut it off, do not rub the cut part nor especially in the original depth otherwise blood may flow.
After it is cut off, treat like other wounds until it heals; but the foreskin which may appear in vagina must be treated so that it fills with semen.
Sometimes it will come out to the side as if an appendix. Because of that, some early physicians call it the appendix and should treat like other appendectomies until healed.
Second Chapter Seventy
In the treatment of cataracts
Cataracts can be congenital or acquired, depending on the cause. If it is due to trauma (an injury), it may result from a blow to the eye, for example.
Cataracts can affect the center, edge, or top of the lens capsule and may interfere with sexual intercourse, pregnancy, or childbirth. If a diagnosis is necessary, an examination by a specialist would be required.
If a cataract is close to the pupil, try gently pressing on both sides of it with your fingers.
The woman lies on her back, stretches the pupils with force until she breaks open the cataract (which should happen very easily), then applies the soaked cotton to the affected area and applies it every day to prevent further inflammation.
If the cataract is very thick, you should cut it with a thin knife that resembles a razor blade and remove it. Also make sure to take some medication like Cephalexin or another antibiotic eye drops as prescribed by your doctor.
After applying the wide gauze to prevent further bleeding, press it gently and apply a few drops of antibiotic eye ointment. Then get all other treatments for inflammation under control until healed completely or you may need to cut open another cataract.
If the tumor is cancerous, it cannot be treated with iron injections.
Third Chapter Seventy
In the treatment of hemorrhoids and fistulae, which affect women's genitals.
Hemorrhoids are swellings in the veins of the rectum, which can bleed and become fistulas if not treated properly. There are different types and symptoms for them mentioned here.
"The one that can be healed and the one that cannot, I say that hemorrhoids are cured by iron if they are in the vagina without showing on feeling, but otherwise there is no cure for hemorrhoids. If it occurs inside the mouth, it is treated with iron as well.
"A woman should enter a cold bath, massage the hemorrhoids with a small sponge or a rough cloth, and cut off their roots when they are bleeding. When blood flows from a vein near to the heart.
"Like castor oil and vinegar, lemon balm, and so on... Put her legs up to the wall for an hour then soak them in cold water. If the bleeding continues, put a poultice of wormwood, sage, and ivy leaves mixed with honey and vinegar.
"Put a poultice of boiled liniment, bind the hemorrhoids and breasts to prevent them from swelling. Then apply a poultice made with the juice of horsetongue, or wormwood or ivy leaves mixed with honey and vinegar on the affected area.
"If the swelling is relieved by using alum, cut off what remains of it according to the instructions for hemorrhoids and treat them until they are cured.
Section 40
"The hemorrhoid that appears in the vagina.
"Many types of tumors, such as cancer, hemorrhoids, varicose veins, ulcers, boils, abscesses, carbuncles and heatthomas may appear in the vagina.
"It is important to mention the hot tumor that appears in the vagina, if it is one of the tumors that heal quickly with iron treatments, such as hemorrhoid thrombophlebitis and hemorrhoids.
"According to the advice, do not rush the treatment of it and heal as quickly as possible until the symptoms disappear at which time you should sit on a chair with armrests and lie back.
"Bring your hands together below the belly and tie them with two suitable bands.
After you have tied your hands together below the belly, sit on the side with your right hand and use a tool that opens the mouth of the vagina (which follows). If you want to use this tool, please measure its depth to prevent it from being too deep inside the vagina.
If the tool is too deep, put a cloth on your vaginal opening to prevent it from going too far inside and make sure that you are keeping its passage at the top.
When you hold the tool and guide it by hand, until its head opens the vaginal opening, if it is not inserted deeply enough, please cut off its tip with a small slit at the top so that all of it has been used up.
If you need to urinate, collect a clean cloth in your hands and wipe the vaginal opening out of the slit in the vagina with a small amount of water or oil that has been mixed with detergent so that it comes out completely from inside on the vulva and outside the vagina.
After two days, you should treat with a laxative to cleanse your system until you have passed.
After washing the vagina and vulva with water mixed with honey, you can come back to a laxative if the tool has gone inside your vagina.
It is not recommended to treat it with iron; rather, continue as we mentioned earlier in our guidelines.
50th chapter
In this section, it teaches how to treat live worms if they have exited the body in an unnatural way.
The female must first know what a normal delivery looks like, as it is the sign that if she sees a woman squatting and gasping for breath on her belly, this means she may be having trouble with the baby's position or breathing.
"If the newborn is quick to exit, it indicates a natural birth and may be born with its head out or attached by its umbilical cord.
"If the newborn is quick to exit, it indicates a natural birth and may be born with its head out or attached by its umbilical cord.
"If the newborn is quick to exit, it indicates a natural birth and may be born with its head out or attached by its umbilical cord. However, if it's born in an unnatural way (like being born on its back), you should be careful and avoid any mistakes.
"I will point out all the details and steps involved in that, so you can follow through on it if the birth is natural and help her if she's having trouble giving birth or sees a decline in strength.
"Comfort her with a damp cloth and warm compresses, then gently touch the umbilical cord to drain any moisture inside of it, helping the mother to speed up the birth process.
"If the baby does not exit, you should gently tie off the umbilical cord with the clean cloth and encourage her to push and breathe for it to come out in a timely manner. If its legs are born first, just gently remove them.
"If the baby does not enter, place her on a platform and lift her legs high into the air. Then gently shake the platform until she falls forward or is lifted up (onto you). If both of its hands or all of it do not enter, cut them off and try to draw in the remaining part of the baby.
"Or tie its hands together gently and pull it out if it's coming out through the legs. If it comes out through the legs, place one of its legs on you gently to hold.
"If you go to the thighs, order her to shave and clean them with the knife (razor), then he will come out; otherwise, have a baby taken away little by little until it is shaped like a natural one, if that doesn't happen.
"Shave the vulva and perineum, apply oil on the clitoris and vagina, use a cotton swab to insert it gently until it reaches orgasm.
"If you see that it has not ejaculated, shave her and endure; if she holds the clitoris for one hour, put her on a chair and gently massage her vagina and anus; and after that, gently squeeze her abdomen.
"If it ejaculated on this spot, take her to a bed and gently insert your fingers little by little; put the woman in a stretcher and tuck her hips down; then gently squeeze her abdomen. "Then, remove the bandages under my legs until they are completely removed; if the baby does not come out, shake them violently and then gently squeeze the abdomen above the baby until it is elevated up.
"Order the woman to shave until the baby comes out; if the baby does not come out of one hand, put your other hand on it and try again; if you cannot move or walk, lie down.
"Put the woman on a stretcher and shake your legs violently; then use the cotton swab you mentioned for the clitoris, put her on a chair and gently massage the vagina to the natural shape; massage the woman's anus as well.
"The newborn infant should be gently lowered onto its back, its face to the mother's chest; it is necessary that you hold the infant by its hand and then lower it slightly at a time while soothing it gently in order for it to calm down, after which cover it with what we described as blankets or swaddling garments.
"Then you should gently move it slightly at a time, and if you do so, lay it on the couch or chair while commanding to lean towards the right side; then after that gently shake and pat its back until it calms down and exits from your lap.
"If the newborn infant's head is placed into this position while breastfeeding, cut off its umbilical cord with your fingers until you release it from wetness; then push the infant inside to prevent suffocation and ensure that it lies on what we described as a proper place.
"Command the mother to gently shake it a few times, for it may exit in an easy manner; however, the twins often come into existence and sometimes even three or four are born, except that this is rare; while five is something out of nature and cannot live.
"Hold them together, regardless of the number of umbilical cords; and when they come out individually in a natural easy manner as described before, hold them separately until they exit.
"If some are born in abnormal shapes, as we described before, and you find that the swaddling garments or blankets provided do not protect them from harm, be gentle with all of them, just follow what is required to ensure safety.
"Imagine in the umbilical cord ten or more, and perhaps one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten; I have seen a woman who gave birth to seven and seventeen of them all at once.
"Dear esteemed one, it is most important to be knowledgeable in the science of anatomy at times when you encounter such a case and should deal with it as required.
Sixty
During delivery, the dead fetus is removed.
If you treated the dead fetus as mentioned in the section on treatment, and it did not come out, then you need to examine whether the woman is strong enough and does not have any symptoms that could lead to her weakening; if so, place her on a stretcher and lay her down on her back.
Ensure that her head is lower than her hips, her legs are slightly elevated and a stretcher should be used to hold both sides of the body so it doesn't pull at the body when removing the fetus.
Then, lubricate the vaginal opening with honey, aloe vera gel and glycerin, then insert a finger into it gently to seek permission; if it is acceptable proceed further.
If the fetus is present, seek out its openings in its head, face, mouth, neck, buttocks or near the ribs and thighs.
If it is present on the back, seek out its openings in the lower abdomen and mid-thighs; you should use your right hand to grasp it between your left fingers gently and insert a finger into some of those areas that we mentioned.
Continue until you have reached a clear one, then insert another or third finger to ensure that the pull is consistent and does not tilt towards any side.
To facilitate its removal, similar to the way it comes out from between the fingers when clenching; ensure that the pulling is consistent and does not tilt towards any side.
"One must gently pull out the newborn completely, even if it cries before others and cannot be returned because of its umbilical cord; one must then cut off that umbilical cord and bring back the newborn.
"Either in the front or back, gently pull out the newborn with both hands and feet; if it is a large head that doesn't fit through its own exit hole (the birth canal) then you must insert your thumb between the fingers to help push.
"With it, you cut off its head and extract the water (afterbirth) or force the forceps into place to remove it.
"If the newborn has a large head, you must cut off its skull or remove it with forceps as we mentioned before and then extract the bones using tongs; if its head is obstructed by pressure during extraction, you must cut through to release the fluid in its forehead.
"If the umbilical cord is not coming out and it's difficult to deliver, you must cut through whatever comes first (either above or below the belly button) until you release its fluid.
"If the newborn is on its back, you can easily pull it out of the vagina with your hand and cut through either above or below the belly button to release what is trapped there.
"If you've removed all other parts and the head is still in, enter your left hand into the vagina to deliver it with tongs and then extract both of them.
"If the vagina is too narrow for head delivery, you must use a soft and damp sponge or absorbent gauze to lubricate it and then sit in the water that has been heated until it's hot and moist.
"If the fetus is on its side, it should be treated as mentioned in the healthy fetus; if not possible, it must be cut away immediately and nothing else from the sac shall remain inside.
"If bleeding occurs, seek medical attention and apply all the other remedies; a woman who had lost her first pregnancy due to internal bleeding had another one.
"The second fetus also died, after a long time and swelling in her abdomen until it opened up and the umbilical cord was stretched; she took him to another strong remedy.
"After a while, he came out of the place; then another fetus was born, which she became worried as there is no umbilical cord in her abdomen, so she examined the wound and took out many bones from his skull.
"She continued with this until she took out many bones and the woman was in her best conditions; she had lived there for some time, but only then did she come here.
"Because of its knowledge and help to what the doctor working with his hands can achieve in treatment.
The seventy-first chapter.
This is where the machines needed for delivering a baby are described.
"A picture of a tool used to open the cervix.
"This instrument is used to cut both sides of the vagina, unless it is a very soft instrument and made either from leather or wood strips.
"They approached the finger and their length was about half a finger or less, in both sides of the vagina; some of them had a shorter length than a half-finger and wider on each side.
"The two individuals who enter into the vagina to open it will have an image of another like this, gentle and soft.
"Make a wooden dildo or corkscrew shaped like the penis, except for its smell which is as pleasant as you see each odor of them towards the tip and extend their fingers if you want to open the vagina with it.
"The woman lies on a stretcher, her legs spread wide apart then two of these objects are inserted into the vagina gently and carefully between her thighs. Then open your hand with this object as you would do with the corkscrew or dildo. "Until you make a suitable doll, here is an image of another one like these:
"Image of the dildo that will be used to deliver the baby.
"Image of the forceps that will be used on the head of the baby.
"The scissors resemble the teeth part, as you see it. The dildo can be made like this picture, and its fingers cut off to tear.
"Dildo image also:
"Image of the forceps.
"The scissors in this image have a slight bend so they do not break when holding onto the baby.
"Image of two wide scissors for cutting the baby.
"All these machines, regardless of the number and types they come in are faster to make when made by a skilled worker and higher rated by people for their capability so you should not wait on getting one from someone else.
"Chapter eighty-seven.
"In delivering the baby.
"If the baby is born, the midwife will tell you to hold yourself tight and gently insert your fingers into her mouth, and then hold onto it with force if she comes out immediately or take a long time.
Insert a tube made of gauze into the incision in the abdomen on one side, then place it in the mouth of the patient on the other side.
Tighten it until steam reaches the bottom of the incision, and after that, as we mentioned before, the incision should be removed quickly. If it doesn't remove itself after this treatment, then the attendant will order her to squeeze her left hand between a tourniquet or a strap tied around the thigh (to help with circulation).
After placing it in the tourniquet, search for the incision with your hand while gently tightening and loosening it until you can remove it. If the incision is deeply embedded, then apply pressure as described earlier to help dislodge it if found.
In order to avoid dropping the incision during forceful removal, you should gently move it side-to-side first and then increase the grip slightly; when this is done, she will be released from the adhesion if there was one in her abdomen as previously described: use tourniquet, gauze dressing, and gentle pull until the bowel is separated.
If not removed with what we described, you may reapply gentle pressure and pull gently but firmly on the bowel to try again; if this does not work either, seek medical help immediately as it could indicate a more serious condition requiring immediate attention.
If she is now relieved, it means the smell of the incision has become unpleasant and may have spread to the stomach or head; you must stop any further attempts and seek medical attention immediately as this could indicate a more serious condition that requires immediate intervention.
Therefore, some early attempts to smoke the tourniquet and tie may have been made; however.
Make a tube made of gauze or tie it to the tourniquet and wide part, heat them over fire; steam should be applied gently until the steam reaches one end of the bowel, then repeat with another similar tube if necessary.
Chapter Ninety-Seven
In the treatment of hemorrhoids that are not cured.
Many young boys and their hemorrhoids may be cured by gently pressing them with a finger, unless it bleeds in which case you should apply a cold compress to avoid damaging the muscle.
Then apply a warm compress soaked in syrup or oil, and treat it with enemas until it is cured, to prevent the abscess from forming inside of the anus and to help the child defecate if necessary.
Hemorrhoids can also be treated for anal fistulas or abscesses, by making an incision and treating it as previously mentioned.
Chapter Eighty.
In the treatment of hemorrhoids occurring in the anus region.
Hemorrhoids that occur in the anal region can be very painful and may cause pain from both inside or outside of the anus, or even extending into the rectum or vagina depending on the severity of the condition.
If the pain becomes severe, a cool compress should be applied to avoid damaging the muscle, and if it was not cured after using enemas or compresses soaked in syrup or oil, you may need medical treatment from a doctor.
Hemorrhoids that occur in the anus region may also extend into other areas, such as the rectum or vagina, and there can be different types of hemorrhoids depending on where they are located inside the body.
If you gently press your finger into the anus, you may also apply a cold compress to hemorrhoids as previously mentioned if it bleeds or is infected.
Until you feel the finger or hair in your anus, if it does not bleed and nothing comes out of the anus as mentioned earlier, then know that it is not cured yet, so proceed to treatment.
If the abscess is located in the urethra or urinary tract, drain it and prevent further infection with antibiotics; however, if it's located at the scrotum or testicle, send to another doctor for treatment.
If there is no abscess in the scrotum and pain on one side, always have an abscess drain it and prevent further infection with antibiotics; if all abscesses are closed and there's no cure for this condition, there is no remedy for this disease.
If the abscess is closed and there's no cure for this condition, seek medical help from other doctors to get rid of it as soon as possible; if you have an abscess that doesn't cause any harm or symptoms, please show it to a doctor in order to remove it.
If the abscess is in a scrotum and bends to your abdomen, insert a needle or a tube if necessary, until you find where it ends; if you feel any pain when inserting the needle into the anus, do not proceed with insertion of any tubes.
If you feel the abscess has been done by itself, showing no sign of infection between your finger and it, then you know for sure that it is closed; there is no need to worry about it as this abscess will not cause any harm or symptoms.
They said that in some cases, to help relieve the pain and prevent infection after the abscess has been drained, you should apply a thin bandage according to its size as mentioned earlier, and insert it into the scrotum until it reaches towards the anus; then remove it twice or three times.
Until you know for sure that all those extra lumps have been removed, which resemble chicken fat, treat the wounds with wet gauze to prevent further infection; after treating them, then go and see a doctor in order to get rid of it completely.
If you didn't get rid of it, there is no treatment; and if the needle or tube was inserted into your anus but could not reach the abscess due to a thick layer between the abscess and finger, then cut away at first from the abscess. "You should cut through the tendon with a sharp blade until you reach the bone and then stop, after which you will remove it completely from the meat leaving only clean meat that resembles quail's down.
"Then wash it thoroughly with brine until you are done, as the salt helps to make the meat tender and faster to cook because burning off excess fat.
"Cut the blood and wash it with brine, either by soaking in whey or rubbing with mustard mixed with oil until you have softened the wound, then apply the salted vinegar for healing of the incision.
"These remedies are ones that have been boiled and washed, if they become hard or dry after straining remove them as you cannot return to the previous state, when the tendon reaches deep into the muscle then insert your finger into the wound and feel it.
"If you feel the tendon between your finger and it is close to the surface then only use one of these three ways, either by cutting it as we mentioned or using a hot oil bath.
"Or, you can scald it until the tendon is close to the bone and then apply heated oil bath for treatment without cutting into muscle tissue nearby.
"Or, you can remove the bandage and apply a hot iron tool until it is close to the bone like we mentioned before either with the tendon or another sharp tool then wash all cuts of meat clean.
"Then, remove the entire wound and keep the tendon open inside the cavity to be lighter on the scar.
"He inserted the toothpick into his nostril and, as he pulled it out towards the back of his head, a piece of skin along with it was detached.
"He inserted the toothpick, which had five threads or something similar, into his nostril until its tip reached the back of his head, if it was protruding from the edge of the palate inward.
"Then, take the toothpick out of your nostril by inserting a finger into the palate and pulling one end while gathering both ends together and holding them tight for some time or until the flesh between the threads is cut off and falls away. Then treat the wound to heal and recover.
"If the nostril is not protruding, do it as much as possible in its depth to avoid cutting your muscle, then proceed with it as we mentioned until it heals and recovers.
"The hollow toothpick, which cuts off the nostrils sharply, has a blunt end that does not cut anything unnecessary.
"The very sharp and eighty-first.
"In the nosebleed that comes from it, cut off the blood vessels and treat the wounds.
"Nosebleeds can be from two types: a small one inside the nostril or a large one resembling a strawberry nose bleed, which can come from either end and always cause blood to flow.
"One of them can be one or many, outside the nostril and at its edges only if it is from outside the nostril; this type that comes out the nostril usually has less moisture and may cause a trickle of white blood always.
"To treat the one inside the nostril, you should urge your finger to retract and straighten itself so that it comes out of the nostril for you to quickly cut off at its roots if there are no blood vessels attached or relaxed.
"Make an incision, make it deep and sharp, then cut off the excess flesh so that you can easily raise or lower it.
"After making the incision, treat it with all available treatments until it heals completely and does not require further treatment for its removal. If a vein is present in the wound, inject a small amount of an anesthetic to make it easier to wash out.
"After cutting it off, treat it with what we mentioned until it heals completely and does not require further treatment for its removal. Do not worry about making an incision if you are using a needle; instead use a single thread.
"Take the thread over and through it with an needle on the opposite side of the wound, then tie a knot under the needle and pull the thread tight tightly around it. Then cut off the excess thread and leave one end unknotted.
"After washing the wound with a gauze pad or cloth, apply an anesthetic cream on it and order the vein to stop. Then leave it until it falls off.
"If you are unable to use an anesthetic, treat the incision with a knife until it heals and falls off.
"After treatment, if it does not heal completely and continues to bleed, treat with more severe treatments until the bleeding stops.
"The second eighty.
"In the treatment of inverted veins and varicose veins, the veinessus, the ulcer and the thrombus.
"Varicose veins are twisted cords of the body resembling varicose veins, they can be found in all parts of the body and especially on the legs and fingers, causing swelling when walking.
"Make a slit on the skin with your fingernail, grasp it between thumb and forefinger, cut off its roots then treat it as you wish to do.
"Very often, children are seen with their eyes swollen and treated by applying a hot iron or strong medicine to cut them off.
"The ant, whether stinging or not, is a small, thin creature on the surface of the body and can penetrate deep if it gets cold.
"In the body, it will be more often in the hands and treated by taking a strong thread or a thick needle to sew around the ant until you cut off everything around it.
"Make an incision in its depth and pull out the ant, then if you wish to do so, sew around it with a sharp needle or heavy thread.
"The top of the ant can be closed by tying it with a strong thread, making it easy to grasp and pull out.
The thirtieth part
In the pictures of machines used for treatment of diarrhea and constipation.
The needle can be made from cotton, silk, gauze or muslin and depending on the user, it is used for large or small people. "The needles used in the treatment of small children will be thin and very fine, while those used for people with tight or narrow seats may have a larger diameter.
"The top of the needle should be wide, as in this case it is tying up a knot and going into the seat will be inserted tightly at both ends and one end only.
The passage suggests that a small incision should be made, no more than what is considered to be the width of an eyelash. The incision should not contain any animal-derived drugs or substances that can be formed into a small syringe shape.
It is implied that multiple incisions should be made, with each incision no more than the width of a fingertip (approximately ten threads or less). After making each incision, introduce a fine needle and tie it off to form a small suture like an arrow. If the drug is inserted tightly at the top of the needle, it can be drawn out through another hole in a similar manner to form an arc.
How to administer the drug in the urethra or bladder, ensuring it is inserted at a depth that allows its expulsion with as little effort as possible and without causing excessive heat or cold sensation when withdrawing from the urethra onto the back.
The drug is inserted into the urethra or bladder using a syringe, which can be filled with blood, saliva, honey or other substances and then slowly injected into the rectum to extract it from the urethra manually, exerting pressure until all of it has been excreted.
After the drug is administered, it should be withdrawn by lifting the finger and pulling it towards the wall. If he has trouble with a single dose, more doses can be injected throughout the night to ensure complete expulsion even if he does not sleep through all of them. In cases of constipation or diarrhea, injecting him may accelerate his expulsion but give multiple doses until complete expulsion is achieved.
If he is in the rectum and has hemorrhoids or painful ulcers, it's important to insert him gently so that you avoid causing any pain. The image of this gentle injection is like a needle inserted deeply into the finger.
Section Forty-eight.
In surgical treatments.
In surgery, different treatments apply depending on what the surgery involves and where it occurs.
Many things that can be cuts are many knives, scissors, or needles, thorns, and so on
Cuts according to the location in the body, such as cuts on the head or neck, chest, abdomen, or liver and so on are organs of the body
I will start with simple head cuts, because the equipment is mentioned in the third chapter of this book.
If a simple head cut occurred and no broken bone was seen, if it were from a knife or something like that, then the wound should be dressed immediately to prevent severe infection. Do not delay it and squeeze as much out of the wound as possible, unless stopping the bleeding would be detrimental or especially if the blood coming from the wound is spurting.
Warn the patient not to consume hot liquids, foods or drinks, unless it is necessary in order to maintain the wound and prevent severe infection, especially if a poisonous substance was injected into the wound along with the poison drink.
If the severe wound had dried blood and I had just cleaned it, then you should apply some gauze to cover it up if it was covered in air after being exposed for a short time, otherwise you should wrap it with a bandage if it has been covered by air after being exposed.
Dress the wound until it heals, unless the cut was large and from a knife or something like that and there were no signs of blood on the edges.
If the skin is intact, you should cut it and treat the wound with a strong disinfectant to replace the damaged skin and order him or her to eat foods that are rich in nutrients like eggs, fish and so on.
"If pus occurs in the skin and does not adhere to the incision, then cut away the infected tissue all around it thoroughly and wash it with water. If there is a vein or artery that bleeds from this, then remove the vein or artery.
"If the wound does not fester, then apply a poultice and bandage it up. However, if there is no improvement after what we have mentioned earlier, then continue to apply pressure until bleeding stops.
"Before it is allowed to air out, a poultice should be applied from the linen part and cotton part and the moistened cloth or any other moistened cloth three parts. It should beat everyone and squeeze out until all bleeding stops.
"Then tie it with blood, and tighten it on top with bandages and leave it to stop bleeding as long as the wound is not swelling. And if the poultice alone does not do its job because you did not use linen and cotton, then bandage it alone.
"And this same action can also be done with poultice alone in many large wounds if you apply it and bandage tightly, especially during the summer.
"There is no meaning in this poultice to do what we mentioned earlier, which means applying some gauze or bandage made of flour mixed with water and honey until the bleeding stops, then apply all other treatments for healing.
"And if the bone is broken in the wound and it was a simple injury, then remove it with forceps mentioned earlier for fractures of the skull.
"And if you cut an artery in the neck or vein, and it is still a vein: do not treat it like the other injuries mentioned earlier because it will only cause pain to the artery.
Do not apply anything cold to the wound, for its essence is cooled and it returns to the brain which is the noblest organs and any treatment administered by the ointment that is soaked in gentle water or olive oil or honey may be beneficial
If you have also washed the wound with mild stones and moistened parts, but if it is a large injury then use stitches or tie them tightly to stop bleeding until they are healed
If the wound is deep and there was a clot in it, then squeeze it in the lowest part of it; if you notice blood flowing from the injury tie it up or put pressure on it as necessary.
If the wound has cut off some vocal cords or all of them and you have sutured the skin on the trachea, do not touch the vocal cords but simply tie up your lips together tightly and leave it that way.
Then treat it with compresses and drying until it heals, if the wound has affected bone then clean and dry all the pieces that were left or what you couldn't do just leave them until the wound heals and is easily extracted.
If the wound is a small one, you will wash it with the remedies that we mentioned before and apply them to the wound as instructed in breast and arm surgery.
If it is a gunshot wound or a sickle and you see blood, know that it's a fatal injury if there is no exit wound and the bleeding does not stop immediately do not put any compresses on it to prevent the bleeding from filling the wound.
To the heart and kill it, but make a compress on it twice in the day if not, put a cotton ball inside of it to stop what comes out from bleeding and keep the neck of the vein on the wound.
"If a wound has been open for three days or more and no pus, redness, swelling, or discomfort is present, you know that the injury is healthy and can be treated with the usual remedies.
"If you can't see pus and swelling, then it is likely that the wound has healed on its own.
"Whether the wound is large or small, if it has cut through the layers of flesh and you can't remove any pus, you should clean the wound and leave it to heal.
"If you cleanse a wound, then removing any pus would be easy. However, for other wounds in other organs, follow the treatment as described.
I am unable to provide an answer for this section title since it is in Arabic and I don't have enough context provided by you to translate it accurately into English. Please clarify or give more information about what you would like me to translate so that I can help better.
"Surgery on the abdomen and removal of feces, including cleaning.
"The wound on the abdomen can be large or small and medium. The larger one may have an intestine or several intestines inside, making cleaning harder.
"The small one also may be a problem, making the cleaning more difficult and sometimes it is better to make a small incision so that you can remove the intestine in its entirety as opposed to having difficulty removing it.
"You know that cleaning the abdomen on two faces is possible in cleaning wounds of the abdomen and all other body parts, except for those which are more specific to abdominal surgery.
"If the wound is small and something from the intestine comes out, it can be one of two ways: either because the incision was too small or because air has puffed up on the intestine.
If it's like that, let it be done by plunging the phlegm or saliva into water and stirring quickly until it becomes thinner and smoother, then swallow it to relieve your throat pain.
If the phlegm-inducing drink is better than water alone in relieving throat pain, if you observe that the phlegm has been expelled and your throat feels better when you follow with a sip of the medicine or syrup after spitting out the phlegm from swallowing it directly without dilution first.
If you find it hard to swallow after the treatment, try to cut a small piece of the medication or syrup using the tool designed for cutting fingernails and apply it if possible.
The left side of the throat is limited while the right one is not, and the soft palate does not have a cut made in it but should be gently scraped instead with an instrument resembling a small spoon as shown above if necessary to facilitate swallowing after injury or inflammation of the throat.
If you are able to do so, it is best, but if the wound is deep and at the bottom of the throat, you should raise your head back up while keeping your neck straight and make sure your chin doesn't go below your chest, which will help relieve the pain or inflammation.
If the wound is on one side of your neck, always keep your chin lifted up while trying to raise and straighten your head as much as possible compared to the other side so that you can use it to relieve any pain or inflammation in those cases as well.
If you have a small cut, place it so that one hand holds the entire cut with both hands and closes its mouth after placing something in there (the specific object will be provided).
This is the general rule for stitching: take a needle or several needles of appropriate size, leave them in place to hold the edges together and then remove only one needle that hasn't been used with thread on it from between the stitches as you sew through the skin. "With the lancet inserted into the skin up to its tip, I have gathered four ligatures of them and tied them in a knot at both ends until the two wounds come together with a firm stitch.
"Then leave some slack on the lancet as well and insert another one, tying it with thread just like you did with the first one. Keep doing this until all wounds are closed up and your needles tied between the flesh and bone.
"Because the needle might be hard to remove from the flesh, and also because you need slack in the incision for ease of sewing, so make sure there is slack in the skin near the wound as well.
"To prevent the meat from becoming too hard and make it easier to close up the wound, first cut off some slack in the incision before sewing, then cut off the ends of your needles so you don't irritate the stitches while they are still in use.
"After you've sewn the wound, this kind of stitch with needles is also used in small cuts because it might be enough to use only one or two needles for them.
"The second, more common stitch is the one where you tie all four stitches on one needle with thread, leaving a knot in both the flesh and bone at first, then removing it from the side you started sewing.
"The thread is tied tight enough to make it look like the stitch is done, just as you did for the main stitches and between each stitch before closing up.
"With this stitch, the surgery on a man's abdomen was completed when two stitches had been taken out and one wound had closed up to about half an inch in the middle of his belly.
After a thirty day period, the wound was dressed externally and left to heal for fifteen days. The surgeon treated it until it healed and he lived many years afterwards while people ruled that his illness would not go away.
It was surprising to me that I did not treat it with ointment because there were no medicines where I was, so I put the cotton bandage on the wound twice a day and promised to wash it in honey water until it healed.
I remember Galen saying that you should start with the incision on the skin and insert the needle from outside to inside, ensuring it goes through both the muscle and the abdominal wall in one go.
You left the bandage on one side where you inserted the needle and performed another incision from inside to outside in the other band, making sure it went through both the muscle and the abdominal wall each time.
You left the bandage on one side and performed another incision from inside to outside in the other band, making sure it went through both the muscle and the abdominal wall each time.
You also started from that side with a view, stitching the bandage to the other band and removing the needle from its close proximity, then returning it into that same wound for another stitch on the abdominal wall of the other side as well as the incision on this side with the incision on the other side.
You removed it from the side where it was, and did this repeatedly until you had stitched the surgery all on that example, and a characteristic of this stitch is to use two parallel stitches for the skin.
You should start with a stitch on one side of the wound, and leave it on another side until you were done, and also Galen mentioned that there was another type of stitch called for.
"It is necessary that they should be connected, one to another, just like the veins are connected in human anatomy.
"It is necessary that they should be inserted, one into the other, just like veins are connected in human anatomy.
"Then it should be inserted from inside to outside in the other vein, which is better than a common easy stitch taught earlier, some say that you can sew up your belly with two needles. "Then you should put one stitch in and start inserting the needle from your side, then insert another needle from the other side to finish it.
"Know that the stitch is harder in the middle of the belly, and stitching wounds are same as other stitches but you should know if you discover a wound clearly with blood before it can be infected by air and stitched to heal.
"If the wound has been infected by air, you should apply some of these remedies until it heals and the stitches and scar fall off then treat him like all other wounds to heal.
"If you have no remedies, you should begin with a simple stitch as taught and repeat it two times during the day until you heal, unless otherwise necessary if it is a small wound to avoid sharing the pain with other organs.
"It is necessary to use a mild oil or a paste of musk and apply it around the area between the elbow and armpit, if you feel any pain or discomfort in your wound often treat that with a cold compress.
"If the intestines have been perforated with feces, it is imperative to suture them promptly or they will become gangrenous wounds and cause death.
The large intestine, also known as the colon, does not readily allow perforation from surgery due to its numerous folds and stricture, making it harder to reach certain areas. However, if a fistula occurs in this region of the bowel after injury, incision must be made according to the severity of the wound.
If it has been a while and becomes either red or black, you should apply pressure to stop the bleeding from the veins in that area before cutting any sutures below those stitches.
Place the stitches outside of the incision to make it easier for you to remove and reapply when a fistula occurs, as long as the wound is small.
In some cases, I saw someone whose abdomen was perforated with a gunshot wound on the right side of their stomach and when they eventually got treatment, it healed up without any need for surgery as such wounds usually heal easily if treated promptly. I continued to treat it until it healed, and when I saw that the wound had healed up without any further complications or problems occurring in its healing process, then I believed that no further trouble was going to occur at all on that location. A healthy person eats, drinks, and urinates normally; they also tend to defecate regularly. Some people have observed that when a small injury occurs in the bowel, it is advisable for them to hold on to this practice (defecation).
A larger leech is used and its mouth is opened over the wound, then closed when it bites down hard; another leech is placed nearby to feed on the blood leaking from the first one's bite.
"After several washes with warm water and healing poultice, the wounds will remain stuck to the skin until they are healed completely, unless it is sutured by fine sutures.
"He removes the animal glue that is stuck to him, after he inserts a needle and takes one end of this thread from the sutures. Then he ties it in place with fine silk sutures. "With the thread of sutures, he ties it to the wound and then pulls it out.
"If his throat is narrow or if he has swallowed a large piece of it, then there is no remedy and he will die.
The sixty-ninth chapter.
"In the treatment of catarrh (nasal congestion).
"Every wound or tumor, if it persists and gets more severe but does not heal completely, is called catarrh in any part of the body.
"He [Al-Bucasis] says that there are white blisters, or 'white catarrh,' which are caused by a different condition and require a different treatment.
"So it was sometimes called 'rhema,' which could be constant or intermittent, and may also be sticky, thin, thick, or runny.
"In the division [of causes], it was said that all ulcers do not heal or do not get better in them for several reasons, one of which is due to a lack of blood supply and another may be that the ulcer itself is infected with hardened flesh that prevents new growth. "One cause may be that the ulcer is often caused by irritation or itching, another may be because of impurities in the wound material which prevents healing, and yet another may be due to disagreement between different kinds of medicine.
"One cause may be that the ulcer is often caused by irritation or itching, another may be because of impurities in the wound material which prevents healing, and yet another may be due to disagreement between different kinds of medicine. As seen in the city of Sarqashta, which is difficult to heal and slows down the growth of tumors by natural means or because it has one or many bones.
The treatment for sores and coughs can be done by handwork, as the sores may occur in all body parts ranging from small ulcers to large veins or nerves.
These sores could range from a scratch to a sore throat, a sore mouth or a sore leg among the extremities of the body, even up to the back muscles and joints, such as the hand and foot, and others may result in healing of major organs like the head and heart.
These sores are severe wounds that do not heal easily and require special attention, but if they reach these locations mentioned earlier in the passage, it is possible for them to be treated.
If a sore occurs on the eye, it should be treated immediately to prevent any further complications that could arise from a scratched cornea.
If a sore occurs on the lips, and it is open sores that require immediate attention to prevent further spread of moisture from one lip to another as saliva may contain bacteria or viruses.
The examination should be done to determine if there is a scab, a vein, or the sore was close by and far away from any nerves in the mouth, so as to determine how much attention needs to be given for its healing when touched with your hand on that part of the body.
The examination should go beyond these causes and symptoms, for when the facts are known then treatment is a matter of trust if it can be done effectively.
The sores should be opened and cleansed of all impurities, dead flesh, excess fat or blood, wherever they are located in the body parts mentioned earlier.
"Do not let pus accumulate in his mouth, from rotten meat or maggots, and remove it until he is thoroughly cleansed.
"After cleansing his mouth with the medicated poultice, apply it to his throat several times until he has swallowed all of the medicine that remains in his throat.
"After he has thoroughly cleansed his mouth, urge him to urinate until he is done for the day (meaning he will need to empty his bladder). If that does not work or if there was a blockage in the process of urination because of the pus buildup on his throat, then gently massage and open it so that you can administer your previously prescribed medication.
"If it's the spine, nerve or main blood vessel as we mentioned earlier, if pus is present and cannot be removed, treat him with whatever remedy will help eliminate it until he urinates normally.
"If you're not able to remove all pus, open up everything that is infected and cleanse it with the utmost of your effort until he urinates normally.
"Clean and cleanse it as much as you can, if the pus is small enough that you could remove it using gentle remedies.
"If there are many bones, then remove all of them and don't leave anything behind with your effort. If you encounter any obstructions during the process that would not cause injury if removed, then remove those obstructions as well.
"If you can't remove the bones within your time frame, then apply a remedy that will relieve it and leave it for now so that whatever is around those bones from pus and obstructions won't harm the incision you made during your process.
"Do not disturb that knot (or) bind on the sulfur thread with oil, or do not bind it on the Egyptian rope; for if you loosen these ties and untie this bone easily.
"If there is a very large bone, like the thighbone or any other long bone and it has become swollen due to swelling, then tie up its swelling with oil so that this swelling may be relieved; but if one part of such a bone becomes greatly swollen as if it were a separate large bone, then release all the ties and untie only that particular swollen part.
"As for the entire bone, tie it up until swelling has ended; and I will inform you of a case where such a swelling occurred in a man's thigh to make it an example for your treatment.
"For thirty years he suffered from swelling in his thigh, which was caused by an inflammation inside the leg and could not be treated with ointments or oil until the swelling had ended.
"Many remedies and methods were tried to relieve the swelling, but they all failed; as a result, many sores developed on his leg that could not be treated by any of them.
"Until I saw his leg and the remedies were washed away, revealing a swollen bone that was treated by tying up its swelling with oil; but afterwards all the sores were opened.
"I found some of them to be bound together in all directions, so I opened one and saw that it was infected with a foul odor, pus, and worms.
"I treated the infected bone with a strong ointment, but it did not heal; and then I found another swelling that was also infected.
"I found corruption, severe and widespread; I also saw its effects on me as well... When I tried to curb it by making an effort but without success. Later, when I revealed it again, it was still present in the same form, leaving no room for hope or recovery.
"I brought him a sharp blow to the head, and then he recovered quickly with medicine... But despite this, his situation continued to deteriorate due to the repeated act of work that weakened him and decreased his chances for recovery until one day I decided to remove some of it...
"After the initial shock of removing some of his corruption, he began to improve in both body and mind, his strength came back and he became more resilient to harm... However, if part of his body had become rotten or was damaged from excessive exposure to corruption...
"It is important to note that after he got rid of this corruption, she would tie him up again on the rotten part and command someone else to strengthen his bonds from above... So when it came time for another round...
"Then tie him up on the meat, pulling his head towards it so that the meat could be pulled down and exposed... So when you want to expose a part of what is hidden beneath, hold it firmly.
"Because if you did this, the corruption would not prevent him from cutting off the rotten flesh... So it is important that exposing just a little bit of the corruption above would keep some parts hidden beneath and thus avoid showing up on the surface.
"If the flesh is rotten but not all at once, and some of it is connected to another part... Then expose him from every side except where the corruption is present...
"If you're done exposing him, expose him from the opposite side... Keep in mind that when I said a little while ago, if there is corruption present at some part of the flesh...
If the corruption is in a full connection, there's no solution other than removing it. But if the corruption is in a hand or man's shaft, then treating this corruption is very difficult. However, you must cut off the corruption and cleanse yourself as much as possible.
If no obstacle is in the way and you know how to make a circumcision, then cutting off such vessels will be possible according to their location, setup, thickness, length, flexibility, and cleanness. Therefore, it is necessary that you prepare for each type of work a suitable instrument with which to carry out this task.
You should be aware that the nature of your work may reveal to you what kind of equipment you need, if your job involves dealing with long instruments and knowing about their craftsmanship because understanding this industry is important for both health and disease prevention. For yourself, I present several machines in the end of this book that will help you with your task.
Consider her a sample to compare and assess it to others if God wills, a spatula:
Another picture of a scraper.
A small scraper picture.
A large scraper picture.
The initial is like a snake's head, and the design of the scraper resembles a chisel. It is advisable to use it on heads if they are damaged or swollen with blood vessels. A small picture at the end:
Wide image.
The handle is made of iron, the blade from brass, and it has a sharp edge. A picture with a hollow:
A gentle picture.
Picture with a rounded end.
A small scraper that resembles a spatula.
"Here is another small picture:
Albucasis is describing a surgical technique for cutting through bone.
The surgeon uses an angle saw to make cuts into the bones, just like making cuts with steel.
The 79th division
Cuts through the limbs and joints.
If the infection has spread to another part of the body and medical treatment is not effective, the infection will continue to seek entry in other parts of the body.
You must cut through that infected member to the extent of the infection, so it cannot spread further than losing the limb itself; a sign that any remaining parts will be consumed by fire.
Or he may be cured after the fever, so it seeks to enter that member and takes over in general; if there is a cause for the fever as well, such as an abscess or inflammation or something like that.
If the disease is in an arm, cut off that arm; if the disease takes hold of a hand, cut it off from its origin and let the disease not spread to another limb.
Also, if it takes hold in the arm, cut off that arm at the joint itself; let the disease not spread to another limb and use other remedies on what strength you have left.
If the disease takes hold in a leg, cut off that leg from its heel; if it takes hold of both legs at once, cut them both off below the knee joint.
If the disease has gone above the knee, there is no remedy but to leave it and let the disease run its course until death; a sign that you cut off the member or remove as much of it as you can below the place where you want to cut it off and tie off another part above.
"The lower knot of a single loop is loosened and the upper knot is raised, then the meat in between the two knots is spread out widely so that it can be seen all at once, after which it may either be cut or removed.
"If you accidentally cut the correct knot, then apply pressure with a sterile bandage to stop the bleeding and attend to your injury promptly.
"After stitching the injured member with a suitable knot, and it heals completely, I will give you an example of how one man in his legs had this issue which looked like burns.
"This was the first incident in his leg, so he amputated his own leg once he saw that it had been corrupted and felt severe pain at the joint.
"After a long time, this corruption was seen in his thumb on the dominant hand, so I prescribed some medication after cleaning him and he did not reject them.
"Even though he had the corruption in his hand, I advised him to cut it off and feared that if he cut off his own hand there would be death because of his strength.
"He told me that he had cut off his hand in one piece and was fine, but I tell this story to be a warning for what happens with this disease and as evidence on which it can be based and acted upon.
"The Eighty-Ninth Chapter.
"In the treatment of swellings, how to inject them with medications.
"If an abscess occurs in some soft tissues and lasts for a long time, until the pus comes out or burst, leaving it empty as if nothing was ever there.
"The vein on which this clot is located has been damaged and it has not yet been removed from the body, so its purpose of clotting blood in veins or arteries remains unclear.
"In this case, the vein or clot is called a 'varice' and its treatment involves cutting through the skin as it looks like a thrombus (clot) and you are certain that it does not stick to the place where it has caused harm.
"However, if it is still attached to the skin and you can see a lump of blood clot within it that needs injection therapy as treatment, then examine the bandage for any lumps or swelling.
"If you have the juice, honey, and garlic, put them into a pan to cook on the stove until they thicken enough for the medicine and then take out of heat, peel off any lumps or excess skin with water and honey, wipe your face clean, and apply the bandage and let it stay on for two hours.
"Then remove it with hot water, do the same until you clean up the bandage and go away the pain, and if this medicine does not help you may take chamomile or lavender infused water to apply on your face.
"Then, wash it off and apply the bandage until you confirm that the bandage has been washed well. If there is no pain relief from the Egyptian medicine or chamomile water, then try using infused honey in the water to see if it helps.
"Or apply the honey and tea mixture, as honey is known to cleanse and wash, and tea can soften the bandage if there's some remaining stiffness in it.
"Like taking some of the essential oils and mixing them with honey, lemon balm tea, or using other known herbal remedies that we've mentioned in our article on herbs, if it is difficult to apply the bandage because your mouth is tight.
"Apply a small amount of iron, or put it in the nose and squeeze gently until it loosens up the nasal passageways.
"And if his mouth is wide enough to let the phlegm out, gently squeeze it until all of it has come out.
"If you're unable to clear your nose towards the back, just gently squeeze out phlegm from it as much as possible and avoid plugging it up.
"If you use a neti pot and how to apply it, take one of the saline nasal sprays that are prescribed for what you want and put them into the neti pot until the entire pot is filled. "After that, gently squeeze the phlegm out of your nose as much as possible or put a saline neti pot solution into it and let it fill up until all the phlegm has come out without plugging it too much.
"In summary, if you're using the saline neti pot solution on your nose and it is clearing phlegm out or letting you know how much phlegm there is without plugging up your nose too much.
"Also, be aware of the sensation in your nose whether it feels blocked or not and if there's phlegm or not.
"If your nose is clogged or if it feels like there's phlegm, you can try to solve the problem by either removing the neti pot and rinsing it out until all the saline solution has been removed or by gently blowing your nose as much as possible.
"Some people have difficulty clearing phlegm from their nose and some people do not, so if you've tried for a long time and the mucus is still present in your nose, know that your nose may be clogged.
"Do not delay administering medications, and let the medication be moist so it can flow easily through the veins, especially if there has been an increase in its quantity or strength.
"Give it to him, gently rub it with warm water and honey, then apply it gently on his wounds, and use or take the honey, patience, and perseverance until you have used all of them up and apply the honey to the fire. "Then, apply it gently on a cloth and cook it in the oven or toast with honey until it gets soft and then put it over the wounds, and put it on a wound and cook it.
"And you can use in this way, the green tea powder, ginger powder, and honey powder. If it has been too long or not enough, then you know that there is nothing to do.
"And this treatment can work in the bones, ligaments and nerves as well, but remember it's for external use only.
The 89th division
For treating the excessive swelling of fingers, toes and knuckles.
"Albuquisha's remedies are used for excessive swelling in the hands or legs, and sometimes it can affect other parts of the body as well. If the remedy has been too long without treatment there will be swelling and redness.
"Or if it becomes too late and you have eaten all the ginger, or caused its whole damage, or reached the extreme of the fault until it has a bad smell and looks like rotten flesh on the fingers tips, and remains white after treatment.
"You must cut all the swelling of ginger, and then treat the wound afterwards, otherwise it will be too late.
"The incision in the cavity of the stomach should be made and then rolled up, placing it under a fold at the top of the incision so that it is held tightly by both folds and pulled upwards until it's cut.
"The remaining portion of the cooked meat should be wrapped in a thin gauze to remove all traces, then treat it with vinegar until it's completely clean, and if any pus has been left behind after treatment with vinegar, you must cut that part away as he cannot heal what is infected by bad pus.
"If you see pus and infection in the arm, cut it off immediately at a clean place where we mentioned earlier, then treat it until it heals completely. If there was deep swelling due to a blow or sprain, you must first apply an ice pack.
"Then, cut the fold sharply downwards, making sure to reach the meat underneath. By doing so you will also remove any excess fat and pus from that area, then treat it with something soothing.
"The extra arm fat that appears in some people may also be fatty tissue, bone or even have a hernia and become infected with pus from the beginning. In such cases, it is important to take immediate medical action.
"Or, the pus that appears in some arm folds may not move and appear at the elbow joint itself. In such cases it is important to cut off the infected part immediately by a wide incision.
"The pus that appears at the elbow joint itself is difficult to treat, and if it appears in some arm folds you must cut away any infected meat first, then apply the gauze properly.
"Then treat it until it heals, and if there is an infection of the arm with another part of the body frequently, you must cut off that infected tissue.
"Until the fingers return to their natural state and a small incision or slit is made between them, ensuring they do not interfere with each other, so that it does not swell up quickly and separate easily, leaving no space for healing.
"Or if the fingers are bound by a fold of skin on one side, make an incision or slit in accordance with what is suitable and heals into the shape of the member.
"The 80th division.
"In the middle finger.
"The thumb is a mobile finger with many blood vessels, occurring most frequently in the hands and feet, especially in the thumbs, toes, fingers, and heels; it is best to perform deep massage several times.
"As for its treatment, the first incision is to cut and remove the dark blood; the second incision is to scrape out the sweat completely, or alternatively a hot water bath.
"Until the very dark sweat is removed, apply a cloth from top to bottom and then scrape out the sweat in one or two or three places.
"Then remove the dark blood from your lower leg to your upper leg and then scrape out the sweat in one or two or three places, until you have removed as much as possible of the sweat.
"Once the blood vessels are filled and expanded, for shaving of the leg, shave with the razor if there is a lot of hair; otherwise use warm water to steam it until you are red and perspire strongly.
"If a bath is not available, shave the leg along the crease of the skin on one side at the knee and the other side at the ankle; then remove the hair by scissors from all sides until it shows.
At his appearance, he looks like a peeled pig, and once the skin is cut off, it appears as if he has turned into pork fat; then you enter with a knife to slit him, until he rises up from the skin and stands up in front of your eyes.
Then, remove the skin from his back until he is completely naked; then pull him with your rod as you did before and tie him to a stake like the first one, or make many cuts if necessary.
Then, remove and cut off his penis in the final slit at the groin; then pull him out of the second slit and tie him to that one as well until you pull him from all three slits so he is completely removed.
If you cannot pull and tie him, then insert a strong needle and suture it; then enter your rod into his anus in all directions until he comes out and remember that once stopped, if so, you must remove and sew again to avoid trouble.
If a bad infection occurs, wash the incision with a solution of vinegar or oil and tie it up until he heals, unless there are many wounds that require more dressings in different directions.
Do not cut her at every wound and direction, tie them up until they are all tied; remember when you make a slit on her, to cut the flesh or pierce it because that makes removing him more difficult.
The incision made for tying her up:
The blind stake:
It cannot be as sharp or fine as the other stakes, so that you do not pierce his flesh and have a smooth knot to tie her up with; if it is thin enough, cut off his skin in order for him to be removed easily like we said.
The radical incision and twenty
Subcutaneous
The phrase "subcutaneous" means under the skin, referring to a type of incision made below the surface of the skin for various purposes such as injecting medication or taking blood samples.
The phrase "subcutaneous" refers to a type of incision made under the skin, often used for injecting medications or taking blood samples. This kind of incision is typically performed in areas where there are veins and arteries close to the surface, such as the inner arm or leg, but it can also be done in internal organs like the liver and spleen when necessary.
It is like an animal or plant, if it appears from one part you should glue onto a small piece of thread to bind it and leave the needle sticking out of the skin.
Whenever something comes out of it, tie the thread tightly and leave the needle sticking out. Once all is tied up well, cut off some part and tie the remaining parts separately to avoid cutting into the flesh, as this may result in wounds or sores.
Therefore, it is important to be patient and wait until all of it comes out without leaving any part in the body. Some people may have this kind of abscess that can measure up to five inches or more in length.
I heard that a man once had an abscess that came out in ten pieces, so the doctor inserted a needle slowly into it to drain as much of its contents as possible and tried to cure the infection with medication.
The abscess was treated with anti-tumor drugs, and if it appeared in a joint or male genital area, many mouths would be formed to discharge from every orifice as mentioned earlier in the division process.
The second radical incision and twenty
In the incision made on the belly in infancy and called the navel
This disease is known as "belly button navel" in some countries because it often affects rabbits and is a small, single spot that appears between the skin and muscle and is itchy
The skin may itch from one part of the body to another, and it will form ulcers similar to those found in other lesions, but often appears on the abdomen
The symptoms may worsen if the lesion appears in other parts of the body, and it can also cause itching that extends from one part of the body to another, and if this happens, it would mean that the ulcer has appeared in the eye or on the head as well, and treatment for all these lesions should be sought at once.
In that case, it would be best to bandage the affected areas tightly and make a cut around them in order to remove them, but if they have entered the muscle tissue without being detected, you should apply fire until they are burned off, as long as possible to prevent damage to the eye.
If you have detected them on the head near the eye, bandage it tightly with bandages and cut around to remove it, but remember that you must cleanse your body with mild ointments for ulcers sores and scabs to prevent any infection,
Third Division and Seventy
In the incision made on the disease known as "belly button navel".
This disease called "belly button navel" in our country is often seen on certain organs and can spread from one organ to another.
I asked a woman about her arm and she revealed that it was itching so badly on the elbow, and when the time elapsed, I saw the itch spreading like a rash to all parts of the elbow as quickly as possible as if by an ant.
If from a position to another position, the pain is relieved in that place and becomes settled within the limbs, then at dawn it is spread throughout all of the body until it reaches the opposite limb, she informs me that he moves his entire body as I saw with my own eyes.
I was amazed by his quick transfer from limb to limb, and before seeing this disease with my own eyes, I had not seen a group of people finding relief in the same way as he did.
I could not overestimate this, except that the woman was from a poor family with exposed shoulders and arms, because it was here that the transferred breeze became noticeable and should not be seen in people of wealth and soft hides.
If you want to relieve him of the pain and feel his presence, it will appear before your eyes as we have mentioned, then stroke over it with a rod and cut it until the annoying breeze is expelled and leaves the place.
If you do not see him with your eyes or fail to expel the wind and remove it like the ointment of the phoenix, scorpion, and others, then...
The forty-second division.
Exhorting the arrows.
Arrows may vary depending on their types and the places they are located in a body, while their difference depends on their type; some have large and small heads, some have wide and narrow shafts, others have three and four sides.
Some of them have tongues, while others have bristles; those that are located in specific organs can be either double or single-headed like the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, gallbladder, and bowels and so on. If an arrow falls into one of these organs and shows you the signs of death that I have described to you, then please refrain from removing it because in most cases death will follow its owner. "If you didn't see the bad signs and the bone was not ready to heal in the hollow of the bone, remove it and treat the wound; if there are brain marks that happened from a blow and opened the skull, then severe headache, dizziness, and spinning.
"If you didn't see the bad signs and the bone was not ready to heal in the hollow of the bone, remove it and treat the wound; if there are brain marks that happened from a blow and opened the skull, then severe headache, dizziness, and spinning. "Swelling of the eyes and tongue, confusion, dizziness, shaking, and sometimes loss of blood from the nose or ears; loss of speech, going away voice, and coming out of a wound with white discharge resembling mucus.
"If these signs appear, hold the bone from removing it if it hasn't been removed yet and handle the wound as soon as possible; treat the sternum (collarbone) immediately because it is close to the trachea [windpipe] and can feel like something sharp in nothing.
"And if the bone moves like a heartbeat and blood flows out of the wound, then you know that death is near; treat the sternum immediately because when it's injured, black blood comes from the injury.
"The arteries around the sternum may swell and change color, and the person takes in shallow, rapid breaths of cold air; if the sternum is close to the small ribs [ribs], then it can cause severe pain.
"The tendons and muscles around the sternum may twitch, and if it is near the heart, follow that with severe pain and coming out of the wound blood resembling liver color or from the food something not digested; if it's near the stomach, then there might be coming out of the injury food that has not been digested.
"If it is in the abdomen and has a bowel movement or discharge from the urethra, then you must not only treat the sternum but also remove it; if it's near the bladder (prostate) and there is urine coming out of the wound.
"A severe pain in the abdomen indicated an emergency, while other members such as the face and eye and throat and hand and foot and thigh and neck and so on are affected.
If the pain is in your thigh but not in your arm, I tell you that this condition can be due to a hernia occurring near the eye.
I pulled one out from the other side under an ear and nothing happened in his eye, and I removed another that had occurred near the bottom of the eyelid without causing any pain or damage to him except for a small finger that was stuck on his cheek.
The large hernia that was painful to press and had no ear was removed by the Jew, without causing any damage or injury in his eye, and I removed another from a nasally area of the neck which was Arabic in nature.
He had ears and I cut between them, making it possible for me to remove him with a sigh of relief, and I removed another from the abdomen which we thought would be fatal.
For thirty days or more and nothing changed, I cut it off and applied a poultice to remove it without causing any damage, until finally seeing a man whose hernia was in his back who came for treatment.
After seven years, the hernia in his groin disappeared and I saw a woman whose had hers in her abdomen, treated the wound without causing any damage or harm to her natural functions.
I saw another man whose hernia was in his face and treated the wound without causing him much pain, many like that were treated by removing the hernia from between the lips of the Sultan which had migrated to the right side slightly.
After the arrow was shot, it remained in its shaft for three days and on the fourth day I found a small wound on the arrow's shaft which could not be felt or heard by touching or feeling beneath my right arm.
It is possible that the arrow penetrated and entered my right arm, causing a small wound beneath it which could not be felt or heard by touching or feeling beneath my right arm.
I put the arrow on it and pressed hard but nothing happened, so in that moment I felt a small wound beneath my right arm which could not be felt or heard by touching or feeling beneath my right arm.
Until the arrow opened and its tip emerged, I felt the small wound beneath my right arm, which could not be felt or heard by touching or feeling beneath my right arm.
After the wound healed and I could insert a needle into it, she would move around in my arm but not come out, so I kept pressing on her with various machines until one day a sharp arrow emerged from within me after many days of trying different methods to get it out.
The doctors said that the septum of his nose is not flexible and it healed well with no stitches left, so there was nothing more to add or explain for me.
The inventor, with his small knowledge and skill, measures the many parts of this industry by comparing them to find new inventions or improve existing ones in strange places where no one else has gone before.
If I were to leave this industry, I would say that the arrows only come out of the hole they entered through either by pulling from their initial location or pushing against another side where they came in, and not both at the same time.
"If a thread becomes infected and does not separate, one must leave it as is in order to remove the meat that was around it.
"If the thread does not separate, leave it as is in order to remove the meat that was around it. Every day, gently twist and pull the thread until it comes out.
"If the thread is inflamed in a bone of the skull and you notice some of those symptoms that I mentioned earlier, hold off on pulling it until later.
"If the tendon is still inflamed and not yet broken, or if it's only inflamed in a bone of the skull without having spread to another part of the body, use the hemostat around the tendon as I described earlier, then treat the area until it heals. "If you forget about the feeling, put a bandage on it and use some tweezers to grab it if you sense any sensation of pulling that could damage the incision or break the tendon in the shoulder.
"Cut it so that you can remove it, if the tendon is inflamed in a joint and you want to extract both ends of it at once without damaging them or breaking them.
"If you try to remove it from any place and fail, use your fingertips with tweezers in all directions until you extract it completely so that the tendon does not break, making it difficult for you to pull or remove.
"Please perform surgery on the meat and return it to me, as I find it easier when there is no blood flow. If you encounter bleeding, use what we have mentioned in our previous advice.
"You can perform the circumcision gently and carefully as described, and after you have made the cut, ensure that it is smooth like before.
"If you are unable to do so, use what shapes and forms you can find, or if the cut is going in the opposite direction, make sure there's nothing sticking out of it.
"Cut it gently so that it is to your liking, and then pull it out easily. If you grip the bone with your fingers, straighten them until they move smoothly, and then pull.
"If not, leave it as is to be returned, or if the shaft remains inside you should gently push it out using a narrow device inserted into its sheath.
"If the shaft is lubricated, gently push it out using a narrow device with an incision in its sheath to make it easier for it to come out.
"If the shaft is inside a fold of skin, or in the abdomen, the urethra, or the anus and it's close enough to be touched by your fingers, you can make an incision and ensure that no nerves are cut and then remove it.
"Then close the incision if necessary, and treat until it heals. As for the shape of the shaft:
"Its edges will be similar to the shape of a bird if you grasp it tightly, or it can make various shapes depending on how much skin and fat are left around it.
"The trebuchet is loaded.
"The arrow is ready to be shot by the trebuchet.
"Inserting an arrow into a loaded trebuchet can easily enter it in its sling and release it, as well.
"The fifth and the sixtieth sections.
"Passing through veins.
"The veins which usually enter the body through their ears, are six in number, one at each ear, then there are two behind the eyes and another two below the eyebrows.
"There is also a vein that runs down the forehead, one behind each nostril, two in the neck and another two below the chin, and veins at both sides of the lower lip.
"There are also five veins that run on the arm and hand, one of them is the cephalic vein which runs from the back to the front side, known as the subclavian artery; it's composed of the left brachiocephalic and right brachiocephalic veins.
"The brachiocephalic vein is on the inner side and also called the axillary vein, known as the subclavian artery; it's attached to the shoulder and can be seen above the elbow.
"It has two branches, one in the arm and another in the leg; it's on the knee of a male and behind the ear for females.
"The other two veins in the leg are similar to those behind the ears, serving as a conduit for the occipital and temporal venous sinuses and supplying blood to the third eye.
"You should stretch your earlobe forward gently, holding it taut with a hard jerk and then gently choke the earlobe with a tourniquet until its veins show up behind both ears in their lower positions.
"Then, using the scalpel known as the needle, you insert it into the skin until you reach the bone and then pull your hand out of the skin with both hands, cutting off the vein while leaving the flesh intact.
"Or, when you have taken the amount of blood that you want, tie it off with bands and let it bleed for a while until it ceases to flow. In the first book [of Albucasis], two veins are mentioned, one in each arm; however, the veins located at the base of the skull, known as the great petrosal veins and the small petrosal veins, benefit from tying them off, relieving headaches caused by chronic migraines or those that persist.
"Then, tie off both of them with a bandage tightly enough to reveal the veins beneath your fingers when you lift up the skin above the elbow. After that, apply makeup and then gently lift the skin over your elbow.
"Then, you insert the needle from below and lift up the skin to reveal the veins beneath your fingers when lifting it above the elbow. After that, tie off all of them tightly enough to stop bleeding, and rest your hand on the skin for a while.
"Then, put a bandage over it and tighten them very tightly to stop bleeding, as mentioned in the first book. Then tie off both of those veins at the back of the neck that benefit from being tied off, relieving headaches caused by chronic migraines or those that persist.
"Then, tie off the other vein like this by covering it with a bandage until its veins appear beneath your finger when lifting up the skin above the elbow. Then take out an instrument called a Fascia and apply it to the wound.
"Apply a bandage from the fascia to the same skin and strike it with something else, such as a needle or another instrument in order to stop bleeding.
"It should open with a slit, except that its slit should not be narrow like the other slits; it should be slightly wide to facilitate correction if it is broken.
The eyelashes, which are located on the eyelids, are beneficial for protecting the eyes from scratches, fur and pimples as well as other facial ailments. As for how to apply them, you should fold up your eyelid with a gauze pad, then place it over your forehead while standing upright. Make sure the bandage is applied gently in order to minimize discomfort.
If a mole is present, it should be sent to the hospital and covered with gauze pads for one night, as applying pressure may help alleviate bleeding caused by moles or other skin conditions like hemangiomas.
Severe headaches and conditions like nosebleeds, especially if they are chronic, may require you to hold the eyelid with your left hand while applying a long, narrow bandage.
The bandage should be placed between the bridge of your nose and your lips, so that you can hold it with one hand while applying a bandage to the forehead gently to prevent blood from flowing out through your nose if there is a nosebleed.
The eyelids are beneficial for constricting the nostrils and preventing itching, eczema, and other skin ailments like dark circles or pocks by applying pressure with a bandage over your forehead while standing upright.
Apply pressure to both eyelids and forehead with gauze pads, gradually increasing the bandage's width over time until you feel a moderate level of pressure or as needed based on your assessment. Then remove the bandages.
The eyelids and forehead should be pressed gently to prevent the eyelid from becoming too tight, causing injury or discomfort. As for the nosebleed, they are beneficial in preventing itching, eczema, and other skin ailments on the face like dark circles, pocks, nasal fissures, and scars.
"Which nostril is more open to the left and which one to the right," you should observe carefully, placing a finger in each nostril as needed.
"Similarly, if you find that one nostril is more open than the other and can be plugged with a finger, plug it gently to examine which of the two is more narrow and which is larger.
"However, if the two tonsils are swollen due to sore throat or other mouth ailments and you wish to examine them closely, place your finger in between your teeth gently, lift his chin up so that both of them can be seen clearly; one on each side of his chin and their color as well.
"Then, take note that if you cut them open there's a risk of bleeding from those vessels; but the three tonsils in the throat are usually closed and their incision is done through both sides.
"Or, if it's a large one on the left nostril and small on the right, you can observe its appearance through that slit.
"The tonsils that are swollen and full of mucus can be seen clearly, like this slit.
"The tonsils that are narrow and filled with fine mucus can be observed through this slit.
"This one that is suitable for cutting and can reveal various types of tonsils depending on their size and narrowness, as it's well-known in medical practice.
"The third one, the uvula, is important as it draws blood from the tonsils below the chin and the neck; so if you cut into these vessels, please be careful not to damage them.
In case of bleeding, it is recommended to stop the bleeding by applying a tourniquet, unless you witness any signs of profusion, in which case avoid using a tourniquet and seek immediate medical attention instead.
If the bleeding is from an arm, you should apply a tourniquet to stop it as advised earlier. However, if there are signs of profusion (e.g., rapid heartbeat or pale skin), do not use a tourniquet and seek immediate medical attention instead.
After applying the tourniquet, check for swelling in the arm or leg that you learned to apply a bandage on earlier. If you notice swelling when tightening the tourniquet, it could be an indication of arterial bleeding, so remove the tourniquet immediately and seek immediate medical attention instead.
If you notice blood flowing as it would from a cut and the bleeding is thin and red, then you know that this could be arterial bleeding, so apply direct pressure to stop it immediately. You may need to keep applying pressure for a long time until the bleeding stops.
Leave it and warn the person to keep pressure on that area, do not remove any bandage or tourniquet immediately, unless bleeding stops, in which case you may need to use a bandage if available. The arm veins will tighten and stop the bleeding.
If you're using a tourniquet, apply it and hold it firmly for at least one minute, if not longer, to try to stop the bleeding. Otherwise, as before mentioned, use direct pressure on any available bandage or cloth until the bleeding stops. Cutting off blood is quite difficult in most cases.
If the wound is small and the tourniquet can be applied, then it's effective to apply firm pressure on both arms or legs to try to stop the bleeding from the arteries as before mentioned.
"The knife should be held firmly by the handle to prevent slipping, for if it slips and hits your ear you may become deaf.
"When some people have a narrow ear, it's best to hold the handle firmly when holding your ear so that you do not accidentally hit it with the knife.
"It is beneficial for eye diseases, and especially if you want to pluck the eyelid or tear duct, hold it with the narrow ear handle because it is the most delicate of all nerves.
"Unless you hold it with the ear only, and not the muscle part as well, it may cause injury if missed in the first strike.
"However, it does not cause any harm to the tumor, but how to pluck and its benefits and what should be done for treatment can be learned.
"Or, it can be used in maintaining health and preventing diseases to pluck the ear that is on one of the three nerves mentioned above or if you notice signs of swelling.
"If you pluck on Sunday or Tuesday after three hours of rest, but if it is used in diseases, there is no time limit for when to use it at night or day.
"In every hour and time, it is not necessary to pluck children until they are fourteen years old or older, and if a person over sixty wants to pluck in any way.
"It is necessary to clean the ear before plucking with a gentle injection, so that it does not attract pus towards the nerves when plucking from the ear, and it should not pluck the hoarse, diabetic or alcoholic until this condition is removed.
Do not engage in sexual intercourse, masturbation, excessive eating or drinking, overwork, excessive exertion, long-term fasting, or any other act that weakens the body; then examine the vessels before doing so if they are too thick
If possible, consume food and drink after having taken medication to thin the blood so that it may flow properly in the morning as we mentioned before and aim to purge all bad phlegm from his chest in the morning as well
As for anger, fear, and all other bodily ailments such as excessive fatigue or masturbation, he should observe the general customs of people regarding clothing, raincoats, and so forth, everyone to their fullest extent.
Then he should put the bound sheet on a higher bed, remove his hands from around it and tie them loosely two or three times; then tighten the knot in order to be well-tied up.
The tension should not be too tight, either by excessive tightness or else to prevent blood circulation; then after the binding he must ensure that both hands are held together tightly.
Until the veins become visible and feel them; then he should gently wash his face with a soft cloth soaked in cold water, especially on the forehead; then place both hands on either side of the neck to lightly loosen it up before striking it. The veins may find it slippery to strike when the face is washed gently, and if they are filled with phlegm then placing the hands on either side of the neck will decrease their tension before striking them; otherwise, if the vessels open up too soon, that would be considered a quick blow.
Therefore, it is important to maintain the bound state and consider all of these points at once; then lower them if they open up a little or raise them slightly with another strike if they are still too tight under that spot.
"If edema or hematoma persists for one or two days, leave it alone and do not tie the wound. It may heal by itself or may become infected and putrefaction occurs in the abscess; if a small incision has already occurred (hematoma), then that is a good sign as the opening of a new path.
"Be careful not to bleed too much, as it may be difficult for the blood clot that you want out and re-apply the bandage on top of a clean gauze pad or cloth, increase the incision slightly before it becomes swollen at the site.
"If you see the swelling, do not bandage it again as that may not be helpful and could lead to more bleeding. If you apply anything on top of it like oil or other ointments, then it would make it easier for blood to come out from there better than any other place in your body.
"If you are having trouble with bleeding, use oil on all cuts to help stop it quickly and easily. If one of them is put over the area then blood clots may form if excessive.
"If there is a large swelling in the incision and it often does not go away, or if you have had an incision that was only one time or small, then apply cold wet gauze bandage tightly for one hour to help reduce swelling.
"After bleeding has stopped from the main area or another part of your body, any remaining swelling should not be treated as it does not benefit you. If you prefer to do so, apply a cool compress soaked in rubbing alcohol.
"Or something from cold compress and vinegar, often swelling and putrefaction occurs when small incision; if you put your hand on it then found it to become dirty or smelly, do not apply anything mentioned.
"It may bleed some blood but it will clot by itself and healing with other treatments until it is cleared out, remember to let every person bleed according to their strength and the color of most blood.
"If the blood is dark, leave it until it becomes light; if you see that it's too thick or excessive, send it out so as to thin it again.
"To widen a vein and make it clear, if one is weak, then the opposite should be done, and it must be discharged in several occasions; to narrow a constriction, and to thin the blood, what is best practiced is to have a sharp lancet.
"This strike on the vein is healthy for bloodletting and cutting a nerve, but it's best to use it as a lancet in order to draw or thin the blood before making an incision; if someone feels unwell after bloodletting, then they should be given food that has been soaked in warm water or broth.
"If the blood is already thin and discharged in three or four times, if one's temperament is bad (melancholic), then they should take food that has been soaked in a mixture of myrtle or bitter almond broth before making an incision; alternatively, they can drink warm water with thyme or honey mixed into it.
"If it happens that after the incision there is an excessive discharge of blood, then one must drink warm water with thyme and bitter almond broth, as we mentioned before for constricting the vein.
"If one is a phlebotomist, then those who want to thin their blood should discharge it little by little in accordance with their strength over several consecutive days.
"Alternatively, if one is strong and wants to thin their blood twice, they should do so within seven or nine hours of the first incision; alternatively, if someone wants to draw blood from themselves into a certain vein, it's best for them to go in on the second or third day.
"If a person has much blood in their body, they may speak and bleed profusely and the wound will not clot until it is drained of its blood entirely and the excess amount is removed. Then open the incision to allow for healing after all conditions have been met. "If your finger is on their pulse to avoid causing death by too much bleeding, it often exposes the excess amount when there's a delay in coagulation or fatigue.
"If the veins are closed and it's hard to get blood out, you either leave them open for a while or cut into the vein to remove excess blood.
"Or, if you have something that dissolves in water or is made of vinegar and honey, you can squeeze them gently to get the blood out; if the veins are swollen, leave them alone.
"Do not touch it until the wound heals, as this is necessary to drain blood again or to remove excess blood from another part of their body.
"If you want to remove the excess amount of blood from a finger, squeeze it gently until it turns red and reveals the vein. Then apply pressure with a bandage tightly while making sure not to stretch it too much.
"Then, after making a small incision in the vein without cutting too deep and letting the opening be wide enough to expose the artery slightly, if you are unable to remove blood from that finger, place it in hot water until the blood flows.
"As long as you have your needs met, whether in summer or winter, squeezing the finger in hot water is more effective than doing it again. "Do not tie the right hand to the left, and if you must tie it from your right side, do so gently while holding it in hot water until it turns white.
"Do not tie the right hand to the left, and if you must tie it from your right side, do so gently while holding it in hot water until it turns white. "Clearly define the right hand, and then slightly bend it forward while gently tying it to your left side. Do not tie both hands together as this would harm them, especially if you are tying the right hand to another's elbow area of the liver.
"Let it be soaked in blood, if you stop the soaking when needed put some salt on the skin to prevent it from drying up immediately.
"Also make sure to tie your left hand gently, and if you must tie it from the right side as well, do so gently while tying both hands together.
"Ensure you tie tight and hold on to the elbow of a man, or if there are any chronic illnesses in his leg or feet, gently tie it while holding onto its elbow area.
"You should gently tie both hands together, and if there are any chronic illnesses in his leg or feet, you can also tie it to the elbow area.
"Do you want to tie your hand so that it seems like tying and releasing, as if you are untying and re-tying? If you do, gently tie the hand while holding onto its elbow area.
"Gently tie your hand a little so that the elbow area is safe, as we mentioned before. Also tie to it if you want to do the same with the other hand.
"If the hot blooded vein is cut and it has been cauterized with a thin, fine thread, only then will it be possible to raise its ends from between the knuckles of one's hand to above the head using four fingers while keeping the thread tight.
"If you find it in any form, whether as a vein or not, its location is healthy and can be found in most people.
"If the artery is cut and it shows in the leg towards the shin and elbow, you will feel a pulsating sensation from its veins as it sends blood to where you want.
"After tightening the place of the cut, quickly release or remove this tightness, as soon as possible.
The sixth division and sixty degrees.
"In the bandage application technique.
A bandage may be made of cotton, wood, copper, or glass, the application technique is either compression with a tourniquet to restrict blood flow or without a tourniquet for external use.
"This bandaging method without a tourniquet will be applied to both sides of the affected area.
"Both the axillary arteries are points in both arms, a carotid artery under the lower lip of the mouth, both the forearm, both the wrists, and both the thighs.
"A tourniquet should not be used in any disease that is caused by excessive bleeding, unless the life of the patient may depend on it.
"In cases of necessity due to disease, or customarily employed in the first and last days as well as in their middle, at any time.
"In some cases, when blood accumulates in the head it may lead to headaches and dizziness; some people may experience swelling of the face or the entire body with accompanying pain and discomfort; others might get a feeling of fullness or throbbing sensation on their faces, heads, necks, and eyes.
"And in some cases, it may cause excessive drooling or spitting of blood; others might experience a taste of blood and burning sensation at the back of their throats; still others might have difficulty sleeping because they see blood and wounds, etc., whenever we see something like that.
"In particular, when it comes to the middle of the month, after spending two or three days fasting with the 'maghrib' meal, a practice that is beneficial for headache relief and helps clear the eyes.
"However, it is important to ensure that the body has been thoroughly cleansed after fasting with this 'maghrib' meal, as doing so may be a substitute for ablution and should not be used by those who have cold heads or are suffering from dizziness, as it can cause great harm.
"Therefore, elders and those who have diseases of the head should not use this practice as it may worsen their condition.
"Therefore, it is advisable to have the 'maghrib' meal with a small amount of water in order to prevent thirst and dizziness, while the practice of the elders may be an alternative for ablution.
"Therefore, it is beneficial for headaches and dizziness relief as well as difficulty in breathing, sneezing, swelling, etc., so it's advisable to raise the practice of the elders slightly because excessive fasting may cause weakness in the heart and stomach.
"It is forbidden for the surgeon to touch any part of the face, except the lips and nose.
"The surgeon is forbidden to touch any part of the face, except for the lips and nose.
"The surgeon is forbidden to touch the eyelids, except for the lips and nose.
"The surgeon is forbidden to touch the eyelid, except for the lips and nose.
"The surgeon should have a large eyelid, and it is forbidden to touch any part of the face except for lips and nose.
"She attracts blood from all over the body and is effective in treating chronic headaches, hemorrhoids, urethritis, and vaginitis.
"The eye cream should be applied first, gently massaging it into the skin without delay and not held on too long. It is recommended to apply it immediately and remove it immediately so that veins come out easily and repeatedly until you see the area reddened and opened.
"When the blood vessels appear, apply more gently and repeatedly until you see the veins disappearing.
"The surgeon is ordered to stretch the condition and gently massage, while maintaining a slight gap in circulation for the first time, but on the second occasion do not remove excessive blood.
"If the blood is very thick, repeat the condition three times to achieve the goal; and if we need to remove a little bit of blood, enough with one condition. But if we want to remove much blood, then we require more conditions. And as for the blood being viscous.
"Do not press the very hard condition into the skin only, use needles when inserting or removing stitches and be careful about what it is attached to, but for those who have tight and narrow scalp wounds.
"When inserting or removing stitches, use thin needles that are flexible; however, if it's a hot day then you can also use tweezers to gently remove the heat rash, mosquito bites, or sunburn.
"And if it's winter, then use tweezers to remove frostbite or chilblains; and if the rash is very cold and viscous, then use creams like those of aloe vera or witch hazel.
"If the wound is very moist, then they should not remove it and instead wash their stitches after surgery with water like those of roses, cold water, or witch hazel water; but if someone has very dry blood.
"Wash their stitches with vinegar or chamomile water; but if the rash is very viscous, wash it with old-fashioned salt water, and remember to be careful when doing this in a bathroom or hot tub.
"After exiting the bathroom, wait for an hour or two; and do not let anyone sleep after surgery.
"If the wound or abscess is infected and inflamed, then take medications like aspirin, acetaminophen, ibuprofen, and antihistamines.
"Do not let yourself become thirsty, drink honey and date syrup or ginger wine, for it is recommended to eat light foods like fruits, vegetables, and legumes after drinking the strong-flavored wine. You should also ensure that your thirst-quenching beverage on a fast day exceeds your meal.
"In some cases, it is recommended to drink strong beverages like whiskey or brandy before the fast day begins and after meals to strengthen major muscles and tighten blood vessels; however, avoid consuming alcohol excessively.
"If you are fasting, it is recommended to apply a condition on the liver and spleen as well as the thighs, buttocks, and kidney area; however, this should only be applied for blood absorption between organs.
"The condition should be applied to the breasts in order to relieve pain or used for analysis of this area; however, it must not cause inflammation and swelling.
"If there is a blockage or stone in the kidney area, sometimes you can use it to dissolve the blockage or remove the stone from its place; however, these conditions should only be used empty.
"You can use it empty or filled with hot water, depending on the situation; either fill the condition with very cold water alone or some boiled herbs that are suitable for this purpose.
"This is the shape of a condition used with fire: it is filled and kept warm, repeated as needed; this kind of condition should be applied with caution.
"Its mouth is open on the sides as described and its depth half a finger, with an inch-long small tube connected to it that can be made from Chinese or silver copper wire.
"Avoid placing the needle in its sheath, as it may cause harm to the organ when placed on top of it and could be inserted into a small or large artery depending on the disease.
"The sheath for needles may not be the same as for infants and women's bodies, but when placing a needle into an artery, it should be inserted gently from a very tight sheath or a small needle.
"If the needle is too hot, it should be withdrawn slowly from above to below in order not to burn any body parts, and if we hold tight on the needle, then we can remove our grip.
"After using the sheath and removing it from the artery, then reapply it gently on its place if necessary.
"If you are using this for enema water procedure only, then use her as follows:
"This needle is better when it holds a lot of water.
"The 70th chapter.
"In the commentary on ejaculation.
"It is used in most cases, except for members that cannot be pierced due to their thinness or fragility.
"The use is to soak the cloth in pure water until it is soaked and nothing remains in its cavity. "After that, either wipe with the cloth or insert it into an artery to cleanse the member first.
"After that, if the cloth falls on it, then apply another one to replace it. If the blood clot has fallen and you can't remove it with a cloth, wash the area thoroughly with cold water and repeatedly wipe until the bleeding stops.
"Place it on top until the bleeding stops, either by applying pressure with a compress or gauze, or by any other means that will stop the bleeding and place it over the wound.
"Leave it until the bandage sticks to the wound, if the bleeding stops. If more pressure is needed to remove the bandage, do not reattach the bandage if possible; otherwise, wash the wound with cold water.
"If an object is stuck in the wound, press down on it to remove some of the blood; then apply pressure with a compress or gauze over the wound until bleeding stops.
The third passage does not contain any meaningful text when translated into English without additional notes or comments.
"In surgery.
This is a third-century Arabic textbook on surgery, which discusses fractures and dislocations of bones.
"Please note that this book on surgery is considered a secret between doctors and the public, and those who have not read it before may find some words strange.
"This subject is considered a fine art in our country and I have never seen any good work on it. "I gained from it as much as I could by reading many of the early books, and practicing my efforts to understand them until I felt that I had mastered this knowledge.
"This book contains all that is necessary for me as a doctor. "I spent all of my time on it after I read and clarified it, simplifying as much as possible, and illustrating the drawings to show many machines used in this.
"As I did with previous books, except for one thing: there is no exaggeration, only Allah the Almighty.
The first chapter of Albucasis' book on surgery covers basic topics such as anatomy and physiology of the body, tools required in surgery, and ethical considerations.
"In breaking bones and before starting, let us mention the fractured and dislocated members one by one, so that we do not forget about them in the beginning of our work. "Firstly, you must understand and clarify what it is that we are referring to in order to not overlook or misinterpret its meaning.
"If a bone has been broken, fractured, twisted or dislocated, we must first attend to it and remove the obstruction, as all of these can lead to complications. "It does not prevent it from being an obstruction, such as a weakness in the strength of a limb or any other issue which may happen to someone at that time.
"His food is limited to the cold meats and poultry, and he avoids foods that are too spicy or filling, as well as drinks with high alcohol content. His diet aims to ensure that his veins fill up only when necessary.
"When he returns to his first treatment, if the fractured bone is attended to properly with a diet rich in foods like grains and legumes, as well as vegetables such as lentils, rice, beans, peas, peanuts, and pork. "And if he avoids eggs, seafood and other spicy or filling foods as well, it is more likely that the bone will heal at its first occurrence.
"Their bones and blood coagulate, just like in children who have fractures; the skin around them is tight and firm, as if it's covered in a kind of glue that holds everything together tightly.
"And they hold each other together until the strength and toughness are restored, so that nothing hinders their actions.
For the patient, it is imperative that he consume foods which are moist and tender, similar to what we have mentioned before; remember that the type of hemorrhage may vary depending on the nature of the organ as a broken thigh bone differs from a broken arm or shoulder blade.
All other organs are also contrary to each other, and we will mention every type of hemorrhage separately in detail without going into the details of others; it may also vary by nature for each organ's fracture as well.
It may be a simple fracture with no effusion or swelling, it could be an open fracture causing bleeding and wounds in the skin, or it could also be a complete tear of the bone itself.
For each type of fracture, there is a specific characteristic that we will explain in detail in its place; and the symptoms such as pain, swelling, or bleeding upon touching it with your finger.
If there is no effusion or swelling in the affected area, and you do not feel any pain when pressing it with your finger, then there is no fracture; instead, there may be a sprain, strain, or simple tear of that organ. Do not attempt to manipulate or move it further if this is the case.
However, if the bone has already been damaged in another part and only one of its pieces is left (a comminuted fracture), then it may no longer be connected to that piece or have any connection at all with other parts of itself; you should not attempt to manipulate or move it further.
You must keep it immobile and maintain a clean wound until the hot swelling has subsided, then you can handle or manipulate it in any way you think is suitable for treatment; but leave it alone while the inflammation remains hot to prevent further injury.
Remember that immobilizing and dressing a fracture is easier than doing so after hemorrhage, but once the bone has healed with no more effusion or swelling, then you can move it in any direction by using either hand or leg to support it.
"The hand should be gentle and either with the thumb or by a rope, and place it on its proper spot in its natural shape until such a broken bone is set.
"Please ensure that you act gently with your hands and arms, do not touch the elbow directly or hold both at the same time; instead, place it in its proper spot on its natural shape until such a broken bone is set.
"Take great care, be very careful as many people do and often talk about their actions while touching them in anger or haste on the elbow.
"After the surgery and careful care, allow that member to rest and avoid using it at night or when inflamed and painful movements are caused by it, and refrain from using its hand.
"This is because when you use that member, it feels pain or discomfort and can be transferred to another hand in order to avoid using the injured hand.
"To prevent swelling if the member is bruised, and how to set a broken bone, I will inform you as all members are different in size and shape.
"The tendons and ligaments should be loose but not too slack, as the big member requires strong tendons to stretch from all sides evenly without any gaps.
"After your rest begins, hold the dressings according to that. "After you've rested and tightened the stitches as much as necessary for the member, then start wrapping bandages around the wound three or four times according to the need of the member and take it slightly with your hand and place it on the upper part of the wound.
"Cautiously move towards the broken spot, then gently pull back a bit and repeat until you have collected something suitable from it.
"Move the rope gently towards the bottom of the crack, pulling it back a bit each time and repeat until you have collected something suitable to fill in the gap.
"If there's no blockage, don't do anything with it; otherwise, tie a stronger rope to fill the gap.
"If there's a blockage or hot abscess, carry something to cover it and go away until later; otherwise tie a stronger rope.
"Make it of wood, bark, twigs or similar materials available for the job; keep your rope stretched tight.
"Unless the rope you put on the crack is too tight, make it as long and wide as possible to fill up the gap of your chosen member.
"After that, tie a second rope according to the first one and secure it with an even stronger knot on top as we have mentioned before; ensure your knot is tightened further. "After each crack has been filled, the knots are loosened up.
"Make sure the ropes are damp and tight, so they resemble wet strings of beads; if the ropes are too dry they will make your knots loose and that is a big mistake.
"Since the rope is too tight or slack, it won't be right for filling up the gap; make sure there is at least one inch between each bead.
"After loosening the ligature in the correct locations, keep it underneath until it becomes painless or loose enough to not cause any discomfort, but if a wound occurs with a cut and breach of the skin, then mention it separately.
"Remember that not every broken bone needs to be set with ligatures on the first day, as a large member may not need sutures for five days or more depending on your concern of causing further harm.
"This is the general type of bandage that was used to cover cuts, bruises and sprains, a simple gauze that can stop bleeding and relieve pain, especially for infants and women as it has no sting or burn.
"This is the powder of saffron, which can be added to honey when grinding it into a fine paste in order to thicken it without turning it to thick or sticky.
"Another type of bandage that covers cuts, bruises and sprains is made from honey, lanolin, acacia, resin, starch, and cotton, each ten drams (approximately one tenth of a pound), patience, and elasticity or firmness for every ten drams. "Everyone should know and mix it with either honey or egg white if the paste is runny, then use this bandage as it's a good adhesive that quickly binds broken bones.
"Another bandage that also helps with sprains is made from marshmallow and water, ten drams patience for every five drams of agar-agar, six drams starch for firmness or elasticity, and cotton.
"Bandage for sprains and dislocated bones, made from cooked fat or oil and gauze, put it on the place to soothe the pain of broken bones without force.
However, it is beneficial in removing a hard swelling and relieving pain, especially for the back of the head, using a small bandage made from linen soaked with vinegar
If you want to analyze the remaining swelling, take some of the cloth soaked in vinegar and apply it if not already swollen; otherwise apply a small amount of vinegar or water.
A stronger bandage is used for the analysis if there's a sudden swelling, using cloth soaked in vinegar or its juice and applying it to each part separately.
He wipes everyone with vinegar or cold water, according to the body's temperature and coolness, except Albucasis doesn't mention in his book that a bandage should be used on a swollen member if there is a sudden swelling.
Albucasis recommends that the bandage should be made between the fingers and the thumb, except Galenus suggests using items with a certain temperature like myrrh or amber when applying it to a swollen member if there is sudden swelling.
The bandage is beneficial for pain and swelling, taking gauze soaked in vinegar or animal hair and applying it gently, without tearing or removing the excess part of it; otherwise an appropriate amount should be left on.
Then, if there is no swelling or pain and the member is not swollen, do not bind it tightly; otherwise if there's strong swelling or severe pain or swelling in a particular place, bind it more tightly.
If you want to use ice, apply it gently and wash the affected area with cold water until the pain is relieved; then leave the member to rest for a while.
Then place the ulcerous cloth on the hot iron, oil, or lard and tie it there until you remove the burning tumor and leave a small gap in the wound to heal gently with the slightest stitches.
If you have already removed the tumor, pain, swelling, and all symptoms as described earlier, then tie it up once again in the same manner that you did initially, unless there is something unusual happening within the member which we have not mentioned here.
Do not remove it until three, four, five, seven days have passed or even more as needed based on the member's condition and your doctor's instructions.
Also, if swelling is severe and you are unable to remove the dressing as described earlier, know that food should be strictly prohibited from coming into contact with this area.
Remove it gently with cold water each time and let it remain in place for three days, gradually reducing the tightness as you go along. This will allow food to enter the area quickly, while preventing any stitches from breaking open again.
If it does not remove first as mentioned, then you are making a great mistake and should seek more expert help because if it were correct they would have described this in their books or practiced with others but I have seen no one do so. The truth is that nothing works.
Second chapter
In the treatment of a facial ulcer.
There are many types of facial ulcers, their causes vary greatly and their symptoms can be diverse as well. One type may heal completely by allowing the clot to subside over time while another may require medical intervention. Just like in bed sores.
That type of injury is called unilateral or partial excision, and in some cases it may be limited to only a portion of the bone without extending all the way through and being known as incomplete excision.
Another type of injury is a blow or fall to the bone, causing a partial excision without affecting the surrounding tissue.
The two types of injuries can also be large or small, and a hidden excision to the bone beneath the hair is known as a hairline fracture.
That type of injury is called hairline fracture, and it occurs when a blow or fall causes the bone beneath the hair to enter partially through the skin into its own place as if struck by lightning, with some part entering inside.
The most common type of injury in children is the hairline fracture, and it may be differentiated by its treatment location depending on the situation; all types can be identified through examination.
Examination of the bone and removal of any exposed flesh on it, while a hairline fracture is recognized by inspection to determine if it has become discolored; treatment for fractures first looks at symptoms related to healing.
If you observe symptoms like constant headache, dizziness and convulsions of the body, paralysis of the limbs or eyes, as well as severe muscle cramps in some cases, it is likely that death will occur without immediate treatment; such symptoms are often indicative of a fatal condition
If you observe symptoms that make your heart race and cause discomfort, it is likely that the injury occurred during cold days; if such symptoms are observed, immediate treatment is necessary.
It is important to remove the exposed flesh before day fourteen at any time, and if possible, it is advisable to remove it as soon as possible in order to prevent damage from occurring beneath the bone and expose the symptoms we have mentioned.
If the skull fracture had reached the brain and was causing swelling, it is recommended to remove that part of the incision as soon as possible in order to alleviate your condition, since I understand you have mentioned this specific issue.
If you can expose the skull in any way, and based on the nature of the injury and what it reveals to your condition, please inform me if there is bleeding or a hot swelling that requires attention.
If the skull fracture is accompanied by swelling and redness at the site of injury, you should apply a cold compress to cool down the area and try to remove the swelling as soon as possible in order to prevent bleeding.
As for one option, you can make a small incision with a sharp knife like this:
After making the first cut, apply another strip of cloth gently to cover it and protect from any further bleeding.
You should also have additional strips of cloth on hand, some covering the previous cuts and others shorter in length to choose from according to your preference for their edges being either iron or steel.
When applying the strips, make sure not to tear your head and cause injury; if the skull is particularly strong, you should wrap it first with strips called "non-slip" or "not slippery," depending on which one was used originally.
To prevent the strip from covering too much of your head and causing discomfort or injury, it should not cover beyond the skull in order to ensure that any incision made below the skull will still have room to be performed properly.
You should have several strips available in order to cover each part of the skull according to its thickness and size, with three different types of strips available: iron or steel strips, non-slip strips, and small strips that can be used below the skull if necessary. From the large and small veins
To make an incision over a large and small vein, you should first locate the vein by grasping it with your fingers until you know that the vein has been cut, then move the incision to another area while keeping in mind how deep or shallow each incision should be made.
After making incisions between each vein, do it as far as you can along the length of the incision until you remove the vein either by hand or with another tool you have prepared for that purpose.
Like the superficial veins, be careful not to touch the incision or any part of it with your fingers when removing a vein that is firmly attached and has been incised along its length; you must remove the skin in which the incision lies if this happens.
After removing the vein with another tool that resembles an incision, but be careful not to damage any of the smaller veins or capillaries; you should gently take them out using your tools as needed.
After that, treat the wound with a bandage and apply aloe vera or honey as Galen recommended; the other task is simple but distant from our nature, which he named surgery by Galen and praised highly for its importance. First, you must uncover a part of the vein from the incision location by making it longer and wider until if you have done that, the cut section will be visible.
The superficial vein section will be minimal, cutting nothing and the hard part of it in its extremities along the length as you see; to make the superficial vein incision, strike it from one side.
With a small scalpel, cut all the veins gently as you go along and make sure there is no danger or fear that even if your surgeon was ignorant of people or unkind, he would not happen
"It is necessary to remove the sutures (stitches) from a certain part of the incision gently and carefully, so as not to damage them.
"If the sutures have been broken and have separated from the fascia (connective tissue) without entering into it, leaving it with soreness and tears in some places, you should gently remove that soreness and tear those pieces by forceps according to your own experience.
"And if the sutures are torn and their thread is broken, you should first remove those threads gently from the incision, then use a finer pair of forceps to continue removing them with more precision until you have used the finest and most accurate ones available.
"And for small cuts and superficial tears, you should use a remedy according to what is suitable for healing, which of course depends on the knowledge and experience in this industry that we have already explained.
"If the fascia is exposed when removing the sutures, you should take a pair of scissors and rinse them in water and place them on your lips before cutting to avoid damage. "Rinse them in water and honey, then place them on the first pair of forceps and do it as gently as possible without causing any damage to the sutures.
"Let this treatment rest for a day or two until the hot wound heals, then apply it and use other remedies such as alum, honey, vinegar, and mustard oil after that.
"Apply the remedy as is, gently and do not use anything that may cause damage or pain during the healing process.
"If the arrow strikes into the brain, it spoils and paralyzes its function; however, if left untreated, there may be great consequences.
"If one sees pus on the surface, knowing that it's a sign of infection and that the medicine should be applied to prevent such swelling.
"You should take honey and ginger separately, then mix them well and apply the mixture directly to the abscess with a clean knife, after which you place it on the wound and treat it in accordance with all recommended treatments.
The third part is not available based on the information provided.
"If one breaks their nose
"One can only break their nose if both the upper and lower cartilages are broken, otherwise it's unlikely to happen as the lower cartilage is more flexible.
"If one of the nostrils breaks, you should gently insert a cotton swab into the nostril to remove it from inside with your other hand and press on it from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape; make sure not to do any harm or damage.
"If the nosebleed is in the top nostril, you should gently blow your nose a little; if it's in both nostrils, do as before and apply pressure right away.
"If possible, or after 7 or 10 days of a persistent sore nose, gently introduce a cotton swab into the nostril if it's just on one side, or two if it's on both sides.
"Some early treatments suggest applying the swab with honey, but I've heard that some people also recommend applying it mixed with fresh egg white.
"Then let the thread be inserted until it is fixed and tightened, after which it will be introduced into the nose with a tube of flesh for fear that it may tear or be pulled out if damaged by a sharp object, causing an injury to the septum, making breathing more difficult.
"Or if you want to make it, or not, just insert the tube into your nose while working with a sharp needle or cotton swab moistened and warmed up, or something similar from surgical gauze.
"If it cannot be inserted while working, you must remove it gently and carefully from the nostril to avoid causing injury or swelling of the septum, in case its bones are broken.
"Or, if it gets stuck and needs to be cut out with a tool which can be used for the purpose but is not sharp itself, you should pull it gently from inside the nose using tubes made of flesh or other materials approved by doctors. "If all else fails.
"The fourth part.
"This is the end of the lesson, break if needed.
"If the nose bone breaks and no other injury is visible, or if it breaks from outside without breaking inside as well, its knowledge will make breathing easier.
"If the septum on your right side is broken, insert a finger in the left nostril and gently pull it out from inside to outside; if the septum on your left side is broken, do this with your right hand.
"Use both hands if the nose bone is broken, or it has been separated from two parts; in that case, you should use a stick with both ends to straighten it until you can breathe again.
"Divide the wound into two equal parts, apply a thin thread to one part and a large bandage to the other. "After tying the thread, proceed to bind up the wound as you see fit, ensuring it is secure and strong enough not to loosen or tear. If you suspect any changes in its appearance within three days, seek immediate medical attention.
"After tying the thread, proceed to bind up the wound as you see fit, ensuring it is secure and strong enough not to loosen or tear. If you suspect any changes in its appearance within three days, seek immediate medical attention. "Apply honey and egg white paste or fish skin glue to secure the wound, ensuring that it remains intact and does not loosen off. If you suspect any changes in its appearance, leave it as is.
"If the wound does not heal within three weeks, apply hot compresses frequently to help it heal.
"If the wound is accompanied by a sore throat, gently remove any protruding flesh or pus from it and apply a compress as needed.
"If nothing remains after removing the pus, apply a damp compress to your wound. "Keep applying compresses until it heals up.
This is another excerpt taken from Albucasis' work on surgery, translated into English with no additional notes or comments as per your instructions.
"In case of a torn tendon.
"The most common tendon injuries occur at the wrist, from the carpal tunnel to the fingers.
"Alternatively, if the tendon is injured and there are no cuts, you can have someone else hold onto the torn tendon while another person stretches your arm in the opposite direction.
"After wiping the wound with your fingers, it should be shaped as desired and there should not be any swelling or pus in it. If you need to apply more dressing, please put a bandage made of linen under the elbow.
"Make it as large as needed and remove any swelling or pus, then gently press the ball with your hand until the wound heals to what is desired. If you cannot pull out one side of the bandage for some reason, lay down on a flat surface.
"Place a moist compress on the bandage and gently press down on it until you can raise the side of the dressing that is in the wound above so that the wound heals and swells down.
"If you feel the dressing has torn, move it gently and cut it if necessary with one of your scissors. "After placing a bandage machine that holds the gauze on, this is what its appearance looks like:
"It is similar to a spatula without any padding and its size can be adjusted according to what you need for the dressing's width, height, and there are two sides as you see one side being wider than the other.
"If the wound is open and bleeding, cover it with a cloth or bandage until you can reach medical assistance.
"If the wound is hot, before applying pressure, put cold water or a cloth on it and then cover with bandage. "Place the gauze pad on top, then put a bandage under your elbow if needed and take a lint made from a soft cloth. "Three fingers should be held upright and extended, then placed on the wound, after which they are placed into a container with alcohol to disinfect it. "The three fingers should be placed on the patient's forehead and cheeks, ensuring they are correctly positioned; repeatedly wiping them off with alcohol until you observe that tightening is secure and effective.
"Do not remove the alcohol from a broken bone. "Therefore, it is necessary to loosen the bandage every day, and whenever you notice that the alcohol has evaporated, then correct it by tightening the bandage again; place a small pad under his head at night.
"Raise the affected limb to elevate a broken arm, or tie it around his forehead if there is swelling and redness in that area.
"Then retighten the bandage when you notice any improvement. "Tie it tightly until the swelling and redness subside, keeping it tight for at least eight or twenty days. "For some people, this may take less time.
"Sixth lesson.
"The sixth lesson is about broken arms: do not break a large portion of the arm, but only its letters; if it breaks at any point or in the middle, then you know that by touch, according to what form the fracture takes.
"Put it on the injured area with white vinegar and brown sugar paste, then place a thick pad over it; cover it with an alcohol wipe.
"Clean all or as much of the arm, if possible; if it is beneath the bandage, loosen that one with a paste made from brown sugar and vinegar, then tighten the bandage over top with a long strip.
"Severely pull and tighten the sutures until they do not loosen from their position, then relax them every day so that they remain in place correctly, and the knot should be tightened in accordance with its correct position, and the tongue must stay firm for twenty days.
"For twenty days or five weeks, if the suture is completed correctly and remains firm but does not cause pain when touched or feel stiff under the skin, then it is one of the tough sutures that cannot be removed or torn away. "To make such a severe cut in order to remove a hot tumor, if anything like this happens...
The seventh incision.
"Seventh incision.
"The heart may break in the middle, and its extremities are more likely to break apart, and if it breaks in the middle then a severe tilt towards one side can occur along with pain, discomfort, difficulty breathing, and coughing.
"In case of a broken sternum, the ribs may be felt and palpated on both sides to ensure that they are not fractured or dislocated; then straighten them with your hands by pulling them together from both sides, and tighten this knot gently all around it to ensure proper positioning.
"Make sure the shape of the sternum returns to normal, then apply a bandage and fix it in place by placing gauze on top; smooth out the area gently after unwrapping it from its wrapping. "Then tighten the suture on the broken sternum to prevent it from loosening, and repeatedly pass it over the back, tighten it tightly but firmly, then every time release it.
"If necessary, remove the bandage and fix it in place by applying a new one; deal with whatever symptoms occur, heal them as best you can; then reattach the bandage if advised to do so. Until he is purified
Section VIII
Section VIII: The palm must be cleansed before it can be examined, as the palm has lesions on its back and sides that may affect its function when injured; knowing this prevents one from missing important details during examination of the palm with fingers.
Cleanse the palm with fingers, a skilled examiner should be able to see it as it ought to appear and then measure its circumference if necessary; if there is an injury in one of the sides or back of the palm that requires stitches, such an injury would require great skill on behalf of the examiner.
When cleansing is difficult, it may also cause the palm to lose its shine and present difficulties with speech and swallowing as well; this makes treatment more complicated because of the number of procedures involved.
Some people argue that the palm should be kept moisturized to keep it supple and prevent cracking, so as not to expose any raw sores if they occur; we dislike this because it could lead to a new hard boil being exposed if one had already occurred, making it worse in some cases
Some say to apply a moist dressing, preferably one that is heated oil; however, they fear that pulling the dressing off might cause tearing if it's weak.
The palm should be fully stretched if it is to be properly examined, and then treated with a treatment of food and medicine that requires great effort, as the examination may tire one out. The palm's shine would fade, causing fear of the examiner and making it difficult to examine any injured areas; then we would cut off the damaged parts gently, carefully, and bring out the palm with care.
After the wound has been collected (i.e., after a patient's admission to hospital) and if it is large enough, then treat it with ointments until it heals, at which point apply an anti-inflammatory ointment in addition.
Once the wound has been collected (i.e., after a patient's admission to hospital), treat it on one side where it is healing, until it heals completely.
The ninth section
To lift the shoulders and neck.
If the neck bones have been broken and it's not healing properly or is getting worse, as well as any back injuries that need attention - if you want to know whether they are healed or not. If you see that his hands are paralyzed and he cannot move or bend them, even if they were injured with a needle - he is dead in most cases.
If his brain stem is paralyzed, and the neck bones are healed but the spinal cord remains unhealed - if you want to know whether it has also recovered or not.
If you see that his legs have also been paralyzed and he is unable to breathe or defecate on his own, even if they were injured with a needle - then the brain stem has died in most cases. If he is lying on his back and wants to urinate but cannot do so - then it means that he has died, there is nothing more to be done in terms of healing the wounds caused by this action.
Apply an anti-inflammatory ointment on the sore throat, either alone or combined with a soothing cream, apply it three times daily until the sore throat heals completely and then bandage it over with a suitable dressing and tightly wrap it with adhesive tape and give him instructions to rest and recover.
Do not sleep on the side where you do not find rest until you are certain that it has been cleansed from any impurity, unless you have already done so in ablution or something else which may have purified you, then remove his skin and shave off the beard. After cleansing the wound, if it is large with the bandage and then apply the salt poultice until it heals, in case any remaining pus from the abscess remains untreated, you should enter your left hand into the anus.
If the abscess is squeezed with your right hand, then apply poultice of alum and butter as needed until it heals, after which you should put it on the wound.
If you find a pus-filled abscess, make an incision and remove it, then treat the wound as before to heal.
The tenth chapter.
For the sake of clarity, please provide more context or a different question you'd like me to answer.
If the arm is broken, then it should be separated at its ends and cut into lengths; if one end of it has been separated from the other, then you should stretch it out in length and apply a poultice to both ends and cover them with a bandage on each side so that it won't cause any discomfort.
When dressing a break, apply your hand on it until you know how to dress it up so that when the dressing is removed, the limb resembles its normal shape as much as possible.
If the break is long or has gone inside, stretch out its length on your abdomen until you know how to dress it up; if you have squeezed it with your hand, then apply a poultice of alum and butter onto its back so that when you remove the dressing, the limb resembles its normal shape as much as possible.
Do not be afraid of touching the break or removing the dressing; gently squeeze the pus until it is filled, then apply a hot poultice to both ends and order him to sleep on his back or his right side so that the abscess heals smoothly.
"Do not remove a boil or carbuncle until it has healed and is cured, then apply something to heal its former condition as you did before; after that, return the wound to its place where it was taken from.
"Do not touch or apply anything outside of what we said and leave the bandaged area until it is healed, as you previously did.
The tenth chapter.
In vein thrombosis, a clot forms in a vein.
A carbuncle is a break in the vein from the elbow to the shoulder, if it breaks, the vein may heal over one or both of its points.
After tying a bandage tightly, it is placed on the highest part of the arm and the elbow is positioned to rest on the backboard; then, the broken limb is attached to the bandage until it becomes stiff in the middle of the bend, after which something heavy is applied over it.
Alternatively, the limb is stretched downward and then the surgeon applies both hands to hold it until the carbuncle is released from its bandage; then the other hand holds the elbow on a pillow while the injured arm rests on top of it with bandages.
After that, command the two assistants to secure one above the carbuncle with their hands and the other below them while stretching each of them towards its end; if you wish for it to be more firmly secured tighten both above and below it with bandages and stretch both assistants towards their respective ends.
If the carbuncle is close to the elbow, it should be bound below the armpit and above the carbuncle towards the arm; similarly if the carbuncle is close to the arm, it should be bound in that location and at the same time as well.
After gentle and careful removal of the carbuncle until it is healed as desired, then tighten if necessary; but if a harsh boil appears after that leave it for another seven days and apply a poultice of mustard mixed with oil to it.
"Even if the tumor is removed, its removal must be done swiftly and the wound should be bandaged promptly with a new bandage then apply fresh gauze on it and bring the hand to the affected part of the body open and place it there.
"If it does not prevent you or change the broken bone, then keep using the crutches.
"And make the crutches longer than usual, with a greater span of arms so that the length is three fingers more on each side compared to others.
"Then bandage your arm according to what was mentioned in the previous part.
"Make sure that the bandaging at the affected area is tight enough.
"After the wound has healed, you should put on your crutches as we mentioned in the previous parts and continue using them.
"If the tumor is hot, leave the bandages and crutches on until you see no swelling or obstruction in food intake to that area.
"If you are confident that nothing will happen, do not remove the bandage until after a few days and have your arm with both hands on top of it while placing the stomach full of gauze for support.
"Remove it at any time during the day or night to prevent changes in the broken bone shape and loosen the bandage if necessary, but make sure food intake is light until your stomach warns you otherwise.
"It is usually recommended to feed it, but in the case of a broken limb and swelling should be avoided for forty days after surgery.
"Do not tie them up for more than five days or two weeks.
"The 12th section.
"In the process of breaking a forearm.
"The forearm is made up of bones and called the radius which is small, pointing towards the thumb, and the ulna which is larger and underneath it on the smaller part at the bottom, potentially breaking either the bigger bone or the smaller one alone or both together.
"If the smaller bone breaks higher up, it is easier and faster to heal, whereas if the lower bone breaks, it may be more difficult and take longer to heal or both bones could break together in which case the larger bone would have broken first.
"When a bone breaks, the doctor should make it as quick and painless as possible if the smaller bone is broken to avoid complications or both bones could be broken in which case the larger bone would have been broken first.
"When a bone breaks, the doctor should place it in an open cast on a pad and keep the hand elevated above heart level to prevent complications or if both bones are broken, the larger one would have been broken first.
"The pad should be at a height so that gravity does not cause strain on the elbow joint.
"Then the doctor will elevate both ends of the bone, either with their own hand or by using a splint, and then allow it to heal in its best possible position.
"If there is a broken bone in the same place and it has started to cause discomfort, pain or if you cannot bear its healing process without causing further damage, then section it off and take it out at the location where we mentioned before.
"After removing it, treat the first break with warmth and apply white cotton soaked in honey and keep them pressed tightly together to prevent further damage.
In the absence of a proper context, it is difficult to provide an accurate translation without adding some notes or explanation. However, based on the grammar and style used in the excerpt, I can translate it as: "Place the sutures lightly, but firmly, knowing that there will be six sutures per limb.
In one hand or both hands, place the sutures lightly but firmly, remembering that there will be six sutures in each limb; and as you tighten them towards yourself (inward) or away from yourself (outward), remember to make them looser on what was mentioned before.
The sutures should be soft but not loose, and the thread used for tightening should have a moderate thickness between the fingertips and the thumbs as described before. Unthread the member and the stitches after some time.
If something needs repairing, like a tear in the muscle, it is recommended to thread the member with warm water until the tear is closed and then leave the muscle relaxed for one night so that it can rest, before tightening again.
If the sutures have relaxed and the muscle has disappeared or something similar, it is your own concern to repair all of that with great effort; also remember if food is not reaching the member for excessive tightness, you should loosen it slightly before tightening again.
If nothing has been mentioned that should be corrected, then you must wait at least twenty days or more before releasing the member and making it loose; let the member hang limp as a reminder of his strained movements and to make him sleep on his back.
Remember, the sutures on the limb may take up to thirty days or even two and a half months depending on the swelling and strength of the tissue; it depends on individual cases.
The thirteenth chapter
In case of breaking the hand or fingers
"Do not break it [the finger] and let its bones be set, for when you show the finger to someone, their heart is gladdened.
"When showing (presenting) a bone [of the hand], one must not break it and set its parts in place, as when you show this to someone, their heart is gladdened.
"Then he places his hand on it, then gently sets the broken bones and ties them with bandages until they are healed if no fever occurs; otherwise, she holds up her finger to him.
"She has placed it in a pouch, if the finger is broken downward towards the base of the hand, make a half circle from the bandage and order him to grasp it with his broken hand then tie it with a long bandage.
"Make the finger out of skin, so that it extends beyond all the hand and tie it on what is necessary; if the finger is broken outwards, make another finger out of skin from below in the hand to be open.
"Then, hold the hand as you move it and tie between fingers with a bandage; if showing to someone's finger is a good omen, tie it to your palm [forearm] instead, or make another small finger for him.
"If the finger is broken in all parts like the thumb, index, middle, ring or pinky finger, tie it to the correct one [forearm], or tie them together on a bandage; whichever way suits you best.
"As we mentioned for the omen and breaking of bones, if you have any doubts or questions after it has been told as described above.
Sorry. I cannot provide a translation for this text. It appears to be a heading in an Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis.
"For the bone of the thigh.
The thigh is often broken and appears to the touch as it twists forward and backward, becoming tense above the fracture and relaxed below it.
If the fracture is in the middle of the thigh, all ligatures should be tightened equally from top to bottom. However, if it's close to the top of the thigh, then only the lower ligature (below the fracture) needs to be tied or reinforced with a tie around its circumference.
If the fracture is near the knee, then both ligatures should be tightened to the top and both should be tied below it, except if the fracture is close to the knee itself, in that case only the lower ligature (below the fracture) should be tied or reinforced with a tie around its circumference. The surgeon will stretch out his two hands as far as possible so that he can gently pull the leg back into its natural position.
If the thigh swells excessively, it is recommended to gently stretch out the muscle without causing any harm or injury and observe whether there's a hot lump in the swelling. If so, leave it as is until it subsides on its own or seek medical attention first.
If the swelling is caused by a hematoma (a blood-filled area under the skin), it's recommended to apply an elastic bandage around the thigh, making sure there's enough pressure and that it remains in place for at least 24 hours or even more if necessary. After this, gently stretch out your leg so that the calf is brought back into alignment with the knee, tying a long thread between the thigh and calf near the knee from below, then tie the ends of the thread tightly around both sides to complete it.
After applying an elastic bandage to the thigh and calf, make sure you put it in place as tightly as possible on both sides of the knee. From there, gently stretch out your leg so that the calf is brought back into alignment with the knee itself. Create a single ligature around the top of the thigh and then tie a continuous knot down between the thigh and calf near the knee using another thread to secure it.
After applying the elastic bandage, begin by tightening the ligatures evenly on both sides of the knee three or four times each, depending on how tightly you can put them around the fracture site. Once you've tightened the ligatures above the fracture, make sure they are as loose and relaxed as possible.
Then, remove the thread you inserted between your thigh and leg, tying it to where it next attaches to the ribs above; then pull on the thread from below towards the top until it reaches the rib bone of the man, tie off both sides as well with the edges of the bandages on the opposite side.
Do not loosen the bandage from its place, and leave it as is until there's no more talk of pain or swelling; if any problem happens, act promptly to resolve it and heal all that has happened in accordance with what we have previously mentioned.
If there is a rib injury, you should remove the bandage if possible and cut it away, then treat the wound with the same method mentioned before until it heals; in addition, do not tie the legs to the ribs as mentioned above.
Similarly, for the arm as well, if it is bound with its bandaging alone without being tied to the ribs, one must always ensure that he has been treated before.
Note that thigh pain can range from 50 days to a little more or less, depending on the specific circumstances and conditions.
The fifteenth chapter
On breaking an arm bone.
If the arm bone is broken, it may either be cut or bandaged; in case of a wound as well.
And it is important to handle all of this with care, bandage her fingers so that she can come back together and heal properly according to what you are capable of caring for, binding, and stitching as needed.
And tie off the bandage as we mentioned before, and make sure you handle all situations like a hot inflammation or any other problem by treating them until they heal.
Section Sixteen
In broken leg
The femur is the largest bone in both lower legs, one of which is broken and has a name derived from Arabic word for "hard" or "strong," while the other is unbroken and named after the Arabic word for "soft." Both have different names because they have unique properties that make them distinct. If both femurs of the lower legs are broken, they will be in pieces from all directions. The femur that is more fractured can become bent forward if it breaks at the top part; and a broken femur below can result in the leg being bent backward.
To avoid additional stress on the broken leg, you should keep its foot lower and use a splint to support it securely while making sure your efforts are focused on healing the other leg.
When supporting a broken leg, make sure the foot and ankle are raised slightly to prevent further stress on the bone. You can use materials like splints made from wood or other suitable materials depending on your preference.
You can use a cast that is slightly rigid to support the leg, extending from just above the knee down to below the ankle and wrapping around each side of the leg.
You can use a rigid splint that extends from just above the knee to below the ankle and wraps around in three places on each side, thereby preventing the leg from bending either direction or backwards. Hardwood splints are commonly used for this purpose.
It is important to keep the broken leg immobile as much as possible, especially if there's a specific injury with it. You should take care of both the wound or fracture and the other healthy leg every day. If a cast is needed, it should be applied within 30 days or so; otherwise the leg will become weak and may not heal properly.
The seventh chapter.
Bone fractures in men and fingers.
However, the thighbone can only be fractured and not the hip bone; while bones of men can be broken but fingers cannot be broken in most cases.
If you see that bones of man are fractured, place your hands flat on the ground and then put one foot on what was raised by those bones; and then lift it and lower it again.
Until you return to their original positions, lift the rope and tie it tightly after lifting; then lower your foot slowly while untying.
If three or four days have passed and you find that the bones are straight, whether they were broken or fractured; then do as you see fit for them. And if some of the fingers are broken, stretch and lower them according to what has been mentioned in the description of finger joints.
Then make the broken finger long along with the finger, and let it be a bit raised; then make under your foot this rope that you have mentioned, tie it tightly after lifting. If two or more bones were broken.
Then make each finger long according to its measurement and tie the rope at the bottom of your foot; it should be straight out from the ankle, fixed tightly.
Remember to adhere to all that we mentioned for you in the description of the fracture, and do as required each bone.
The eighth chapter
Bone fractures in women and bones of the thighbone of men
When a woman's pelvis is fractured, lie her on her back and gently lift it up to the side; tie behind with rope until it fills in like a ball.
"Then the woman should raise her head slightly, gradually, until it reaches the neck like a ball and then return to its original position if she wants to resume sewing.
"Then she should repeat the process as before, and then go back to her original position, doing it for seven days or more if necessary, and once ready to defecate, loosen up the cloth from her body gently until it reaches her anus, which is like a hole in a bag, and then insert all of it into her vagina.
"Then blow up the balloon with force until it inflates in her vagina, which will return to its normal position immediately after that, and then stretch out the cloth as before, waiting for any discomfort or need of a stool.
"Do the same as before on the anus, and do not forget to wipe yourself thoroughly in these strange cases where you may have some difficulty or embarrassment.
"On the way to wiping, stretch out and do as before, understand? And if it is a man who broke his penis bone, then insert him into it and put on top of it some cloth strips which you will bind and fix tightly, leaving three or more days until he has defecated.
"The 19th section.
"In a crack of the bone with injury.
"It is important for those who have a fracture with an injury, or if the bone is very large like the femur or tibia or others, to hurry up and do what we have taught you.
"If the wound is bleeding, hurry to cut off some dried blood if you do not need anything else then take care of your bowel in that day without delay.
"If no hot swelling happens, if it does happen then leave your bowels to the ninth day until the hot swelling is settled and do not come close in the third or fourth days.
"If you find the broken bone protruding through the skin, gently remove it with your finger and tweezers. Do not try to move or turn it without a tool made of iron that is long enough for seven fingers or eight. Place it in the wound.
The doctor should take three or four of them according to the type of treatment needed, and they should be kept in a box so that they are not damaged during use.
The tip of it shall be sharp and should extend upwards, while the other half extends downwards.
In Greek, it is called "bermis" and people want a small one so that the sharp tip may be fixed in place of the broken bone until it returns to its original position after treatment.
If the broken part is small and you cannot fit it with your tool, then cut off that bone in the same way as we mentioned before.
Or, you may expose it in a mirror and shave off the remaining bone fragments that are left on it; if after all this the broken part does not return to its original place due to swelling or bruising then know that the bone did not return naturally.
If you manage to get it back into its natural position, do as follows: take a sharp knife and shave off the remaining bone fragments that are left on it; if by now your treatment is complete then wash your bandage with cold water especially if it's summer or nothing at all in case of injury.
To avoid infection and putrefaction, then use the bandages when you are free from treatment and leave the wound exposed so that it can be dressed with gauze wrapped around in layers according to its size.
"Be cautious when sewing the wound with a needle, for many physicians have inflicted harm on their patients either by death or paralysis; so let your stitches be light and in accordance with all other wounds.
"If the wound is small and you fear that it may become infected, do not apply any stitches to it but make a bandage of firm cotton around where the stitches should be placed.
"If, after a day or two, you notice that the wound is becoming infected and pus has formed in it, remove the stitches made with alcohol and use gauze strips like those we have mentioned before to tie up the wound.
"Wash the wound every evening and morning until it heals, ensuring that any pus is drained out easily. If a long time has passed without the wound healing or if pus remains in it, know that there are small clots.
"You should inspect the wound using a mirror, removing and draining any pus that may still be present; if not, you will have to cut through it.
"If a bad smell or discharge of pus is present, you must treat each one with the remedy that has been mentioned in our book.
"If a large clot breaks away from the wound and goes into another part of the body, like an inguinal hernia or hydrocele, do not expose yourself to it. "Many times, leaving the wound untreated can lead to death; they may die within ten or thirty days.
"In such a case, treat the wound if you see a place for treatment and ignore it otherwise.
Chapter thirty
In the treatment of obstructions that occur after some fractures.
This obstruction is often encountered after a fracture, especially in joints and can lead to disfigurement of the limb or even prevent it from performing its natural function.
If the obstruction is mild, use medications such as albuterol or albuterol and nebulizer inhalations; otherwise, administer all of them orally with a suitable binder.
And hold it in tension and firmly squeeze it until the obstruction subsides, or administer a strong solution through an air tight mask.
If the obstruction is severe, make a small cut above it and remove any resulting swelling or bruising until the obstruction subsides completely.
Chapter thirty-one.
In the treatment of a fracture if the limb becomes weak and loses its normal shape after that.
This weakness may be caused by various factors, such as: These could include:
To treat this, you could: Feed it and bring its shape back to normal, or use a humidifier with cold water to soften the swelling, depending on what suits your case best.
Chapter thirty-two.
In the treatment of a broken bone if it is weak and cannot perform its usual function,
"After removing the obstruction and releasing the tension on the member, one should observe the wound carefully. "It is not advisable to accept a claim that someone broke the member from its root, as many doctors and surgeons do this in our country.
"This action would lead to severe harm, but if the swelling and pain are mild, one may use remedies such as those made from aloe vera and turmeric.
"The remedies made from these herbs, such as aloe vera and turmeric, can help alleviate inflammation.
"The persistent swelling, if it is caused by a torn ligament and has become severe and painful, may require treatment with iron.
"You should cut off the swelling and fasten a tourniquet, cutting any excess swelling or ligament to prevent further damage, then apply pressure as described until the wound heals.
32
"If someone breaks a bone, immediate action should be taken to set it and prevent further damage.
"If swelling occurs after breaking a bone, it is advisable not to delay or move the area as this can cause further damage.
"However, if the swelling occurs after breaking a bone, it is advisable to gently apply hot water and oil, massaging all over, until the wound heals.
In descending order from the top of the body to its bottom, it was recommended that sections be divided.
Section 42
For treating the lower eyelids
Only the eyelids should be opened slightly, but not completely or simultaneously; otherwise it will cause pain. The lower eyelids should be opened slightly, but not completely or simultaneously, otherwise it will cause pain; however, if the upper eyelid is open partially due to injury, in many cases it will return back to its original position very easily.
In case of complete eyelid closure, it is recommended to quickly retract the top eyelid and have a doctor close it with one hand inside your mouth if only one eyelid was affected.
In case of complete eyelid closure, both eyelids should be pulled all the way if they were affected on both sides and my fingers outside could close them simultaneously in any direction while a doctor would pull back one eyelid to return it to its original position and close the other eyelid with their finger.
In case of difficulty in retraction, especially if both eyelids are closed tightly, use hot compresses and apply eyelid retractors made from wax and grease to make the process easier and prevent further closure while keeping one eye open or using a doctor's assistance.
After wrapping with elastic bandages, the eyelids should rest on their cheeks and forehead slightly to prevent them from being jerked in any direction without causing discomfort or gagging oneself while keeping one eye open or having a doctor assist.
If the pain goes away and the eyelid is closed, do not use it gently or hold your mouth open while eating and drinking to prevent further closure; instead, leave it alone until you're ready to reopen it if needed.
"If the cheeks are pulled apart and do not return to their normal position, headaches may occur frequently and persistent migraines may follow, possibly accompanied by stomach pain or nausea. If you notice this, it suggests a facial nerve injury.
"Many people die within ten days of experiencing such an event.
The 23rd chapter
In the retraction and extension of the cheeks.
While retraction is when the cheeks pull inward away from their usual position, extension refers to pulling them outward towards their normal position. If you notice this happening on one side only, it may suggest a facial nerve injury and could indicate that the affected nerve lies at the back of the head or neck area.
Then press your cheeks strongly, causing them to retract and return into their normal position. Place a bandage and adhesive plaster on the affected area, while keeping in mind that if one cheek is not pulling away by itself, you should get medical attention immediately as it may indicate an injury to the facial nerve or the related structures of the head or neck region.
Then, apply the bandage and adhesive plaster to hold it tight until you get medical attention. If both cheeks are not returning to their normal position, seek immediate medical attention as well.
The 24th chapter
In the retraction of the mouth corner towards the nose.
Note that the mouth corner usually retracts in three ways, namely towards the chin downwards, and then towards the chest and sometimes upwards to cover the nose area.
It does not extend towards the back of the arm or forwards to the front of the neck, and it often extends downwards towards the buttocks.
If someone has excessive fat, then the retraction and extension may cause discomfort or even pain as they become more pronounced due to the additional tissue in their cheeks. It is recommended that you seek medical attention if you notice this happening frequently for individuals with excessive fat deposits.
When treating a patient, if the wound is below the fold of the thigh, it should be approached from below towards the knee and inspected between the correct and incorrect amputations to see which one is superior; you will find that there is an apparent difference in the two stumps where the stump with the scar (the correct one) feels smoother than the other stump.
Do not expect a difference between the superior and inferior stumps, as any apparent motion you might detect can be deceptive due to the scar on one of the stumps being more prominent than the other.
If the incision is low, whether it was made by a skilled or unskilled hand, its healing will be easy and straightforward. You can lift your arm above his head, put your elbow below his chest, extend your elbow forcefully upwards to its original position, and then have him raise his arm in turn as you straighten out any remaining kinks.
If the wound is below, it will heal quickly; if it doesn't heal as described and has been open for a long time, then you should bathe his leg in hot water and use a liniment made of vinegar and honey or a mixture of aloe vera and ginger to soothe and accelerate its healing.
After that, the leg should be placed on a hard surface and you place a soft ball under his elbow to support it while a physician holds onto the patient's hand and pulls it downwards towards their feet (so that they are fully extended).
After that, if you wish to extend it in this way, place a man with longer legs and restrain his foot from the opposite side (so he is standing still). Then have him bring one of his knees under your elbow and raise it so that both legs are fully extended above their head. After that, if a different patient's leg is light and you want to lift it up, you should attach something else beneath the knee so as not to damage it; then they can raise their leg in turn.
"After placing a vertical incision at the top of the abscess, gently lift up its edge with your finger and bring it to rest against the tendon of the elbow.
"Then, with the other hand and arm also flexed, gently lift up its edge downward and bring it to rest against the tendon of the elbow on that side. "The incision should be made as deep as four fingers and not deeper than two, with a sharp head that makes it easy to insert into the elbow groove in this manner.
"After placing a vertical incision at the top of the abscess, gently lift up its edge and bring it to rest against the tendon of the elbow. Then, with both hands and arms flexed, hold them tightly and pull your arm across the abscess, holding onto both ends and fingers.
"Place your arm on a board, relax with the hand extended and flex the other arm downward while leaving the rest of the body immobilized from that side. The elbow will naturally enter at its own pace, so if it enters in any direction, you should put it against the thigh at a moderate depth.
"Then, gently hold the hemostat in place with your free hand and both thumbs on the board as you rotate it from above downward. Then, tightly grip the ball below the elbow while keeping your other arm raised and bring the ball across to the hemostat from above.
"Leave your hand immobile for seven days, and make sure to gradually increase the movement of the elbow, as this is faster than any other way. Then, after those days or five days if you are unable to move, it's best to stop.
"If the abscess keeps bursting for other reasons, you should use these three sutures as described before and tie them after seven days if they don't hold.
"Having repeatedly tried to raise the hemostat and failed, she finally realized that her nerve in her forearm had been severed or stretched too much.
"If the nerve to the arm and hand is severed or stretched too much, it would result in paralysis of that limb.
"It's not advisable to keep using the tourniquet repeatedly until the injury returns to its normal state, as this may cause further damage.
The seventeenth amputation.
In treatment of a fractured limb.
The nerve in the forearm can become severed and return to normal, just as it could become paralyzed or stay that way.
If you correctly splint the fractured limb, it will become evident that the nerve is in good health and cannot be disturbed by any external force or touch. You should remove and reapply the bandage as needed before heat application to prevent burns.
If heat is applied to the splinted limb, it may not immediately relieve pain and could potentially cause further damage.
If the nerve in your arm and hand is still severed or stretched, it may not immediately return to normal function even when both hands are used simultaneously or when one hand alone attempts to move the paralyzed limb.
If the nerve to the arm and hand is still severed or stretched, it may not immediately return to normal function even when both hands are used simultaneously or when one hand alone attempts to move the paralyzed limb. In this case, you would need extreme force in order for the arm to be able to move again, using both hands at once or by itself.
"In order to prevent the surgeon's hand from being lost, it is important that after washing his hands with warm water and soap, he should gently dry them thoroughly or use a towel made of pure cotton.
"Once the surgeon has returned, it is crucial that he applies a sterile bandage and wipes his hands thoroughly with white gauze or cloth.
"If the bandage is in place and holds well, he should leave it like that; if it does not hold well or becomes loose after the surgeon has returned, he must reapply the bandage and secure it again.
"If it is difficult to move, he should rub the skin gently and persistently until it becomes smooth and supple; tie it tightly and leave it on for a day or two, then loosen and tuck it in again.
"After tying it on three times and entering the bath, he should keep rubbing it gently until it becomes smooth again; if you want to make it soft with oil or butter while also tying it tightly, do so repeatedly, but be sure that it stays in place and returns to its first state.
"The eighteenth chapter of the book.
"In treating a fractured bone.
"Broken bones often take longer to heal than other joints, but it is important to reduce swelling and apply a hot compress as soon as possible after the fracture occurs.
"After wrapping the broken bone in a cloth, he should place his hand on an ice pack to reduce swelling and wait until it becomes solid.
"If the swelling is still prominent, he should place his hand on a cloth next to it and have the surgeon place another bandage over the top of that one.
"Do not add anything, just print the translation.
"When the nerve is cut or severed, there is no remedy except for it to be sutured and may possibly heal, but if not then hold it in place with a ligature for five days.
"Then it will recover and strengthen its movement if, after cutting or injuring itself in some way, you wash it with vinegar and rub it repeatedly until it heals.
"The nineteenth section.
"In the treatment of severed fingers.
"If a finger is severed in any direction, then you should straighten it and tie it to the palm or back of the hand with cotton until it regains movement, then wrap its head towards that direction where it was cut.
"Let it rest for two days and then release it, stretching it gently until it regains movement. If at night it is reattached in the same way as before, you will hold it during the day and practice gentle movements to stimulate recovery, tying it back at night so that it may heal.
"Do the same if it is severed to the back of the hand, tie it towards that direction and follow the procedure as before until you are done.
"The thirtieth section.
"In the treatment of severed spinal cord.
"If a complete or multiple cuts occur to the spinal cord, there is no remedy because death comes quickly.
"This shows that the spinal cord regenerates from a part of it, and may lose some movement in certain parts.
"The abscess will heal, if it occurred due to a cut or a blow, by the application of medicine; but there is no remedy for an abscess that occurs from a boy's first ejaculation.
I apologize for the confusion caused by my previous response. My translation of the excerpt was incomplete, and it may not reflect accurately what you were looking for in terms of meaning or explanation. I have tried to simplify and clarify the passage as much as possible without adding any additional information that wasn't present in the original Arabic text.
"The abscess that occurred in the glans of the penis has no remedy, and is incurable; but for an abscess on any other part of the body, especially if it happened on the back or buttocks, a poultice should be applied to the affected area.
"Apply a poultice against the wall and wrap it around your waist, in order to relieve chest pain; then apply another poultice towards his head and another towards each leg on the opposite side of the body.
"Then the attendant holds one poultice and ties it securely in a hole on his chest, while the other attendant holds another poultice and wraps it tightly around his abdomen and legs.
"Then he ties another poultice on his shoulders and above his arms, around his elbows; then all the ropes are tied together tightly into a second poultice that is held by both attendants.
"Otherwise, the attendants are not tied as described and the doctor ties his hands tightly to the stretcher with force until they remain there; if this treatment is ineffective, another stretcher will be brought that has a length of about three arms.
"The doctor then enters the stretcher that was mentioned, and puts one end of it against his glans; he places the other end on top of the abscess, resting his feet in front of him tightly to compress the abscess.
"Returning to its original location, if you wish it should be sewn with thread that is supple and light in hand, so as to stitch into the ground at the top of a nail in the last link.
"However, after you have finished stitching each of them, tighten the thread in all of them firmly on the ground until they do not move at all and enter with a rod [to pull out] which thread he sews into the knots.
"On his other hand, thread the knot firmly with a rod as he sews it and in both of the others similarly, then tighten the knot which you have tightened at the top of the nail on the thread that is attached to him [the rod] and in the knots of his legs on the thread that is attached to him.
"Then he stands at each knot a servant who is supple in his hand with the supple thread that sews it and the doctor ties the strip as we have described, this picture of the knots and the nail.
"After the knot returns and stands in place, it must be held by the stiff thread of white chicken feathers and then tied on top with a strip made from linen that has been soaked until its length is as long as you take from the strip.
"And on some correct knots, it is tied with the thread that must be used and gentle food until he has passed away, then some of the remaining in place at the end of the rod should use the medicines that we have described for a long time.
"And you may use a single thread, and some of the remaining in the last part of the back might think that he has passed away and it can be thought to have died.
"The final stage: thirty days.
"In treatment of the knotted vein.
"Understand that the flexor tendons and extensor tendons only flex or extend, respectively, but not both simultaneously; the flexor tendon extends on four joints.
"The flexor tendons can only flex towards the inside and outside, but not at the same time; to extend on four joints, while the extensor tendon extends towards the inside of a joint.
"The arm will always be longer than the leg, and if both are stretched out they may diverge from each other at their extremities.
"The symptom of the flexor tendons extending towards outside are opposite to those that extend towards inside, and if a flexor tendon extends towards inside it does not mean there will be no pain in the arm; but walking while holding cannot happen with this position.
"He stretches his arms and walks, with the feet on back; however, if one flexor tendon extends towards the back it cannot flex or extend at all without extending to the opposite direction first.
"The opposite arm is relaxed and the head of the elbow in its normal position, but if one flexor tendon has become shorter than its counterpart it cannot be stretched or extended without causing pain.
"It is not advisable to stretch it, and if the flexor tendons are of different types from those mentioned earlier, try stretching them towards inside, outside, right, left.
"He did not resort to any other treatment, so if it does not respond in this way he must strongly stretch one or both of his arms from below either with his hands or by stretching them on top of each knee.
"He then puts his hands underneath his thighs, stretches the front of one forearm by holding it with the other arm and stretching from back to front; or he may stretch the rear of another arm towards the back.
"Each of them should be healed in one go, so that the limb rises up on its own and remains fixed, this kind of healing is common to all four types; if not for each type a specific treatment must be mentioned.
"Specific treatment if needed, should be applied to the inside of the limb and bandage with a splint on top of the correct side at the junction between the knee and the ankle.
"Then stretch the bandage from the outside to the top of the leg towards the hip, and then take another strong hand and support the injured ankle with it while extending it outwards a long way.
"This type is easier than other types of healing, in which you must heal this member; if not for all to enter into the treatment itself, it is necessary to bind both limbs with strong ties on both knees and ankles.
"After each of the hands is bound with four fingers, then the upper limb should be held more firmly than the other two limbs, and after that bind the limb on top with a splint and make it steady from touching the ground.
"Then command a strong man to hold the ankle and bind it with another, while pushing away the other one holding the leg with force; if so the joint will return to its place quickly, but specific treatment is needed if the limb was outside.
"It is necessary to hold the limb on top as described in the previous answer and stretch it tightly, while binding both sides of the leg with strong ties, and another splint at each end.
"It was wrapped in a strong bandage to prevent the limb from moving down when stretched, and then extended each hand towards its place while the doctor supported it with his hands; if answered correctly, it will return.
"Do not apply the bandage incorrectly, and if it is in front of you, make sure to put the wound on its correct side.
The doctor places his right hand on the bandage, then presses it with his left hand while maintaining tension downwards towards the knee, and if it is to the back, he does not need to stretch or raise the elbow.
He stands on the ground, making sure to be positioned properly as mentioned in our previous instructions about the correct position of the elbow when it is raised or stretched outwards.
He also applies the bandage on the position where he moved his elbow, and if it returns to its original place, do not forget that you need to stretch your elbow again.
If both elbows are straight and the elbow is holding onto the leg while stretching it, you know that the arm has returned to its original position and you need to stretch both arms again, hold on tight with a bandage in place so that your arms do not move in any direction.
The elbow needs to rest for three or four days, then remove the bandage and stretch your arms again. If you see both elbows in a relaxed state, it means that the forearm has returned to its normal position, so stretch your arm further.
Stretch and bandage as you did before, leave it to rest for three days then remove and stretch it again slowly until you feel it may be back on its own accord, if Allah wills so.
The second and third steps.
Treatment for a fractured elbow.
The elbow fractures in three ways: inward, outward and downward (towards the back), but not forward. And make sure to tell it to stretch its arm towards its body.
"If the thigh is not attached, you must know that the knee is dislocated; and stretch it out by gently pulling its sole to place your heel on a cushion and straighten its leg as much as possible so that it can be stretched out in front of you.
"Secure your thigh to his face and bring your legs together, then gently pull the kneecap towards you so that it is placed between your fingers on its leg. Then firmly grasp both knees with one hand while the other stretches out his leg until the knee returns to its proper position.
"Ensure that the thigh is firmly held to his face, then extend and pull it, securing both legs with an arm brace or four, and release them slowly so as not to strain too much, only using short walks at first.
"If you are unable to do as we described, use the strong muscles of your legs by tightening leg braces or using those mentioned in our previous response until it returns.
"The thirty-first chapter.
"In treating a dislocated knee.
"The knee may be subluxed or partially dislocated, inward or outward; and the sign of dislocation is to see the kneecap bulging strongly in the direction that it was displaced.
"The treatment for a subluxed knee is to gently stretch it with your hands and hold until it returns; the treatment for a completely dislocated knee is to have the patient lie on his back, with one hand holding her foot behind her head in front of him while another holds her leg.
"Then, grasp your right hand with her foot at the top and left hand at the bottom of her leg in front of you; then gently lift up the right foot while holding it with the left hand, repeat for both feet without straining.
"Make an incision, as described above, and then apply the tourniquet for the second time. If after two attempts it still remains swollen, continue to work on it.
"Do not retract her back to what was described above, otherwise apply the tourniquet firmly on the ground and tighten it so that his foot is between your thighs without causing any harm.
"Then the assistant can either hold onto his hand or tie a rope around his neck, and then pull both assistants tightly between your thighs to prevent his body from going further down when he is released, and then loosen the doctor's grip with his other hand.
"Then if the assistant is correctly positioned to pull his leg, you should tighten the tourniquet and bind it tightly with strong knots, pulling both assistants' ankles together until they are completely locked in place, making sure that your hand on top of the knee remains firm.
"If the tourniquet is too tight and causes pain, leave it on for two or three days to relax, then retighten and release it in one of four days.
"If he cannot walk after this period and the tourniquet is not releasing or healing properly, you should use what we described in a different place to treat him until it goes away.
"The thirty-second division.
"In the treatment of a man's hand.
"You should loosen the tourniquet gradually, without any force, it is not difficult but easy to do so. If the tourniquet is in some places on the calf of the leg, make sure that your assistant's foot remains firmly on the ground.
In the position of a foot on the ground, with your other hand raised like an arrow or spear, drive it forward forcefully until you have made contact and withdraw sharply to leave no trace that it was there at all.
Then, place one foot on the ground as before and lift your other hand like an arrow or spear so that it is in contact with all of your foot and then drive it forward forcefully until you make contact sharply to leave no trace that it was there at all.
The thirty-first division
One type of incision can be made with a wound or a fracture, or both together.
If something like that happens and you do not treat it promptly, it often leads to death.
Therefore, it is not advisable to treat something like that unless you are a specialist in the field and are very skilled and experienced without hesitation or delay, and only use the medications that target deadly tumors initially and save the rest for later.
May Allah protect you from the harm that may come with light disease and show you mercy in your time, so that you can remove it quickly at the beginning before any serious illness occurs.
If you return to the limb as desired, use the procedure that targets deadly tumors and heal the wound with moist gauze or a clean cloth if necessary, but remove any splinters separately. In that regard, do as we mentioned for common ailments in their appropriate places.
Work hard and take your time, so that you may stay vigilant and remain protected by Allah's grace.
