O you, very dear sons, I have finished this book which is the last of the science of medicine assembled from its precepts and pronouncements. And it has come to my mind that I must finish this treatise which is part of the work of hands, that is to say, surgery
And because the work of hands is fraught in our region and is rare throughout, if it is deprived of science and care, and only remains the small descriptions in the books of the ancients that the hands have performed. And from this comes the error and the emptiness, and are closed the understanding and is alienated the science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.
Or it seems to me that I can bring it to life together the order of this treatment in accordance with the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and the other instruments of the work with the arrangement of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.</start_of_turn> And it befits him who enters this to learn in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he has judged the bones, and the forms and the connections and the separations of them, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and limbs and the number of joints, and the movement of the veins and the rest, and of their issue.</start_of_turn>
And thus Hippocrates said that the pain without the disease is like the work without the art; and the same in the art of the hand.
We say at the beginning of this book that he who is ignorant of the things that are before him, if he is rash and does not reflect, will often do more harm than good; as I have seen many times with these matters that are concerned with this science and if he neglects science and sense.
For I have seen a madman who drank wine mixed with vinegar for scrofula or the swelling of a woman’s uterus, and cut the arteries of the neck; and as much blood flowed out as for a woman to die between her hands.
And thus another time a stone came out of a bladder of a sick man, and the stone was great; it carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and was dead for two days.
And I heard it already called for the treatment, and saw the condition of the patient and the greatness of the stone, and so I knew that if I cut it out he would die.</start_of_turn>
And thus another time a maid came to take care of our lord who had a broken limb, and with the splinter caused a wound; and the physician's knowledge was strained by the fracture above the wound as if by strong binding, and did not allow blood to flow from the wound, and left it until the end; and he commanded that it should not be moved again; and it happened that when the limb was finally freed and the splinter was taken out, it was lost.</start_of_turn>
I beseech you to come here, and I hasten to come and loosen the limb; and when I see it dislocated, it is without pain and without suffering.
But every way the corruption has already been confirmed or the limb is unsound, and it will not recover; and the corruption will continue to rise in the limb as long as the limb is entirely lost.</start_of_turn>
And thus another mire which effracts the abscess, encloses it, and then inflames it by the malice of its lordship.</start_of_turn
For the swelling, when it is full of melancholy humor, it does not suffice to touch it with fire except when it is in a part of the body where one can remove everything that is corrupted.</start_of_turn
And therefore, take heed, for the work of hands has become divided into thirteen parts: that is to say, there is danger in many ways; and I shall show in each chapter where there is doubt and peril.
Therefore, you must always be wary, lest the fools speak falsely of you.</start_of_turn>
If you take your arms in custody, and undertake your patients calmly and firmly, and use the better way so that by the grace of God you may come out whole and sound; and let the dangerous diseases be banished by health; and abstain from your arms from anything that makes you doubt, and hold fast to your life so that you can go from this world to the next in peace.</start_of_turn>
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»
Galens speaks in verses of his admonitions: “Do not take my advice carelessly for any disease, for you are called foolish if you do.”
The first chapter deals with the cautery of fire and dry medicine, and this chapter orders from the head downwards; and the forms of instruments, and the materials of cautery, and all that is necessary for the work.
The second chapter deals with the dressing and piercing of wounds, and the treatment of abscesses, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter orders the forms of instruments.
The third chapter deals with restoring dislocations and sprains, as well as other things; and it is ordered from the shoulder joint downwards, and from the form of the instruments.
Neither do we recall from our work what is the quality of the aid and the great discomfort of a complexion like this.
I say that the quality of the aid, and the discomfort, is the longest word and the subtlest science and the most secret response; and about this many have spoken, and they agree on this; and I am stifled by their words, for I fear the length.
I say that the fire cautery helps universally for any complexion or where there is matter, for there are two kinds of complexions: that is to say a complexion that is hot in the sense of matter, and a complexion that is dry in the sense of matter.
In complexion chaude et seche, assembled matter, some declare that cautery is of great aid; others declare that cautery is of no avail in disease except that which comes from heat and drought.
For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be a remedy for hot diseases by heat, nor by drought; and thus those who say the opposite that cautery does great aid in dry and hot diseases that arise from the humors of the body. For when you compare the body of a man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this saying. For I have never found it to be otherwise by experience.</start_of_turn>
And every way, there is no other way for me to know of this matter except by experience, for I have long observed the chapter of cautery in the books, and the diversity of temperaments of men, and the causes and dispositions of their diseases, and their issues and remedies; for other temperaments I have no knowledge, even in cold and wet diseases.</start_of_turn And all the doctors agree and are accustomed to the cautery.</start_of_turn>
And know this, lads, that fire cautery with secret cures is better than burning cautery.
For the fire cautery is simple, and brings no further pain than to the limb that is being treated, and harms no other part besides that.</start_of_turn>
Burning medicines come from one limb to another, causing grief and bringing about diseases of the limb; and often cause harm to the patient.</start_of_turn
Fire in its height and by the goodness of its substance does not cause this, if there is no excess.</start_of_turn>
And that which I have said to you I have found through experience and through the length of my service and study in this art, and it is confirmed by truth; and for this reason I apologize for the length of my words, for it does not please me to conceal the secret which is reported or fiery, and the quality of work, as it demonstrates the cure of diseases of the body, as the philosopher demonstrates; or you may consider it in your thoughts.
Know this, child, that it is in what degree the cauteries must be made that they agree, and when they are pricked.</start_of_turn>
I say that the cautery is useful in all degrees, for the harmful effects that arise from it are overcome by the aid of the cautery; and even if the cautery is for necessary pains that are urgent and cannot await the degree that is more harmful to the limb.</start_of_turn>
And never think, my son, that the foolish people are right; for the disease which is cured by cautery never returns; and he says so. But it is not so that they cure, for cautery is but a medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors which are the cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine for its promptness of action, and for the virtue of its work and its power.
And indeed, there is one thing that is certain: the disease never returns according to the complexion of the patient and the course of the disease and its power; and there are assembled in him the superfluities by the acquisition of foods and other things, except when cautery is administered in place of these or when there is little superfluity and moisture, for indeed, in such cases the pain does not return any more; but this is often the case.</start_of_turn>
And indeed, many people do not understand that cautery is called the last resort of medicine; but they see; but they do not believe that cautery is better than medicine, but their understanding is false, for indeed, cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we have administered other treatments in any disease and they have not been successful, then we administer the cautery, and it is worth more.</start_of_turn> Therefore, though cautery is behind medicine, it does not accord with the intentions of the wise.
The ancients say that gold cautery is more effective than iron, because of the quality of the gold and the excellence of its substance; and they say that the lead of the cautery does not cause harm, but this is not true, for I have proved it, and have found that it is seen in many people; and gold cautery is worth as much as iron, as they say.</start_of_turn>
And indeed, whenever you burn an instrument of gold, you do not know how much it is charred by the color of the gold and when it has cooled down; and if you burn it too much, there is enough hindrance.</start_of_turn
And for this reason we use our fire cautery as we have learned it to be useful in our work.
Or you have ordered this chapter from head to toe, because in this way the patient will find it easier to recover.</start_of_turn>
Olive oil cautery
Olive oil cautery is good for moisture and cold on the head, and there are many causes of this disease called "soda," and also from many humors that descend from the head as sweat, and from many dreams and pain of the teeth and throat, and even from many diseases that come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
If the patient is purged by medicine that softens the head of the bone, two or three times, according to what the physician deems useful, agreeable and customary for the patient, then make him cough up the head of the bone again.
Then make him sit comfortably between your hands, and put his hands over his head; after that place the root of your thumb on the root of his index finger between his two thumbs; and there where your two middle fingers will be, if it bleeds from the root then withdraw the cautery which is called "olive," for this is the form:
And put away the sign of ink; and make an incision and extract the hand a little and a little, and then fix your hand steadily, and repeat the cautery until you see the bone somewhat; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; then take one mouthful of silk and put on gauze, and take away the wound, and leave it for two days; after that put on a soft dressing.
And they say the old folks, the more time the wound stays open, the more it purges; and for this reason it helps to move.
And they say, none of these people say that we must leave the cautery on for so long that part of the bone is burned, and then we must close what is burnt of the bone, and be cured.</start_of_turn>
And they say others that we must leave the cautery on for so long, and press so hard that it breaks as wide as a woman’s girdle for this reason that the humors issue outwards; and we must leave the wound open for a long time; after that we must cure and bind.</start_of_turn>
And these two methods of cauteries do not seem to me to be very good in all cases, for some men or because of fear; and I believe that I ought to leave it alone; for the head of the shoulder is easily loosened by continuous solutions of nature, as we have seen in other members; and even when the head of the shoulder is weak by nature, the first semblance of cautery is more salve and soothing for me, and for this reason I shall do this in this case.</start_of_turn
From ancient times, pain in the head.
When there is chronic pain in the head that lasts a long time, the physician should use poultices, herbs called "cochie," and purges of head, oil, and plasters; and if we apply the cautery as we have said above, it is of no use.</start_of_turn>
Be careful if the patient's condition is serious and that it is not too painful; otherwise, cauterize only as much as we have said above.</start_of_turn
After you have cauterized the area around the head bone as we have said, cauterize the vein which is called "vasselz"; and hold your hand over it so that you do not see blood until you reach the bone: the patient experiences more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later; and it is better to cauterize the edges than the middle of the wound.</start_of_turn
Dou cautere dou chief When in a part of the shoulder there comes sudden pain, and the disease extends up to the head, and the head of the shoulder is expelled by medicines that are modified, and other cures have been made as I have said in the division of diseases, and all this has not profited: then one must make cautery according to two methods, that is to say by means of medicine and of fire.
The medicine cautery is like this: if you take an alder root, and rub the skin and cover with it. If there are two heads, do the temple or where the pain stays in its part as much as you can to reattach the alder root under the skin; and when it is reattached, if you bind it and stretch it well and leave it for fifteen hours; then take it out and treat the root with vinegar and leave the wound for one or two days; then put on a bandage that will cover the wound until it is healed.
After the wound is cured while it is still sound; and if you see that you do nothing of those medicines which I have written or dose to treat with burning medicines.
The iron cautery is as follows. Shape it like this:
And is called "clos" because its head is made in the shape of a cauldron or pot with a little lip in the middle; grasp the painful area and hold the iron slightly lower than the thickness of the skin; and when half of the thickness of the hair has been burned, release your hand when the artery is not burnt, and there will be plenty of blood.
After putting on cotton wool, remove the flesh from the wound by two days; then put on moist cotton wool, and then cure the wound until it is healed; and if you are going to cauterize this ulcer with the cautery that is called "cultellare", at the tip, and keep the artery covered in this ulcer that is not ancient.
De Emigraine.
When you have finished treating the emigration, as we have said in the sections on diseases, and you see that the cautery has not helped, and that the patient still suffers, then you must omit the cautery which is called the "cultellare" while it is blunt; and mark the skin with a line half an inch long, and hold your hand once, and strain that you do not cover the artery and that the blood does not flow until the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when you move it, and that the patient does not have regret except for the spasm and the pain that comes from the spasm itself, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or from its cutting, for there is great danger and even for the one who does not know it, and who has not studied and is not experienced; and leave the work in peace; but I will tell you later how to retain the blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it is described.
And if you see that this cautery does not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the area as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see that this is of no use, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has a pair of tweezers; this is a better cautery than the previous one and is more helpful.
From the cold of winter the ears suffer pain.
When the ear suffers from cold-induced pain, and medicines and other cures that we mentioned in the previous section have been administered, and the pain persists, then evacuate this cautery which is called the "points," for this is its shape:
After the cautery, smear the entire painful ear or the area around the ear with oil until the pain subsides, then pull out the plug from the root of the ear when you have marked the area with a mark; and there are ten cauteries around the ear; after treatment let the area rest until it is healed
from the torture of the mouth
Torture which must be cured by cautery is not other than those which move from phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make any cautery which has the appearance of those which come from drying and hardening of nerves.
When you cure this semblance of torture which moves from phlegm of hydras and evacuations of head and vomiting, and this is worth nothing, then you must cauterize the patient with three cautery instruments: one at the root of the ear, and the other a little below the temple, and the third between the two eyebrows; and put the cautery over the part which opens well, and make the cautery in the place where the head of the ear is below a little of the edge of the ear, and another in the temple as long as a bean; and leave the cautery there until half of the hair is burned; and this is the form of the cautery.
And it is like the little cutter which we have put before you, but it is a little more subtle and it is better that the knife be a little thicker; after curing like this as I have said, until it is well healed.
When epilepsy is ancient and you cure it as we have said, and it brings no profit, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauteries: two on the two corners of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one on the place which is called "vasselz" as we have said before; and the fourth cauterization on the back of the stomach. And be cured as we have said before.
When epilepsy is ancient and you cure it as we have said, and it brings no profit, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauteries: two on the two corners of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one on the place which is called "vasselz" as we have said before; and the fourth cauterization on the back of the stomach. And be cured as we have said before.
When this disease is given to the patient, large doses of herbs and medicines that modify the brain are prescribed; after which the patient is left with their head bound and placed on the occiput a plaster is put on the sinus which is written or treated with plasters; and this is the method of cautery: if you do it as I have said.
If he is sane of soul, well is he; and if not, two cauteries are to be made upon his head from the crown to the collar, with an inch of space between each; and let him cure as the others. And if you see him adding, and the patient is suffering, make him a third cautery in the middle; and if he is a scoundrel, two others upon the two horns, and cure him until he is sane. And let the cautery which is called "olive" be as I have said before.
If he is sane of soul, well is he; and if not, two cauteries are to be made upon his head from the crown to the collar, with an inch of space between each; and let him cure as the others. And if you see him adding, and the patient is suffering, make him a third cautery in the middle; and if he is a scoundrel, two others upon the two horns, and cure him until he is sane. And let the cautery which is called "olive" be as I have said before. For from the coldness of the head... It is necessary that the head be stripped of hair and what we have said before; after which the patient's head is to be raised and then a cautery is to be made upon the head and upon the cheek, and one behind and two upon the nape of the neck; and if you do more, and the limb is moist and the patient is suffering, and the ailment is strong, make three cauteries upon the nape of the neck; and leave them in place until the pain has passed, and then cure as long as he is sane. And let the cautery which is called "olive" be as I have said before.
De l’epilempsie.
Epileptics should only use fire cautery when it is suitable for the patient, and before that they must modify the brain by other means when the patient is great and suffering from excessive medical care.
And if it is a young child who cannot endure suffering, make them gargle and chew, modifying the brain often with bones of meat; after that, let the patient breathe calmly and then perform the cautery as we have said before, on the veins and arteries; and if the patient is strong and suffering, make cauteries as we have said for those with paralysis and softening of bones, on the spine of the back and neck, or the olive cautery as we have mentioned.
If the patient is a child, make the cautery subtle as follows:
When melancholy is the cause, superfluous humors or corrupted moisture and thick phlegm arise, whereupon the cautery of certain cauteries is indicated as we have said for the paralytic.
And if melancholy is the cause, excessive humors decline to melancholy, and the patient’s body is moist, then one should drink something which will temper the spirit, as is done when there is division before it.</start_of_turn>
After that, take the patient’s head; then make a circle of lint well made, like a circle, and put it on the head; and keep the patient’s limbs crossed, and hold them firmly from all sides; then show the limb and let some old rue de berbis pour it; and burn it with moderate heat, so that it can endure; then take out the circle from the head and let it cool down; do this to the patient every week once with another good diet, until he is healed.</start_of_turn
Or if you see the burn cauterized with making several points throughout the burn. This method of cautery soothes the brain instantly; then put on moist cotton wool in the wound and grease with geline.
Or if you see the burn cauterized with making several points throughout the burn. This method of cautery soothes the brain instantly; then put on moist cotton wool in the wound and grease with gelline. When the pain first appears, as signs indicate which I have said in the division, then begin and make the patient drink something that purifies the head, and keep him away from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe several times without food.
After that you command him to rest his head, and make him cauterize the head, and make three cauterizations on each temple if the pain descends from the head and there are three pains together, or if the pain descends only in one place; and apply to the whole cautery all the veins and arteries that are around the head, and let them be as long as the width of the temple; and take care to prevent excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood spurt out, if it comes from a part that you have cauterized as well.
And I will teach you how to extend the arteries in the extraction and how to cauterize it; and in no case shall you make the cautery or hatereil of bones behind the .ij.
And I will teach you how to extend the arteries in the extraction and how to cauterize it; and in no case shall you make the cautery or hatereil of bones behind the joints of the tears.
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and are on the veins, or cut the arteries that are in the appearance of being of great strength; and it is seen that these are cold, fleumous superfluities, therefore it makes the cautery which I have said at the beginning of this book: to cauterize the head and the two cauteries on the two temples, and to cauterize or hatereil the bones; and if necessary, if there is swelling, make a slight cautery under the eyebrow at all times.
Pain de larmes par dedens les eulz
When you have treated the patient according to what we have said in the previous section, and it has not helped, then give the patient two barley grog; after that, raise the head and do cautery or a mixture of cautery; make three cauteries of the cautery called "clavilis" on the three hairs above the eyes, one at the root of the eyebrows; and take care not to touch the artery. And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the oil of the ointment is softened by disease and moisture, then the cautery of this cautery which is called "olive" is used. And this is its form:
And if you see that you must perform two cauteries on the two nipples which are as long as the nipples themselves; do not leave your hand until a third part of the areola has burned, as I have said.
And if you see that you must perform two cauteries on the two nipples which are as long as the nipples themselves; do not leave your hand until a third part of the areola has burned, as I have said. Never is it that the hairs of the nipples are converted to beards, and prick the oil, and thereby make cauteries in two ways: that is to say by fire or by burning medicine.
Or cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
When they grow and are even, then command the patient to keep the hair long; after that mark upon the hair a figure that is as much like the fuel of a mouse as possible, or as the beginning of a sign beyond the hair; then put a soaked rag in butter and a little salve on the oil, and cover the cautery like this:
After cauterizing on the figure you have marked, and doing it several times, so that the burn is neither too deep nor too shallow; and the sign of the work is that the scab retreats, and the hair is raised to the point of the oil; then take your hand away, and leave for two or three days; then put a soaked rag in butter until the scab has hardened; after that treat with oil until it is healed.
If thereafter these hairs reappear, and the burn is softened, repeat the cautery on the same limb as before; and if the hairs are scorched, burn until the burn returns to its natural state, and is even, and do not prick the hairs with the oil.
The fiery cautery of medicine is that you command to the patient that he let the hairs grow long and even, then make a mark of the shape of a laurel leaf; then take French soap and live chaff, each a third, and grind them together well; and make it hot, if it does not cool, and put it on the mark that you have made like a laurel leaf, and put the burn on the patient’s eyes; and if the disease persists with only oil, if you must open in oil, and if in both; and put cotton wool soaked in egg white on the wound. And the head of the patient must be in its place and put your thumb showing on the medicine, and press once or twice whenever the patient feels a biting sensation of the medicine, for he feels the biting sensation as well as fire. When you have done this for a long time, if the medicine has reached your thumb. And when the biting has passed, if you lift the limb up, and you see the wound raised as much as if it had been raised by the contraction of the fire or by an incision; and if it is firm, it is well. If not, repeat the remedy above the limb or the remedy has not worked, until your works are equal, and your wounds are well-stitched; then put on a wet bandage over the wound until the swelling has gone down, and then cure the wound which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
And if you have taken great care of your work with great care so that it does not need any medicine at all. And if the wound becomes soft afterwards, and the hair is pricked in the oil, repeat the remedy above that wound which has become soft from the wound itself; then cure until it is healed; and that is the form of the chasteberry fruit.</start_of_turn>
And know that the souls of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to that be their restrictions; and do not be afraid to take the right way to the one who is the student of this art.</start_of_turn>
Of the cure for fistula by cautery
When you treat fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then you must cauterize according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to hold his limb steady; and hold his limb between your hands in a firm manner so that it does not move, do not let it hang down; then put a moist cloth or paste of persicaria over the oil; then burn the cautery which is part burned: and it is held to the limb as if it were a pine cone, gather up what is split. If you see that any hair is pulled out from one end to the other, or if you see that there is any attempt; but all this is worth more than your work.
Then press the fistula until it is over, and in traction remove the pus, and dry; and if it is closed, if the work is done, and draw out the wound; then put the cautery on the burn and hold your hand to the cautery at the part where there is no nerve exposed only by oil, that your hands do not make a tremor; and put the cautery in the grease of the oil, and corrupt it.
If you approach the fire cautery at the outset until the bone, that would be best. If this does not suffice, repeat the cautery once more; otherwise, if you have labored over it, leave it for two days. Then put on moist cotton wool in the wound and treat with an desiccant until it is healed. If twenty days have passed and it is still not healed, put on corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and then follow what is customary in this chapter.
And there is a manner of cautery of fistula which none of the ancients have mentioned. Understand fistula, and open the vessel; then put in the slit one spoonful of camphor which is like this in form: and do the quantity of a third of a plum; and hold your hand or palm firmly, and do not move the patient in any way, until the melted wax has run out; and then it is convenient to put on the oil over the patient's cotton wool in abundance, on wax or on earth: the wax will thus adhere to the fistula and the patient will recover with great ease and delight.
And if the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, that is good. If not, if it must be administered through the neck, and return the fistula to its original place as it should be in its proper place.
And if the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, that is good. If not, if it must be administered through the neck, and return the fistula to its original place as it should be in its proper place. And if the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, that is good. If not, if it must be administered through the neck, and return the fistula to its original place as it should be in its proper place
When you have treated these fractures as we have said in the sections above, and the cure has not profited, then eschew.i. perform a small burn cautery according to this form:
When you have treated these fractures as we have said in the sections above, and the cure has not profited, then eschew.i. perform a small burn cautery according to this form: and hold the burn close to the fracture until it is done; after the cure the limb until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
of the abscess of the armpit.
When the abscess comes to the root of the arm or in the elbow, or in the jaw, or there are roots of teeth, after doing so it becomes putrefied and rotten and is swollen and becomes a fistula; and you must cure it as we have said in the sections above, and it does not profit: therefore you must have .i. a burn according to the quantity of the fistula; after the breaking or cutting of the fistula, and hold your hand until it is finished from front to back; and do it once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in the cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, that is good; and if not, you must uncover the limb and remove the corrupted bone, as you would do in its chapter.</start_of_turn>
Pain de mouvement des dents
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you have treated it with medicine but it is of no avail, then put the patient's hand in your own; afterwards remove the cautery whose form will arise later in this part as if you put a bandage over the tooth; and put the cautery into the tooth cavity thoroughly, and hold your hand as long as the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; then remove your hand and repeat the cautery as you please; then fill the patient's mouth with salt and keep it closed for an hour and a quarter.
And in this part, if the tooth which was moving is confirmed, and the soft tissue is restrained, and the moisture is corrupted, dry.
Of toothache.
When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or heat, and medical cures do not help, then it is necessary to cauterize in two ways: burn cautery and fire cautery.</start_of_turn>
Burn cautery: if it is like taking burr from a blister, and the end put in a spoon of iron or tin; after take cotton and wrap over the tip of a rag, and the blister boils, and put on the aching tooth immediately and hold until it is cold; and do this often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth.  And if you see if there is much pus and cotton in the burr, and put on the aching tooth, and put on the iron again until the fire comes to the cheek of the tooth.</start_of_turn
Fire cautery: if it is like taking a cane of iron or tin, and either thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient; after heat the cautery, as it will be shaped later, and put on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cold; do this often, for the pain will be the same or more. And it is recommended that the patient fill his mouth with good burr in the haste of this cautery, and then take hold of it; and this is the form of the cautery:
When scrofula is caused by cold moisture and is not subject to digestion by medicines, then you must cover the burn with a cloth, for otherwise there will be swelling; make an incision on the side away from the burn, and put the burn on the abscess once; if there is mixing, do so until the abscess is almost healed; if the abscess is small, put the burn on as much as the quantity of the abscess allows, and leave it for two days; then cure the wound of boils and stitches when it is healed.
When moisture prevails over the channels of the pores, and even when this comes from a cold complexion, then you must first relieve the patient with solvent medicines; then make the burn at the root of the throat, and keep it from going too low, and do not burn anything except the ulcer; then make another burn at the joint of the collarbone and the base of the spine, which is called the "claw" because of its shape; and cure the wound as described above until it is healed.
De la toust. When all and diseases of the pores are of cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or sweating, and the disease is ancient, if you do him several cautceries on the forcele in his veins; and if there is another cautery between two nipples; or let the cautery which is called the "claw" according to its shape which is before said.
And if you see it, make a cautery by pricking all the cautery which is called "points" because its form is like that in the ear disease; and let the points be up to .xxx., or even more. After cure the limb according to what is said above, and let the cautery be two inches long according to this form:
And for this reason, the cautery is lighter, because you make it twice for the price of one.
And for this reason, the cautery is lighter, because you make it twice for the price of one. When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, soothe the patient on his back and his chest; then take hold of the elbow which is inside the armpit of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, if it is dislocated, grasp the cautery which has two notches, which is the shape of this.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:
And never is the suture done upon this vein because there are nine cauteries.
After putting on the cautery, broil the area with the needle; then rest the patient, and do not let the limb be too tense until it is well comforted.
If it is dislocated downwards, something has happened therefore; then make cautery on the thick hair of the armpit, or several incisions in pricking. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is solidified, and the patient is healed.
If it is dislocated downwards, something has happened therefore; then make cautery on the thick hair of the armpit, or several incisions in pricking. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is solidified, and the patient is healed.
The former said that we must make at pleasure cautery of iris root, and in this manner: take a long iris root, the greatest that you will find, and be dry, and be as thick and long as your thumbs; and moisten with oil, and mark on fire, and cauterize. That is, cauterize between the thumb and the little finger, and two small cautery marks a little lower than the beard; and a cautery between the fifth rib and the hipbone, declining behind a little lower; and a cautery on the spleen, and one on the stomach, and one between the two scapulae, and two on the ribs below the cautery that is between the two scapulae; and do not press too much, but open just as much as when smelling.</start_of_turn>
And they say no ancient man has ever used fire cautery resembling a razor, and they put it between the ribs, until it comes to this incision; and they leap from fear, as we have said in the previous statement about foie. But in this work is fear or the patient dies now, or an abscess comes which cannot be healed.
And they say no ancient man has ever used fire cautery resembling a razor, and they put it between the ribs, until it comes to this incision; and they leap from fear, as we have said in the previous statement about foie. But in this work is fear or the patient dies now, or an abscess comes which cannot be healed.
When you treat the disease of the mouse from what we have said about the divisions of the cures, and it does not profit, then there are two methods of cautery that you must try which are both good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices deux ou trois cauteres, en lignant selon la longueur de la mise, selon la figure du cautère du foie que nous avons dit précédemment; et ne pression pas trop ta main à tout le cautère, et soit li malaide sovins sortir de son dos.
If you are making two or three cauteries, bandage them according to the length of the hair, according to the figure of the hepatic cautery that we have mentioned previously; do not press your hand too much on the cautery, and let the patient move out of his back. Another method of cautery is if you are removing the hair that is around the base of the cautery, if as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and keep the nail which is at the place of the hair, or the edges of the patient’s side come towards the left, and raise the elevation which you support the nail according to the nail, according to the length of the limb, and the cautery should be according to the width of the limb.
After that the hair has been burnt off as much as the nails are perceived from the other side, then take away the cautery and wait for three minutes. And if you see that the cautery has burnt through two hairs, reburn the area. After that the cure must be performed when the wound has regained its natural tension, and this is as much as to say as the other cures mentioned previously.
De ydropisie
When burning with fire is recommended, the patient must be ordered to let the hair grow long and straight; and if he pricks at the root, he must keep his eyes fixed so that they do not move until they are pushed out.
When you leave the burn open for too long to gather pus, and do not make the cure after the burn; and when healing hastens, and you bring together the .ij. wounds with the help of God.
The form of the fire cautery for the belly is the staple which we have before showing; and for the back is olive-shaped, as it is here before mentioned.
because of the swelling of the parts. When the parts are swollen with that which is hydropsic, and are filled with yellow bile, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the bone between the thumb and the index finger; and hold your hand with the cautery in that direction. And do not enter too deeply, otherwise you would burn the yellow bile, and let the cautery be in the form of this:
After do so, make four cauteries in the crease of the limb at the base of the cubital process; and let the cautery be long, one going over the front of the elbow and the other behind, between the limb; and leave the cauteries over a long distance in order to let the bile rest; then cure the other wounds that we have mentioned.
De la menoison.
When cold and moist urine comes from the belly, and the retaining and digestive virtue which is the stomach and intestines is evacuated, and cannot be cured by means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and having great appetite, if you do not do.i. great cautery on the stomach as it has been said above or cautery of the stomach, with the circulation of the cautery; and .iiij. cauteries around the spleen all at once.i. cautery of the umbilical cord and .ij. cauteries on the flanks.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, do cautery on the navel and .i. one cautery on each side, and .ij. several small cauteries on the stomach below the great one; for the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
De la cure des emorroydes.
When hemorrhoids are deeply rooted, or several, and are ancient, and are of gross cold and moist humors, which are corrupted; they are cured as we have said in the divisions, and it does no good if you perform cauteries: namely two on the spine of the buttocks, which is all that suffices to expel the feces that obstruct the passage, and to triangulate; and one cautery on the buttock.
If you think the stomach is becoming cold, and the meat is not cooking, and you see the face swelling up, then on the face you should make one large cautery on the stomach, as we have said before, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen with all the cautery nails; and leave the cautery open for a long time. After curing, keep the body warm until it is healed.
From the charnosite which is called "thelul"
When you touch the "thelul", if you see the burn appears to cut, and then put it all on fire over that "thelul" which is touched; and leave it as long as the burn comes out at the birth of the vein, without cutting; do this once or twice. If there is much "thelul", if you burn each one as we have said; after that treat the wounds that are useful as long as they are healed. And if you burn with a large burn on the fat, there will be more great help.
of wound that is not well cured
When the patient cannot endure large sizes or openings, as we have told you, if any disease comes to pass that can only be cured by cautery.
When no fistula comes, and it is filled with putrefying and corrupt moisture, if the physician has made every possible attempt, and continues to hold them, remove the cautery that appears to scratch, and insert it into the fistula according to the degree of its tension; and repeat the cautery until the diseased part is stiff and corrupt, once, twice, or thrice, according to the degree of the swelling; and beware of the nerves that are cramped and the large veins. If the fistula is close to the bladder or intestines, be wary of these parts and do not burn them except in charnut form. Think that it is not always necessary; after curing the disease as much as possible, if the parts are relaxed and the matter is hardened throughout, then remove the cautery entirely; but if the matter is not hardened, remove only the diseased part, corrupting the bone at the same time; and do so as one of us has said previously.
When no fistula comes, and it is filled with putrefying and corrupt moisture, if the physician has made every possible attempt, and continues to hold them, remove the cautery that appears to scratch, and insert it into the fistula according to the degree of its tension; and repeat the cautery until the diseased part is stiff and corrupt, once, twice, or thrice, according to the degree of the swelling; and beware of the nerves that are cramped and the large veins. If the fistula is close to the bladder or intestines, be wary of these parts and do not burn them except in charnut form. Think that it is not always necessary; after curing the disease as much as possible, if the parts are relaxed and the matter is hardened throughout, then remove the cautery entirely; but if the matter is not hardened, remove only the diseased part, corrupting the bone at the same time; and do so as one of us has said previously. When pain of fruit comes with heavy rains and strong wind, and does not yield to a woman's talent, then it is proper to cauterize the fruits on both sides with the needle cautery which we mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be two cauteries in a line, and it will be more effective.
When pain of fruit comes with heavy rains and strong wind, and does not yield to a woman's talent, then it is proper to cauterize the fruits on both sides with the needle cautery which we mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be two cauteries in a line, and it will be more effective. When the bladder is small and weak with fruit and moisture, if the patient retains urine, then it is proper to cauterize on the lower part of the bladder above the testicles, where the hairs usually begin, and from the right to the left, and make several cauteries as long as a spoonful; and do the same with the needle cautery behind the loin, or two if necessary; and make the needle cautery in the navel as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
De la marris. When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not leave me to do anything else, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are late; and when they come, if there is great pain: then it is necessary to make two cauteries around the bone, as we said before or a cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back; or the cautery of the navel, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
De la hainche.
When viscous moisture descends to the hip bone, and because of this the limb changes its position; the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the hip joint is displaced, if it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the hip bone at the circumference, and to mark in front of the limb around the hip if it is turning, so that the hip is within the circle; and if the cautery is made like that which we have cauterized the stomach.</start_of_turn
And if these burnings are not present, make two olive-oil burnings, and let the burnings be as strong as all the others; and cure until they are healed.
And if these burnings are not present, make two olive-oil burnings, and let the burnings be as strong as all the others; and cure until they are healed. When pain comes to the groin, from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of that which we have said in the division; the cure is not worth it, and the disease is old: therefore it is expedient that you purge the patient of the humors of foul bile, or other pills that are similar.
After that, make the cautery; and let the manner of the cautery be as follows: gather medicines on fire, and do the fire cautery. The fire cautery is done in this way: make two triangular burnings according to this form, and make them of good depth and great, and have between each burning a space equal to the thickness of two nails, and let the burnings be olive oil; never make the burnings in the middle of the groin, for there are three according to this form.
If you see that the burn, done with the cautery around the circle we mentioned in the dislocation of the shoulder; but do it cautiously so that the circle contains the whole shoulder, and all the edges of the burn are firm.
This is how we do it in sciatica when the pain is in the shoulder and does not reach the thigh or the leg. And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, do three cauteries there or the patient says the pain is there, and make two further cauteries below the ankle, one on the left and one on the right; or make the cautery superficial and widen the burn edges; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two or three points or more, do the cautery at the point where the pain is felt.
And if the limb is stiff, if you make more, and if he says that the pain is from the knee to the thigh, make a superficial burn with the cautery or a circular burn, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not burn the nerves and great arteries, and do not cause the patient more pain and contraction.
And I myself have seen several people who have undergone cautery on the ankle of a foot, and left them until the limb was entirely free, and pierced them also, and were pierced and corrupted throughout. After a solution from the belly which brought about their death.
And if the pain is in several parts together, make cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner. // And they say that in the cautery of the thigh, for example, if one does thus, make one such burn and the head as big as a navel-wort, or less, and with tongs or between hooks and from one hook to the other at a distance equal to the quantity of a pea; and let the hooks be over two parts, and be as nails, and there is one palm of iron well made; and this is the form:
And let it be cauterized until it is all red and emits smoke, and then put it on the box of the painful thigh, and turn it on the outside rib cage; and cauterize once more. Leave it for two days; and then make an ointment of butter, and leave the wound open long enough until it is healed.
Albucasim saith that our physicians often use this cautery because of its fearsome aftereffects, and those who have used it; and indeed all of them are scarred bones, which can suffer from it and leave their mark.
Albucasim saith that our physicians often use this cautery because of its fearsome aftereffects, and those who have used it; and indeed all of them are scarred bones, which can suffer from it and leave their mark.
When pain comes to the back, whether from sitting, or from percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from similar spreading of cold matter, of all these signs none are worth cautery, save for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
If the patient is devoid of foul pills or other similar things, make three lines signed with a pinprick on his back, under the armpits where the pain persists; and burn as many cauteries as he can bear; or as many as seem necessary according to his strength. And let the cautery be performed according to the cautery that is called "poins"; and if you see that he needs it, make two or three cauteries at the middle cautery according to this form.
Many times this disease comes with small inflammations, and signs of beginning are that they are stiff and painful when they happen, and fear; and you find it behind the lower spine on the back and on us it appears like that which comes after the others.
When you see this and you see it cured, if you cauterize at the center according to this form.
If the cautery burns some part of the spine, cauterize around the spine at the place where the cautery has pierced. The points should be close together. After the burn is complete, cure the wound until it is healed as we have said, and beware that you do not bring the cautery too close to the nerves.
When the fire cautery burns some part of the spine, cauterize around the spine at the place where the cautery has pierced. The points should be close together. After the burn is complete, cure the wound until it is healed as we have said, and beware that you do not bring the cautery too close to the nerves.
When the joints are affected by moisture that is spread throughout the limb and when the pain comes from inflammation, that is called "podagre." When the cause is cold and treatment with medicines does not suffice, it can be cured by cautery in part: make the burn around the joint at the painful spot, using olive oil in the following manner:
If it is necessary to prick the face of the tooth, when you perform the cautery throughout the entire process, call out "point." If the pains come up to the knee and to other joints, and this occurs many times, perform the cautery on each knee twice or thrice on each side of the entire cautery; and if you must do more, do so, but do not keep your hand fixed for longer than is necessary until the sensation of the burn is gone.
If the pains go down to the knee and the back, administer the cautery as we have said in this chapter. If the pains are in the hands, if you prick around the socket three lines; and if there is no more pain, if you prick on some joint and on the hair of the hand; if the pains come up to the buttocks or to the shoulder blades, if you cauterize some part, and make the patient take good care of himself and give medicine. For if you make him take good care of himself and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
of the route of the face
When the shoulder joint comes out of its socket, and the ball descends like a coon, this is new; if you see the cure for this, do not trust it; and if it uses things that leave the belly open, so that the worms descend from the belly; after that, make the patient sit on his back between your hands, and command him to keep his arm stretched out as long as the ball is repaired, and hold it at your two sides, and mark the exit of the shoulder joint from the bony prominence, and as soon as there is any sign that it is like half of a circle below the ribs; then withdraw the cautery.
When it is soft and secret, and he sweats, let go of the ball and keep your hand on it so that it does not go back; and take care of the patient’s wounds well, and put on him some lint and some serjeants on the wounds, and another on his palm; then put the cautery on the sign at your whole hand, and keep it straight and hold it until you have reached the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and beware prudently that the ball does not slip when you are doing the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or anything worse.
And if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is for nothing. And it is recommended that the cauteries of the small people be subtle according to their measure, and the great people also great according to their measure; after two days cure the burn of the cautery of butter until the scab is bony; after that cure other wounds until they are healed; and keep the patient lying down for forty days until the wound is well healed; and it is recommended that his diet should be scanty, so that the ball does not slip when he moves from his bed to the chamber.
And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, he will find a well-formed scab, which will last for forty days; and he will have had good rest, so that he will work steadily and take care not to eat too much or drink too much, and not to smoke too much; and when he has followed this teaching, he will be entirely healed. And I will speak of the treatment of boils in this chapter. And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, he will find a well-formed scab, which will last for forty days; and he will have had good rest, so that he will work steadily and take care not to eat too much or drink too much, and not to smoke too much; and when he has followed this teaching, he will be entirely healed. And I will speak of the treatment of boils in this chapter.
When wounds come in other parts and are well-known, and you see that they do not grow further, then you should make a burn with the cautery according to their quantity; and either a third or a fourth of the wound should remain unburned. After the cure, do as we have said; and no one has ever said that it should be cauterized at two angles according to this shape:
But first mark the place with a mark and make a line parallel to the breadth of the wound, and another perpendicular, and hold your hand firmly against the cautery clamp. But the first cauteries are lighter and more fluid.
But first mark the place with a mark and make a line parallel to the breadth of the wound, and another perpendicular, and hold your hand firmly against the cautery clamp. But the first cauteries are lighter and more fluid. When pain comes in no limb, whether from swelling or injury, and this pain lasts a long time, and the medicine does not suffice, then it is advisable to cauterize with the cautery known as "points," and to cauterize according to the length of the limb and the smallness and weakness and toughness and twisting of the joint and the degree of pain. If the first cautery is successful, well and good; but if not, repeat the process. Indeed, it is customary to cauterize the part that is nearest to the ailment, for it is believed that this will ensure that the cauteries are effective until the patient is healed.
From meselerie
From meselerie. The sickness is never aided by fire cautery. Indeed, the very disease comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it being cauterized, take warning if the disease is in its beginning, and if it is cured as we have said in the division, do not linger or delay, for you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the whole sickness, whereupon you will make five cauteries upon the head: one at the nape of the neck, the other towards the front at the end of the beard; and two on the two corners, and one behind the ear; and leave your hand there as long as the cauteries come up to the bone, and as long as the pus comes out forcefully so that the vapors of the humors can escape; and cauterize the mouse as it is before.
And if the sickness is scattered everywhere; and it appears manifestly, if you must cauterize from these cauteries which we have said or from the chief, and one cauterize in the neck, and two on the spine of the collarbone, and three on the spine of the back, and one large one on the hip and one other in the groin, and two on the shoulders, and two on the tendons of the arms and legs, and one on each joint of the hands and feet; and beware of the nerves that are on the back of the heel, that you do not burn them; and never make the cautery on the bone of the heel, or on the bone of the stomach, or on the liver.
The hairs that are made long by the fire cautery grow more and more useful; and the patient does not feel pain from the fire cautery as he would from a wound, for the flesh is already corrupted. And it is necessary that the fire cautery be great and small according to the limbs and joints, as you do with herbs. After treating with flour of times with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
The hairs which are made long by the fire cautery grow more and more useful; and the patient does not feel pain from the fire cautery as he would from a wound, for the flesh is already corrupted. And it is necessary that the fire cautery be great and small according to the limbs and joints, as you do with herbs. After treating with flour of times with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
When swelling comes to no limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not well, then one must make cauteries on the limb according to the greatness and smallness of the limb; and either the cauteries should be made at a distance from the bone, or at the very least as close to the bone as possible. And one must not make the cauteries on the hand, foot, or back, except in the case where the nerve is cut that makes the limb immobile. And in such a case, all other parts must be known in relation to the limb and the movements of the nerves that move the limb.
De albaras.
When the disease called "albaras" is present, and the physician's remedies are of no avail, then a cautery is to be performed once with a little burn, according to the quantity of the black bile which has come, until the blenchour is bony and its color is altered; then it is to be treated with flour of times, lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and saffron and alum, one part of each; mix them all together and bandage them with a cloth, and keep them until they are healed.</start_of_turn>
The cure for fistula by cautery.
When a boil starts to come, and you see it stop, if you burn it with a cautery that looks like a circle, all around the boil. And everyone says that we should burn it in the middle of the boil; but in my opinion, that does not seem right, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen many times; and the most direct thing is to burn it around, with the cautery which is called "circle," as we have said concerning cauteries.
When there is an inflammation that cannot be measured...
When someone has a disease called "adubelati" which takes a long time to measure or due to the excess of the disease or because of the patient's weakness (that is to say when there is too little blood), and there is little blood left, or because of tension; and you see that it is getting worse: then you burn around the mouth of several small cauteries by pricking; after that you leave it alone. Because it will soon heal itself.
And if you see the fire cautery burning at its full intensity, if the fire is too hot, the form of the cautery is like this:
And if you see the fire cautery burning at its full intensity, if the fire is too hot, the form of the cautery is like this: place your hand in the middle of the ailment which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has perceived its heat, and be as strong as the cautery that the patient feels a tingling sensation in parts like the course of gangrene is joyous. After the cure as long as it is perfectly sound.
the cure of fire by iron
Another method of disease that is called "corrodens," and is nothing other than a weakening of the limb, for it breaks the limb as fire breaks the dry lines. If you see this disease in the body which can suffer from fire cautery, then immediately burn the cautery small and large, according to what is appropriate to the body or the disease; after the cautery of all parts until you have eradicated all corruption, and nothing remains except what is not corrupted. And then leave it for two days, and put on the burnt limbs that it is sore with oil until the fiery boils are ossified, and all the corruption is gone. After the cure of the oily inflammation. And if after two days that the char remains not healed, this is good; and if this is not the case, repeat the cautery on what remains corrupted. And this weakening is never cured by means of medical treatment instead of fire cautery; but every kind of fire cautery is of greater help, as I have already said in the division: take as much as you need.
Hair that comes out whole like nails.
Hair that comes out whole like nails.
Hair that comes out whole like nails. If it is converted by moisture in the armpits, and often happens in the hands and at the nails, if you must do so, bring a bowl of vinegar or iron, or a quill of sponge, and put it on the abscess and the thumb, that is to say, hair that comes out whole like nails; and put the bowl on so that it embraces all around, then put some warm vinegar, and hold your hand firmly, pressing your hand until the edge of the bowl reaches the root; and you will find the warm vinegar going deep down to the root. And offer the patient a glass of the warm vinegar an hour; then leave it be, and it will discharge all its roots. Like this do another one, until you have removed all that is at the abscess, and then cure the wounds that cause pain.
The cure for tremors.
When some tremble from cold, or from quartan fever or from another, if it is thought that you should make for them three or four cauteries upon the spine of the back, one cautery between the shoulder blades; and one cautery or pinch, and one upon the stomach at the olive cautery; if you leave them to tremble, the sickness will be cured from the cold.
pusules full of pus.
Sometimes appear by discharge the body bathes, or pusules full of pus, which come from corrupt matters. If it is thought that at the first sign they appear that one should make a cautery upon each head of the pusule: a subtle cautery of mustard seed, from which the point should be grasped by the fire, or of elderberry root long, or to the lenticular cautery. And in no case should it be begun when they appear, according to this manner, and it does not prevent the discharge of blood, but is broken by the surplus from which it comes, and is cured; but it is necessary that this should be done after the evacuation of blood.
When the artery is cut. Often there are great discharges of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surgeon, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a mournful thing to extend the wound.</start_of_turn>
And whenever this happens, if you are hasty to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and you strain it out too much without soothing it down, and no blood flows from it; then take the olive cautery and make several small and large burns until they are all red; then touch it, that is to say, make it large or small according to the wound and the limb in which the artery is passing, and put the cautery on that vein or hold your index finger, and hold the cautery as long as it is not fixed.</start_of_turn
And if it spurts violently when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, take hold of another cautery that is in the fire quickly.</start_of_turn
And do not cease to do this one after the other until the limb is extended; and beware that you do not damage the nerve that is below, and that no other evil arises upon the patient; and that as soon as without drawing blood from an artery, you cannot properly fill himself up again even if the artery is large, except by one of the three methods that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not otherwise treated, or by tightly tying a thread, or by medicines placed upon which have power to fill up blood. And let it be bound and strained afterwards.
Whoever comes to restore the limb correctly will rest it tightly with bandages or put warm things upon it, or do other similar things, unless it proves of no benefit in that way.</start_of_turn>
And if this happens to anyone and there is no remedy or medicine present, he must put his thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and keep it still as long as it is under the wound and under the vein; and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often that it may be cold as long as the limb is frozen and swollen and still. And make incisions before those which require cautery and medicines.</start_of_turn>
We have already said in the first chapter that in all diseases where it is necessary to cauterize with fire, or to apply warming medicine, and to inquire into the lesions and their causes, and the instruments and forms of cautery; and in this chapter we will speak of the most legitimate way to proceed in this work, since we have found it to be lighter in this way than in any other way.</start_of_turn>
Moreover, as I have said at the beginning, it is necessary to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapters of the cautery, and for this reason it is necessary to exercise greater caution.</start_of_turn
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you should not be reckless. For many people have come to harm through their diseases; some of whom, when they suffer greatly from their ailments, grow reckless and blame their suffering on the severity of their disease. From such people we must have fear. And from these there are some who will tell you: "Wait, I am wise"; and the disease is dreadful. It is better for me that you give these to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not be foolish but prudently about what you are certain of, and what you have learned; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health is either restored or transformed; and this will help you to obtain lasting fame, glory, and memory forever.</start_of_turn>
Very dear son, our Sirs, your do well to understand and judge, and if you are filled with the spirit of the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.</start_of_turn>
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selon ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.
Or I have ordered thee this chapter by chapters, according to what is before or after the cautery, that I have ordered thee from the head down to the toes, because thereby thou shalt find it more conveniently than what thou hast to do.
Saiches that this disease comes out many times at childbirth, and when the babe’s bail is strained too strong the head of the babe; and never comes from a known cause except that one does not know it.</start_of_turn>
And I have never seen such a disease vanish except in the spring, and with all that I have heard, it seems to me that it is worth leaving the work in parts for cures.
And I have seen many times in my childhood when the head of the shoulder was dislocated due to moisture, and the head grew so large that it could not support itself; and I believed so much moisture that it became blood, and this moisture if it is gathered between the bones above the scapula, between the shoulder blade and the arm; and the work is such that if the moisture is between the shoulder blade and the arm, and the incision is small, that you must make a wide incision; and be as long as .ij. we have seen, until the moisture has gone; and when this is done, the shape of the scapula will be like that of a spindle.
If the moisture is deeper and the incision is larger, if you make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
If moisture is excessive and swells the bone, and if you see the corners of the bone protrude in the lower part, and if it causes pain that increases when you press your hand inwards, and this does not subside: if you suspect that the bone is fractured, make two incisions as described in this manner.
After the incision, drain out the moisture forcefully. Then bind the incisions with cloth and powder, and apply wine and oil, and leave for five days. Then remove the dressing, and cure the wound with stitches and ointments, and leave the limb elevated, and feed the patient dry food until the limb is comfortable and healed.</start_of_turn>
Another method of incision is to look or open the apex of the abscess, and gather the fluid; for it is never in front; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.</start_of_turn>
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.
When the shoulder joint is dislocated and the opening is wide, and the injection of liquid, and you do according to what you are able; and beware that you do not cover the artery; and let the vein flow blood, if the patient dies from excessive bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
When there is no known ailment that is called "cataract," and there are pus or white spots, and the disease is ancient, and the medical cure does not help, then the only remaining cure is to cauterize with that which covers the arteries.
It is not possible for me to provide a translation of the given text as it is written in Old French and requires specialized knowledge and skills in the language.
If you see, hold the sponge under the artery and press above, cutting as much as two thumbs together to pierce through.</start_of_turn>
And when the vein is cut, if the blood spurts continuously upwards, keep pressure on it without interruption.</start_of_turn>
If the artery does not open on sensing it, if you think it is two fingerbreadths wide, mark its end and advance until bone is reached; what is to be done with blood that spurts out if it is more than two fingerbreadths, or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the point of the spur, if the edges of the incisions do not reunite, then strain the wound and ligate it, and cure it with dressing until it is healed.
If the artery does not open on sensing it, if you think it is two fingerbreadths wide, mark its end and advance until bone is reached; what is to be done with blood that spurts out if it is more than two fingerbreadths, or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the point of the spur, if the edges of the incisions do not reunite, then strain the wound and ligate it, and cure it with dressing until it is healed.
When ancient dropsy comes, and acute fever, because of tears and the heat in temples and old saliva forsened and similar things, it is treated by means of medical cures and everything that does not help, if we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have said.
And thus the manner of extracting them is that the patient should make the hair of his temples grow long; and he should understand the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating; and is much more easily restored than in some men who are too cold. And if it is restored, he should strain his neck the patient of some cloth, then wipe the area with no rough cloth, and raise the area with warm water until the artery opens openly; then take the sponge which is like this:
Then he should gently stretch the skin until you see the artery, and then pull it high towards the pincushion, and withdraw it well from the tissues that are under the armpit; and if the artery is tense, if it has a bulge at the tip of the bone, then press that part according to the amount of pain. For if it is not pressed, it will not jump out without pain all at once.</start_of_turn>
Then he should drain blood from the armpits, up to two inches; and if the artery is large, it is expedient to ligate it with two strong silk threads, so that no blood will be seen in front of the wound, and the blood will drain away; then cauterize the surplus that is between the two ligatures in that place, and then, if you see, burn the hair with a fine cautery until the hair is cut; and this is the best remedy, if the patient has no fever and is of a warm complexion.</start_of_turn>
For the fire cautery is helpful to finish off moisture: for this is more helpful with moisture. For it is useful to extract the arteries that are full of fat and put on well-made stitches; and when you take them out, if you are cured of dry medicines that cause char and stitches, as long as you are sane; and if without support of the artery as you must do if you do this too quickly, or if you touch the vessel with the vitriol, it will stain your hand; and if you do not have this, you must take out the vessel until it is frozen, and rise the cold water until it stops, and strain as much as it is possible; and what is more limp and lighter in the extraction of the artery is to cauterize the vein of this cautery at a distance of .ij. inches, but the incision must be well spaced to prevent lasting too long its heat. For when the instruments are too tight, it holds less heat. The fire cautery must have between the joints a space of one inch; and when you have marked the area with a needle, you must let the fire burn until it reaches the bone, and then close the vein with one inch of leathers; and let the hair be plucked out between the needles, for it is not soldered by this cautery in any way; and this is the form of the fire cautery.
The fire cautery must have between the joints a space of one inch; and when you have marked the area with a needle, you must let the fire burn until it reaches the bone, and then close the vein with one inch of leather; and let the hair be plucked out between the needles, for it is not soldered by this cautery in any way; and this is the form of the fire cautery.
When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are above the test of the chief of force, and it does no good to medicine what is done with it, and you see the face of the patient to be twisted, and feels or front of ambulation as if of a madman; and though they are tense and moist if the hair of paper is held close, and are scattered the papers, and scorched by the heat of the tears, if there is any hope of this cure.
And they call it the ancient "cure contuse," and you must make at the patient who has this ailment the hairs that he has over the front, then make two incisions or an even front according to the length of the front; and let one incision be as much as one-third of the front, swallowing down juice until it is level, and the other one-third has one-third of the ribs below the papers, and keep the incision of the arteries that are one-third below the papers; and align your hand from the continuation of the mandible, and let there be some wound according to the quantity of two-thirds that must go through the joints.
from the incision which is over the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the marrow that is between the two incisions to the outer surface of the bone, then make the other half of the wound until the other second, and then pull out this clot.</start_of_turn>
If in the first incision the instrument which is called the "cultellaire," and is very well grooved on one side, and on the other side is smooth, is not deeply grooved, and that is its form: If in the first incision the instrument which is called the "cultellaire," and is very well grooved on one side, and on the other side is smooth, is not deeply grooved, and that is its form.
because of the return of the blood
When no acute cautery is used, and you see the eyes tense and small, and the pupil dilate, and the papers burn; and the hair cries out, and where the chief has been pricked, there is great pain, and the patient coughs; then from these accidents arise matters and catarrh which do not come from many veins, but from many blood vessels.
Command the patient to wipe his brow, then make a large wound from the left temple to the right temple, and from there to the bone. That is to say. From the incision of the left temple to the right, go down to the bone; and grasp the nerves of the temples that move with swallowing. When the bone is exposed, drain all the blood from the wound with a sponge, then remove the clot between the two layers of the wound and put in cotton wool. Then cover with damp cloths soaked in wine and oil, and keep it dry. When it has healed, it is necessary to rub the bone until it begins to grow, and then cure it with drying things that cause the hair to fall out.</start_of_turn>
In part: take .ij. parts of wheat flower and .iiij. parts of colophony, and make a poultice; and apply it to these wounds to cause the hair to grow throughout.</start_of_turn>
From the swelling of the ears
Everything that causes pain in the ears is one of three things: grains, or boils, or stone or similar objects like iron; or seeds, like lice, beans, peas; or fluid things like vinegar and urine and similar things.
When there is pain in the ear due to a stone or other object that does not fit into the ear, do not put your finger in the ear. If you see a stone, if there is no discharge of violet oil or lavender oil, then seek extraction; and let him vomit of concoction, and plug the nose when he vomits, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and keep the ear still. Many times this cure will come out; and if it does not come out, seek extraction with fine needles, as this is the form:
If it comes out by these needles, it is well done; if not, seek extraction with fine needles of double curvature; and if it does not come out by this, make an incision of an inch and a half and cut off the chief of the incision or pierce the ear very deeply, and squeeze out what is around the incision mole if it comes out with the incision; then the pain will disappear, for often it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out partly, take hold of the bone with your thumb and index finger and put under no instrument that has a point for this purpose, and put a patch of cotton around; then press the thumb on the bone or whatever it is, and the pain will go away. If these things do not suffice, if you are in a hurry to make an incision at the ear-lobe along with the abscess chalaz, and spasm, do this: first make the patient comfortable and loosen the hair of the head; then sit the patient between your hands and turn the ear downwards, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fatty or glandular tissue; and let the incision be as wide as a crescent, as long as you live to the bone, and the bone according to your will; and evacuate the pus immediately from your mouth. If grains are seen which are swollen and inflamed, administer extraction; and if it cannot be extracted, administer sponge-rubber tightly according to this shape:
But do not make this incision if you think the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract the grains with tweezers and suck out the pus, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
When the ear is acute, then the patient must immediately apply a compress to the ear and fill it with cotton wool. And whether the pain is on the same side or the other, if the ear jumps for this, that is good. If not, if many stones are taken out according to the length of the ear, then keep them tense and limp, and dig one into the fire; and put the patient one or two of his ears into the fire, and take out the rest from the other side, and fix one on the side which is in the ear; and do this until the pain is all gone. And if you see that the pain is not going away, take hold of one of the ears and burn the other until the pain is gone; then do the same with the other ear until the pain is gone, as we have said regarding the stone.
In the extraction of the ear, if it is of small size, like a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size, we must feel it, if we must extract teeth; and this is the easiest thing to do in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ear, when you have cured as we have said in the division and or performed distillations, and the cure does not help, if you must know if there are worms, look at the ear in the sun: if there are no worms visible, if the treatment has produced subtle toothaches, and if there are none visible, take the tweezers which are like this:
And let the dressing be broad and soft. And keep the most subtle head in the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then proceed with all the skill; do this often until you see them come out. And if they do not obey to issue, if I am pressed in the cotton as I have said concerning the stone; and if they do not go out forcibly as we have said, if you administer distillations which the ancients have proved useful in the cutting of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, thus is the form as you see.
And let silver or gold be stripped out of eight petty losses, and over this let the distiller be put; and press down with this instrument of lead well made for this purpose. If you see a scraper and wrap around it with cotton from the point forward; then pour out your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the cotton, and put the cotton in the ear; then press down the scraper with all the cotton, and press your hand steadily until the oil is distilled or the ear is almost empty. And let the patient feel in the ear, and let the distillation be neither too hot nor too cold, for the medicine will not be so good.
From the swelling of the ears.
No child is born without some imperfection in their ears; and the same thing happens as adults with wounds or tumors that protrude into the ear, for these protrusions never come out of the ear unless they are seen; and never is there such a thing as perfectly formed ears.
Whenever they protrude into the ear without being seen, it is a sign of serious illness in many cases; and in this case it is clear that you put the diseased ear in the sun; look inside: if you see the swelling, if the swelling has filled the whole cavity as far as it can, then it is formed like this:
And be it greasy or rough before and behind all around, if it does not bleed the ear; if the swelling is of a tumor or cartilage of the ear, if you find subtle fractures, and the swelling is slight, as long as the tumor is completely bony
And if swelling arises in the ear, take one small burnisher and heat it slightly over the fire, then apply it to the ear. If you feel the swelling which the patient feels in the ear, pierce slightly, and keep only the outer part of the ear; then put in the ear a sponge according to the size of the hole, and pour in a little unguent Egyptian.
Do not do anything until the wound is healed, or take a sponge and soak it in rose-water, and sprinkle vitriol powder on it; and if you see the ear flee, you must remove the sponge and insert another sponge made of rue oil and wax, until the swelling is ossified; then treat it until it is healed
If discharge of blood comes, immerse a sponge and cover it with cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments which will solidify the discharge of blood which are to administer distillations.
De la char des papiers.
From the heap of papers
And if without any decor, if the cautery of the lenticular lentil and the cautery after the incision is worth moving; and many times repair, can no longer remain from their root; and when they are cauterized by fire, if they are burned those roots and do not return anymore.
From the bark of the tree.
Many times come papers of blood from eyes that seem to swell in their form and duration; for this is the disease called "granulinea," and is an assembly of great moisture in the marrow below and above; the work is like this: take guard if the granulinea moves from one side to the other, and it is a light thing to know; then make a generous incision, then gently strip off the outer layer, then take hold of the tweezers and grasp. If you do not grasp it in the right direction, you will not perceive the marrow; and if the fracture is great, if the assembly has a structure, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do not make force, for the marrow will restore itself quickly and cause harm.
And if the granulinea descends downwards from the ear towards the upper part, if you reverse the marrow, extend the granulinea with tweezers, grasp and press from one side and the other; and if the marrow is loosened by the incision, this will cause no harm; and when the granulinea is grasped, if you leave the dirty oil, cure the limb of that which causes harm until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the blood.
The wax is thick and adheres to the tissues of paper, which is more noticeable in the morning; for in the morning there is abundant mucus in the eyes, and the tears run down the face so quickly that they cannot be seen in the sunlight. Because of this, the eyelids are often closed and the paper dries on the eyelashes, becoming moist with wax that covers the surface. And when you press the hand to the chest and feel the wax between the fingers.
When the patient puts his hand in his bosom; then take one cloth of linen, and make a circle with your thumb according to the quantity of wax in the chest; then put it on; then press with your thumbs from one side and the other, so that the wax is gathered into a circle; then make an incision about the width of a vein, without making it any larger than the wound made in the vein; and when you have finished, the wax comes out of the incision, according to the form of a white lump of fat.</start_of_turn>
Pull out the lump entirely with a sharp knife between your thumbs, and turn your hand to the right and left as much as possible; and keep that you do not touch the edges, until you have reached the bottom; that you do not stain it.</start_of_turn>
If the dislocation does not reappear at the start of the wound, if you expand the wound slightly until it opens; then draw out the foreign body as we have said, and moisten with wool and water, and place back in the limb, and strain the bandage.
If there are such fools who break their bones and place on it to corrupt the moisture that has gone dry. Then cure it until it is healed. And if it comes to the limb being cut through again, if you cure abscesses that are bursting as much as they are healed.</start_of_turn>
hair of papers</start_of_turn>
When paper-like substances grow hair-like, adjust them from their natural state and they are enveloped; if they prick the eyes, they cause tears and produce various diseases like common weeping and softening of paper and mucus, up to the point of destroying the eyes; and the cure for this is in three ways: either by entire fire cautery, or by water-based medicine as it is before or alongside fire cautery, or by incision and stitching or by sutures, as I shall say.
You must put the patient’s chief in your left hand, then draw out the paper from your right hand; if it is softened, it is well done; if not, if there is an awl with every thread of hair below; either cut the margin of the paper or the hair grows out below those hairs, and draw out one thread at the root of every hair; then press on the lower part of the paper, pressing out the hairs that have been adjusted, over the entire area up to the great tear until the small one; then draw out one thread and put a small patch of cotton and bandage on the paper, then mark on the paper a figure like a spurge, like the spurge of myrtle, and it is enough that the figure be according to the quantity you see raising the paper that is designed for you.
And if there is a part that has met with great quantity of paper according to what the paper is softened; then do over the whole area up to the twenty-fifth lines that you have marked, and from the great tear until the small one; and if there is one of the incisions close to the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then stretch out the ointment in one of the two angles of the wound, then tighten; then join the two lips with a suture of a needle with every thread of fine silk, and wipe away the blood, and make the excess threads on the two edges of all things sticky, as you see me do; and if you do not see this, if there is no remedy, then leave the suture and the threads for two or three days; then cure the wound with stitches of dry and constricting things, because the paper is renewed at the bottom of the wound and the joining of the two lips, but the suture is useless (as they say the old ones), and this is work without fear;
And if in another way: if you mark the mark with a figure that is just like the head of a myrtle berry, as we have said, then you must take two needles and evacuate them according to the form that is here.
Then close what is above with small forces evenly according to the form that is here
And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the thing is not equal, if you take a needle or there is some thread, and you sew it through the mark; and you take another thread of greater length, and the second thread of lesser length, and you assemble between these two the threads equally; then hold your hand equally, and hold all the skin above where you have marked, as we have said, then assemble the two layers of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healed; and if there is an abscess at your incision, if you apply grease and other soothing poultices.
And never has it happened that the hair of the armpit is converted: if you use what we have said of incision; but the costure in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure for varicose veins is as follows: convert the armpit hair and fat according to what has been said, then make three veins by art, and two fine threads as long as the hair and as wide as a sparrow's foot; and take three hairs from three parts or hold the threads. Then assemble the one and the other securely above what rests on the oil of the hair, and strain the two veins from the two parts forward; and leave it like that for a few days. The leather which has been strained will rot and decay and will become loose, until it disappears by itself.
If it is late, if the swelling has increased, then cure until it is healed; and when the wound has healed and the hair has fallen out, they will no longer prick. This is the form of the three veins that you will make according to this figure and according to this quantity of length and width:
The work is thus: take a subtle hook, and there is in it a thread of silken thread. Then join the hooks together and do not twist one with the other; and let the length of the threads be equal. Then order in the chase another thread of silken thread briefly, and do not twist them together. Then put the patient's thumb in its place. And let there be no shadow if the work is completed, for it is a subtle and small work. Then draw out the hook at the whole chase until it pierces in the root of the hairs with the natural position. Then withdraw the hair until there remain one or two or three or more. Then withdraw your hand until the vein is fully exposed at the whole chase with the natural position.
If the chase is treated and the hair does not come out with it, if you draw out the chase to the end of the thread that you have ordered, until the chase vein comes out from its pierce and you see it by the light of the oil; then if you draw out the chase and the thread, close the oil and leave it closed for two days or three, until the hair has healed in its place and the wound has closed.
of the putrefaction of the oil
When this ailment which is called "aleacrati" or the coming forth of an ulcer appears in oil, if there are two possible means: one natural, and the other unnatural.  And it arises from a wound, or from a bite or from cautery, and from similar things.
And the way to perform this work is that you make that suture, and dry the flesh of the wound, and put in between layers of linen, and leave it until it is healed; and do not use anything but dry and astringent things in the treatment of it. For if you do this, if the ailment returns worse than before; but there are things that are softening, such as fennel; and vinegar or salt and linseed seed boiled together, and fat dissolved in any oil, and it covers a layer, and treats this.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you must take care that it does not heal differently from the way it was before; and this work that we have mentioned is not fierce except in addressing this ailment, that it does not return differently from the way it was before.
De la char qui vient en l’oil.
From the burn which comes from the oil.
And if the burn figure in the wound as it should, that is good; if not, take a needle and put it in the wound, and draw out the burn, make two incisions or break off the edges of the burn; and if there are two incisions at the two angles of the incision that you have made, and make an angle so that when they are joined together, the figure is as that of a letter which does not have a “j” in it; then break that bone according to the quantity of its cost and burn, of that which teaches the burn, then join the two broken parts, and bind them with a thread of linen; then treat this with the medicines that we have said, and of bandages, until it is healed.
If the ailment comes from a fracture or sprain or cautery, if you must make an incision, make a complete incision over the hair and cover with paper; then withdraw between the two books of a tent, as I have said; and must be made according to the form of the ailment, for it is diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to know well everything that pertains to making the figure return to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what is proper in more diverse situations.
If the ailment comes from a fracture or sprain or cautery, if you must make an incision, make a complete incision over the hair and cover with paper; then withdraw between the two books of a tent, as I have said; and must be made according to the form of the ailment, for it is diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to know well everything that pertains to making the figure return to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what is proper in more diverse situations.
When this fracture has happened in the hand, at home in a partial manner that the limb of the patient is solidified with oil, and cannot move or do his natural works, if you must do so, then you must bite the edge of a scraper from the underside of the limb and leave it high up; and extend as tightly as necessary, until you have reached the point where you see the sprain, so that neither the patient can suffer too much pain nor too little, for the patient will not tolerate too little or too much; and your incision, which you should make carefully, must be just wide enough to reunite that which is broken, so that the limb returns to its natural shape; and when that is done, reunite all that is broken, and do not wash in salt water, and lift out cold water, and vinegar; then put between the limb and the oil a bandage of linen, and put on top of the oil wool loosely bound in abundance; and after that put on a layer of vinegar and other things that are soothing until it is healed.
De l’ungle de l’oil
Of the oil of the unguel
And the manner of the incision is that if the patient puts his head in his right hand, then he will hold the eyes; and hold the instrument in your hand, then coil the unguel has small double curvature, and stretch it out; then take a needle, and put in it one hair of horse, or of ox, or of beef, and one strong thread; and double the point of the needle once and fix it firmly with the unguel, and pierce it through all the needle, and tie the unguel with a thread and stretch it out, and protect at all low the cost of the unguel which teaches the prunele and the hair to the oil, and leave the nature itself or the mucus, if in the incision there is not the crust of tears usually; and never stretch the unguel only by the incision and the thread, as we have said; then protect all the surrounding area with wool, and this is the form:
And keep that the cautery does not touch the thick cloth and breaks it, and that the needle does not pierce through; and after the incision, pour a little solder into the oil, and put a bandage over it, and leave it until the other side is reached; then cure what has happened as much as possible until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push out the needle, and the thread will not go in, many times this semblance of a nail of medicine is cured; and as I have said in the division, if you see it covered, if you can, pour oil over the patient, and take the cautery lighter in this form:
And remove the nail slowly, and if you see that it has diminished a little and the edge is pressed, if you distill from your mouth into the oil bandage made of alum, and red alum and solder, and stamp the oil until the other side is reached; then repeat the other work in the same way until it is entirely healed.
If nothing hinders thee in oil, as with a postulation, then milk, and first cure the postulation by burning it while it is sound, then resume the work as before until it is sound.
If it appears that fat has solidified in the oil overnight with great nausea, if you suspend it with alum, and take a part but not all of it out, that tears will not arise; then distill in the red oil of poppies which is made from litharge.</start_of_turn>
of the flesh that comes from the navel.
The eyes of some people never burst into flame; they cover the pupil and bind upon the papers and press to the brim, and seem like a rosebud; and the work is such that if the patient puts his head in order, then he will see the eyes, and behold, all that flame has a commendable amount of force; then grasp the first flame, and go on grasping until the end, and keep only that which is necessary for the work; and let the incision be as we have said in the incision of the vein and have small forces to hold the bone loose, as it is shown after this chapter.
When the incision is complete and the bone is loosened, if you use boiled oil of rue or you distill camphor, and similar corrosive medicines, and apply a cotton swab soaked in vinegar, if it is well secured; and if it does not move, and you doubt the depth, if you leave the oil and cure the abscess with soothing things that calm the abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and do as many flames as are added in the oil by this appearance.
But it is necessary to nourish the cure with a weak oil of natural origin; and in the work of iron; and do not be rash in any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from that work.
Des voines des eulz
From the veins of the eyes
The veins of the eyes are two in number and are graduated by degree in one inch in this form:
The veins of the eyes are two in number and are graduated by degree in one inch in this form:
If thou canst not collect all this in that hour, make an embalmment upon oil of soothing things to relieve the pain of the eyes, and leave them thus until the pain is appeased and is assured from aftercare; then begin again in this manner as before until they are healed; and that is the form of safety.
If thou canst not collect all this in that hour, make an embalmment upon oil of soothing things to relieve the pain of the eyes, and leave them thus until the pain is appeased and is assured from aftercare; then begin again in this manner as before until they are healed; and that is the form of safety.
If thou canst not collect all this in that hour, make an embalmment upon oil of soothing things to relieve the pain of the eyes, and leave them thus until the pain is appeased and is assured from aftercare; then begin again in this manner as before until they are healed; and that is the form of safety.
And when the bone is fractured, and you see the corruption and blackness, if the limb has all the characteristics of this form, it is called "aspire chief," and is made of ivory, that is, a chief rent, or pointed as with a file when it is in this form.
And lay on the limb the fractured bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand until you sense that the corruption is gone; do this only once, then restore the limb to the exiccative medicine.</start_of_turn>
If the limb is swollen, and the pain does not cease, and the swelling of the limb is swollen, and remains for forty days, and does not heal, and is not cured by any other means, save only to open the fistula once more by force, and by medicines that are strong, and when it is fractured again take hold of it as described above: at an angle of two right angles, and the fracture be thinned down to the chief as you see here.
Then place your thumb on the bone below the armpit, and wipe your hand with oil. Immediately, straighten your arm until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through his hand which is resting on his elbow. Then restore the dry medicine to its place, as I have taught you, and when the wound is healed and firm, if there is still any matter in the elbow; if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
Then place your thumb on the bone below the armpit, and wipe your hand with oil. Immediately, straighten your arm until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through his hand which is resting on his elbow. Then restore the dry medicine to its place, as I have taught you, and when the wound is healed and firm, if there is still any matter in the elbow; if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
When the wound is open from all sides, and there is no danger of displacement of the bowels, no reduction, if you must bind the patient; then stretch the limb, and put on compresses or a dressing in the direction of the wound, then apply oil.i. with acaice and aloe and incense and ochre, then strain the oil and put it on pads and bandages; and keep the bandages if you take bandages thick enough, and double chescun in .iiij., and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity of oil there is in the wound; then strain by pressing down on a stiff bandage. Repeat the compresses in the direction of the wound. Then support the compresses and leave the oil strained for a night, and if the limb is relaxed, if you remove it by mouth; then support the limb again after the night and morning, and if you see the oil returning, that is good; if not, repeat the dressing and bandages and the limb and the compresses until it is healed.
Dou derrompement de toile uvee
When the dislocation comes in the shoulder and is forced open, and there comes forth paper like barley grains; it is expected to see; then if you see it covered, the work is like biting a needle at the root of the lower part until under that, and then insert another needle or there is a double thread of the lower part; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle as it lies; then join the double thread and bind a part of the upper arm, and strain it well, then draw out the needle and put on oil cloth soaked in eggs; and leave it as long as the thread remains with the shoulder, and cure the oil of comfortable things until the wound is healed; and never restrain the wound by the shoulder strap part of a circle of silk, until it is healed.
And if the wound has great appearance, if you prick at the soft tissue which comes from behind the oil, and correct the moistness of the albumin and pull down the wound, and enter inside; then draw it out as long as it is healed.
De la bowe de l’oil.
When the bowl of oil is applied. This disease which is called "alcunnati" is not fierce except when the bowl is assembled in oil, resembling descending water, which is not blood; and the manner in which this appearance comes about is that if you make the patient sit down on the seat which appears and is straight, then take hold of his head with your two hands from either side, and move him until you see the bowl coming down towards his eyes; then either bind him, and do not let him descend and remove the light, and see the patient do the same things as before; and if it does not descend by itself, salt which is like water, and when it descends from the bowl is not apparent as we have said. If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the sponge and put it on the corner of the cloth. That is to say, by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cloth and the crown, as long as the bowl is there; and when it comes out, distill in the warm oil mixed with honey, or vinegar or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then be cured of another remedy until it is healed.
from the bowl of oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis serre l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.
After a short rest, if the water returns for a second time, put the force with the instrument. And when it is firmly secured and will not rise, gently remove the instrument slightly by circling your hand back and forth; then pour a little water on it again, and leave the oil out. Then put on clean oil-soaked bandages or lint and tie with the healthy oil. We and those who are with us put on broiled broth with plenty of eggs.
And if the almagda will not enter the oil because there are parts of flesh that have too thick hair, it is expedient that you take the instrument which is called the «alberit», which is like this:
And therefore pierce the conjunctive solely, and do not linger too long, but make a subtle incision, then insert the almagda as we have said; and when the work is finished, the patient awakens, in whom he sleeps on his back in a gloomy night; and let there be no movement of any kind, and take nourishment easily, and do not move the head to the right or left, and bind according to his disposition until three days; then take it out of the house in the same gloom, and express its gaze, and let him see nothing, and then put it back in place until the seventh day; and do not let me that you do this during the treatment or after the incision now, but it must be that you nourish this, for in this way the pain will subside rapidly.
And so, after the incision, blood comes out; therefore take out the oil before the seventh day, and replace it with that which soothes the abscess; and when it is calmed, take out the gaze and put on a bandage, so as to cover nothing more; and keep it in this house until it is healed. And then go out of the house and come in, and it will change in this way; and do not let anyone interfere with it in this case.
And one came to us from Iraq who said that in his land they used to make an almagda of oil every day, when the pain occurred, but we have never seen or read of it in our land or in the books of the ancients; and it is a new thing for us
And these are the signs of the forms of an almond, for he who does not know them will not recognize them; and they are like spiders properly:
And their heads are of this same subtlety, and their backs in two angles like a goosefoot.</start_of_turn>
or like the spur of a rooster from the breast.</start_of_turn>
Or sometimes newly-born or old hairs appear various, as if there were scorpions with mouths like spiders; and if there are such or if there is hair entangled with foul matter of a dark color, or if there is hair of a tawny color like sulfur. In those in which there is sulfurous hair and is not entangled, it is to be understood that you must make the patient sit between your hands and expose his nose to the sun; and cover his nose, and spit onto those hairs, and drive them away; then grasp what you have put under the thumb of the subtle gut and hold it until you are certain that that hair is completely broken.</start_of_turn
If nothing remains to hold it, if the opening has reached its utmost extent, if nothing is left to hold; and if without being warned, or by incision, if any support fails, if it is a malignant abscess, hasten and cauterize as much as possible until the surrounding tissue is unstained and all the vessels are closed. Then withdraw or do not withdraw easily or with pain or wine.
If he does not vomit and moisture comes up to the throat, the vomit that is left is sane; if moisture does not come out as it should, there is pus in the bones beneath the skin; therefore, do not put anything into the throat: it is better to give him a mouthful of coarse thread and keep the hands busy, and put between each knot no more space than a thumb and a finger; and put the patient’s hand over the thread at the front and his hand over the mouth at the back, and clamp one after the other as we hold with our thumbs and index fingers; do this until you have clamped that vessel, then pull out the thread, wipe the vomit, moisten the thread with Egyptian balsam and put it back in its place as before; do this for two days or more, until the moisture has eaten away everything that is left of the vessel; and then put in or remove a cautery for several days until it is healed, and if there is any need for calming medicines, use them also. This is the form of the instrument for extracting the head, from which we distill oils and medicines or not.
And it may be of silver or of brass, resembling a broad lamp, like a cauldron; and you shall carry it thus; and if you see, make a closed loop, and the instrument will be flat for purging the head; and hold one hand at the head and the other at the mouth to hold when we burn the oil or no liquid.
From the shoulder joint on the neck.
Many times there arises at the head of the neck a disease which is called "telul," and it grows and becomes great at once, so that it is visible; and for this reason it is necessary that you should begin to seize it at the outset, and break the bone thoroughly, then remove the cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay in seizing it when it is great, if you take hold of it with force, of foul colour, of bad omen: if you do not touch it with iron, for it is a fleshy swelling, for when you seize it once, there comes great harm to the patient; and if the swelling is of soft touch, not of foul colour, you can see that you can seize it all, if you evacuate the patient and seize it without fear, and cure the limb of dry and restraining things.
when the neck is cut and bound
When solutions of continuance come in one of these wounds, it is of advantage because in certain homes. It is therefore recommended that this not happen to anyone, if you observe that the wound is fresh throughout its extent; and then join the two edges of the wound to a staple, and cure until it is healed. If the edges are already split from one side to the other, if you must escort all the parts of its circumference until they bleed, then reassemble the two edges to a staple, and strain, and sprinkle upon it some dragon’s blood powder and incense; and put upon the powders a piece of absorbent material of great or other kind, and leave it until it discharges by itself, then cure it until it is healed.
The manner of the staple is that you assemble the solution: or by needles, as we said in the costure of the abdomen; or by thread, as I have told you.
of the edges of the wound.
At home in the hands, there are from the thumbs to the little finger nails of varying sizes, some like grains of wheat, minor and greater; therefore when you turn the fingers, make incisions on each nail, and grasp with tweezers and hold in the palm of the hand; then employ the blood from the incision of a broken vein, until it is no longer bleeding; and then withdraw the tweezers easily, and cure the hand of dry things until it is healed.
From the ridge of the gums.
Many times appears on the gums a fleshy bulge which the ancients called "albulus"; if you support it, grasp the root and leave the swelling or bleeding to subside; then remove the broken vein or other powdery astringents and drying agents; and if that fleshy bulge recurs after the incision, and happens many times, if you grasp it a second time, and cauterize: if it does not return after the cautery; these are the forms of the instruments for covering.
Des sordens.
Once are gathered at the head of the teeth, between the gums, escorces which are soft and rough; and never are the teeth black and yellow and gray, until the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth are biting; if it is that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his shoulder bones be in their place, and open the gums or the escorces open, until there is nothing left; and thus make black and green, and yellow and other spots, until they are whole; and if one has what is at the first reason, it is good; if not, if it begins again to rise the second and third time, until you have done everything; and teeth that have met with various forms of instruments to redden, as it is shown by the work, for those who have scraped whose teeth have other forms than those which are between the teeth; and these forms and others are with you apparent.
It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you stay quiet for a long time, because it must not make me do it; for it is a high-quality substance so we have no excuse for making excuses When the patient is constrained to endure, if you are certain that he will endure, then many times the pain will depart from the patient; and care that it be neither too great nor too small, and make the patient groan out; and whatever does not depart with this groan, as long as the malady persists, for we have already done this for these scoundrels; and when you are well certain that he will endure, then you must order that the limb be bound firmly around the joint with a strong strap; then place the thumb and little finger at the first and last joints, so that they are well supported; and then firmly bind the thumb and little finger to the limb.
After that, if the limb is straightened in the direction of the fracture, and if it does not move, take no other instrument and hold the limb loosely with one hand, and move it as you did before. And if the fracture is perceived and broken, if you must cover it, lay cloth or lint over the wound; and if the bandage is applied too tightly, that it does not break the skin; and you must speak softly over the joint to quiet the limb.</start_of_turn>
And take care that you do not break it, and leave a part of it, and return to the patient with the greatest part of the pain of the first. And take care that you do not do anything like the ignorant layman, who break the limb many times without cause, and do not bring anything but this that we have told you; but they bring about many times by the origin of this great disease from the roots that remain, or from the limb that is broken, as we have often seen; and when the fracture is treated, wash the limb with wine or oil and vinegar and apply plaster of Paris; and if this does not suffice, burn it.</start_of_turn>
The shapes of the instruments, indeed mute the hands at first, whether with long points and thick sleeves, that they do not double when you draw the tooth; these are the shapes:
And be of thick limbs so that they do not bend when drawing, and be of iron well made, and be toothy so that they may hold firmly.</start_of_turn>
of the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn> When the root comes loose when drawing, if you must put out the moist cotton ball from the wound.i.e. as soon as. Then hold the teeth which are left apart like a beak of a thrush; and be made dense like a lime and that is the shape:</start_of_turn
And if the roots do not suffice to endure these tensions, if you must uncover the bark throughout the root, and put the instrument which is called «althali», which is to say a palatine, since this is its form:
And be strong and bulky if it does not break me, and if the root leaps by this, it is good; if not, if you help with all the instruments, since these shapes will come afterwards.
And if you use this instrument which has .ij. rings, since this is its form:
And other instruments which are before in the rank of teeth, and this instrument which appears like a great clamp, of which this is the form:
Or other instruments which are before in the rank of teeth, and this instrument which appears like a great clamp, of which this is the form: Or be great and well-holding to hold the bone, that it does not escape, but can hold and restrain; and then restore the limb of medicine suitable for this, and if there is inflammation in the bone, if it is small, if the wound has all these instruments:
When the tooth appears does not follow the natural curve, and its shape is deformed, even in women of childbearing age, if it is dense enough to impede its eruption, it will not rise properly, and it cannot be remedied: therefore it must be extracted. And if it is associated with the tooth, if you take hold of this instrument which has the shape of a small beak, resembling a file, and grasp it with iron tongs, so be it.
And the pain persists in the jaws and the hands for as long as the tooth lasts, and because of that you must not move the others, and if it appears, it can be limed, if you file a part of the lime like this:
and it is just like filing nails; and while you are filing the tooth slightly in the jaws and hands, if it does not move at all, when you finish the piece at the end there is no raiser, and if the cavity is too deep and it blisters the tongue, if you must file the rough spot so that it is even, so that it does not blister the tongue or impair speech.
When the tooth comes loose.
When the tooth comes loose, whether by percussion or biting, and the patient is unable to press upon it without causing pain, you must treat it with restrictive medicines. This is of no avail; if you must restrain it with a gold wire, for the silver wire becomes green and decays, but the gum does not move. Let the wire be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth. If you see that the teeth are aligned, take hold of the wire and double it between the two front teeth, then place the teeth between the other teeth, if there is one or more of them, until you see them clearly almost up to the neighboring tooth; then resume the covering until you reach the part where you began, and strain your hand skillfully and cautiously, so that it does not move; or if you must bind the root of the tooth if it cannot escape. Then close the teeth with the wire and assemble them, and put them back between the neighboring teeth, and keep them in place so that they do not bleed the tongue. Then leave them in place as tightly as possible, and if it comes loose or the wire breaks, do it with another wire; if you linger and delay, it will only cause further pain and will damage the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the front teeth, just as you see.
And when the tooth aches, if you reset it anew, fresh from fresh, as we have said; and do not let anything interfere that is not wise and soothing, and never make the shape of a tooth of a whale bone; put it back in its place or where the defect is, and strain it as we have said, and keep it in place for a long time with firm pressure.
De coper lou liien de la lengue.
Whenever the tongue or the natural cause comes to the loosening of the tongue, that is not born; or by an accident of a deep wound; the work is such that you must cover the mouth of the patient, and put your hand on his tongue, and hold the tongue; then cover the large nerve of the tongue, as long as the tongue is loosened from its dwelling, and if there is any delay or not, and it is from the soiling of the wound, if you touch the wound and cover the nerve; and keep that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which comes from the loosening; and when you have done this, if you lift the rose-colored blood and easily, or cold blood, then put the tongue back in position with a little attempt; and keep the patient still, that the tongue does not move. And if blood comes from the wound, if you take out the glass splinter; and if it does not go away, if you cauterize with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; and then cure with other cures until it is healed.
and if you see red or black or hard pus coming from it, if the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a fistula; and if it is declining with moisture, if it is spitting blood, if you touch the wound, and deliver from a part and from the other; and if it does not go away from your work, if you put on a glass splinter until it is clean, and then come back to your work until you have finished everything; then lift the limb easily and gently, and cure with other cures until it is healed.
Des apostemes de la gorge.
There are often blood clots in the throat which are called "godath", and which are like almonds in size. When you treat them, as we have said in the previous chapter, and they are not healed, take care: if they are small and pale, do not touch them with metal. But if they are red and the root is large, do not touch them with metal, even though it may cause the loss of blood; but leave them alone until they are dead, and then you can remove them, or they will break on their own. And if they are white in colour, and the root is thin, if you have brought the instrument to cover them, but first make sure that the clot rests and is quiet. Then make the patient sit in the sunlight, and hold his arms by his sides, and cover his mouth with his hands, and press his tongue down with all your might: this is the way. And let it be of silver or of gold like a needle:
... press his tongue down with all your might: this is the way. And let it be of silver or of gold like a needle. Can you press the tongue down with all of this instrument? And you see the clot: take the sponge and press it into the almond, and pull it out more forcefully than you can. And do not put anything on the cloth with it. Then remove the instrument from the clot, as this is the way it is done. The chief is bent in many places, and one part is over the other, and they are very acute, and is made of iron or gold.
And if you do not have this instrument present, if you can grasp it with your thumbs, know that this is its form:
And if you do not have this instrument present, if you can grasp it with your thumbs, know that this is its form: grasp the thumb and index finger together, and when you have grasped one of the thumbs, grasp the other in the same way, and then make an incision and gargle the patient with hot water, hot and easy, and when the blood has drained out, if there are still blood clots, either break them up with nutmeg seeds or burn them with cloves of garlic, or fumigate with marjoram, and the like; until the wound is healed; and never again shall there be any further bleeding from the incision except for the two thumbs, if you grasp them just as before.</start_of_turn>
And I treated a woman with a small abscess in her throat; that is to say, an abscess of little consequence; and she could not breathe through the passage that was blocked, and could not eat or drink, and died as a result. And the abscess was so high that it had forced down two teeth from their sockets. I therefore took hold of her hand, and put one finger on the abscess and the other on the gums, and then made an incision and garbled the patient with hot water, hot and easy; and when the blood had drained out, if there were still blood clots, either break them up with nutmeg seeds or burn them with cloves of garlic, or fumigate with marjoram, and the like; until the wound was healed; and never again shall there be any further bleeding from the incision except for the two thumbs, if you grasp them just as before.
De l’uve.
From the navel.
And sometimes there is hair or something put on the medicine, as for the hairs of a barleycorn, and put the instrument on all the medicine over the navel; and the patient should be kept still on his side, so that he salivates and mucus comes from his mouth onto the medicine within, if it does not reach the throat, and the barking; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the navel, the quantity of half an hour, until you see it is limp and the bites of the medicine are appeased; and if you see it, take hold and cover it with any instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and withdraw the instrument with all its thread from under the cotton, until the cotton is covered over the navel; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it dry and wipe it away after three or five days. And if you have to repeat the cautery of the medicine, when you repeat it, and after the cautery wipe the medicine inside the navel with cotton wool, and cover what is around the medicine; and rise up from cold water, and be cured of hiccups as long as you are healed.
This cure is more effective than incision, for it is cured by fumigation according to this method. Take calamine and isope and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs. Assemble all of these together in one pot and put in oil, and boil. And let the pot be well sealed with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot put one instrument that is pointed according to this method. And be it of silver or of gold, or be one of the nails pressing in the patient’s mouth until the vapor ascends to the eye by the smell, until the eye is mortified; after that it must be repeated often, until the eye is dry, and keep that you do not do this at the beginning of the outbreak of the hot swelling, for many things happen; and do not do this except at the subsidence of the hot swelling. And if this instrument is not present, take a needle and put in its head a bit of egg-shell, so that the patient’s mouth does not become too hot; for the bit of egg-shell does not make the vapor irritate the mouth, and that is a good cure along with health.
Many times it has happened to the throat bone or a fish spine, or nothing; so it must be thought that you must do what you see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing; and what does not appear to you and is returned to the throat, you must make the patient vomit the patient immediately as the meat is cooked in the stomach; for by chance if it is expelled by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and tie the sponge to one thread, and then transfix it. And when it comes back, if it is expelled, and then draw it out; and if it does not come out of this, take one instrument of sponge according to this form:
And let the instrument curve at the head if it can enter the throat more easily, and lift the head high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, for all must live, neither push the bone inwards; and move quickly that the patient may hold the instrument, for it is either loose or the thing is turned upside down; if the patient swallows, or he forces it with all the instrument equally, as much as he can.
And let the instrument curve at the head if it can enter the throat more easily, and lift the head high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, for all must live, neither push the bone inwards; and move quickly that the patient may hold the instrument, for it is either loose or the thing is turned upside down; if the patient swallows, or he forces it with all the instrument equally, as much as he can.
And sometimes medicine is useless, as I have said in the previous division, by the treatment of medicines; and when that does not help, then look in the throat of the patient towards the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument that I have mentioned. And if you see the bleeding, if it is only a small speck, or if there are faint pulsations that are worth as much. And if that is not the case, if you take a barley chaff and put it in the throat of the patient, then press or bite down on the barley chaff until it is charred; and do this often. And if the patient feels pain all over, then take a full dose of cold water, and cover the mouth and throat, and swallow continuously; and if the bleeding stops when the patient feels the pain, then stop.
And if it does not yield as we have said, if you fumigate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument which I have mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will soon bear fruit. And the manner of fumigation is that you take one pot or there are charcoal pieces visible, and let the pot cover be covered with a gauze perceived in the middle, and in that hole let the head of the instrument be; then pour the fumigation, and the patient puts the chief of the cane in his mouth, closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not go out, but comes out until the nausea; and the nausea will now cease, and if it does not yield, repeat the fumigation many times; and the patient will suffer thirst, and eat dirty and foul things, and drink no water; and then it will surely be driven out by this government.
And the shape of the instrument, as we have mentioned, is like tenailles corbes that are put into the throat; and it has the shape of a beak of a thrush, and there is a roughness of lime, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go; and when this is the shape:
it is the chapter on abscesses.
Mouth of similar abscesses is, according to what is remembered from one book to another in this book, diverse in perforation and size; and it is in two ways that these are done. One way is like itself, and the other when there is moisture. And the second way is when they are on bones or in the flesh. For the abscesses of the head are other than those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the bones are other than those that come in joints, and the judges make their judgment in the work.
And if abscesses are not to be pierced, as long as the bone is alive according to its completeness; and if there are some that must be pierced when they are solid, and do not die according to their completeness, like abscesses that are between joints. For when abscesses are between joints, and it is left as long as it is solid, by chance if it corrupts the tendon and nerve of the joint, because of this contraction in that limb. Or the abscess is between the principal member, and if you wait to pierce it until it is measured, if it has gone to the principal member; or it is between the foundation, and if the perforation is not made that it is dead; and it must only be pierced with solid food that comes with digestion, except for that which is between the foundation, that it does not burst, and be prolonged, and form a fistula; and it can never heal in a great end
It must be known that you should wash the wound of the abscess that has died according to its completeness, when the pain has subsided, and the departure of the fever, and the fading of the pain and redness, and the faintness and tingling of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it must be known that you should make the perforation or more dependent on the abscess, and the place where it appeared. And let the perforation be of moderate length, and if the abscess is with hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and all bones that are equal or there is no swelling.
In these cases, by proportion of that limb. And when the abscess is in the flesh, if you must leave the perforation until it is confirmed in digestion, as we have said. For if you perforate before this, if it has gone along with the poison from it, there will be plenty of dirt and ordure; and by chance endure the liver and plunge it from it. And if there is no abscess that is perceived in proportion to the large of the limb, in proportion to that which the limb has in itself. And it is proper that you bring in small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many incisions according to the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses that you must chew the root of the abscess, and cover; when it is become like a drape, and is softened, if you must do as we do with bubbles. And if there are such as are cleft in two angles, and such as we cope with the nutmeg seed, like abscesses of the armpits; and if there are such as we make a round size, and other sizes and similar coping.
Those who have no head, if there is a superficial abscess, it is proper that you perforate it completely; and it is proper when the abscess is large, and it has coaled great swelling, and you perforate it, if you do not drain all the swelling in that hour, but drain a part; then stamp the abscess until the swelling is gone; do this many times with great care, until the swelling is gone; even if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman in childbirth, or a small child, or an old man decrepit. For the expectation of success is never with the issue of the swelling, except by chance the patient dies, and you do not know it. Therefore, leave this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, if you wipe the wound, look to see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a full size, bring in fine linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there is plenty of bursting, it is proper that you swallow in chews one attempt so that they come against each other; and if you have cut in the abscess a part of the skin, and you have closed it in, it is proper that you fill it with coarse cotton or the raspings of flaxseed moistened, and keep it until the bone is healed.
And if discharges of blood arise in your work, if you bring in cold and easy water, and moisten with one drape, and remove the offending discharge many times. And if the discharge of blood persists, if you bring in governance and cure, and the powders that I have said in the hands, and if it is winter and the limb or abscess is cold nervous, it is proper that you put on attempts and cloths moistened in wine and oil; and if it is summer, and the limb is fleshy, it is proper that you put on cloths moistened in water and oil, or in wine and oil rubbed, until the third of the journey, as we have said; and then remove the abscess and wipe it and cure it, as it is proper, until it is healed.
And this must be known throughout in the treatment of abscesses: or as I have said before concerning the precautions to be taken before treating abscesses, and thus in this chapter.
or as I have said before concerning the precautions to be taken before treating abscesses, and thus in this chapter.
or as I have said before concerning the precautions to be taken before treating abscesses, and thus in this chapter. Or as I have said before concerning the precautions to be taken before treating abscesses, and thus in this chapter. Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu antempires a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.
Et le taille sur l’apostème piercings et le moiste, si est plus légère, car il sont de peu de sang. Et si a aucuns de ces apostèmes ou chefs ou il n’a point de moisteur, et de ces-là ne sont que des apostèmes que j’ai coy ou chefs d’une vieille femme; et trouvai l’apostème aussi comme une pierre ronde, asperse et blanche, et ne peut brisier; et s’il en est venu aucun, on le lui fera aussi bien qu’une pierre. En autres apostèmes venus ou chefs, vu qu’ils viennent de chefs de fils et de racines d’oreilles, il les ouvre si soit tous les jours au plus dépendants leu, pour mues issir la bowing; et les traite comme il faut.
And the size on the perforated abscess and the moisture, if it is lighter, because they are little of blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or heads or if there is no moisture in them, and of those that are only abscesses that I have cured or heads of an old woman; and found the abscess just like a round stone, rough and white, and cannot break; and if there has been no rupture, we must do as well for the wound as with a stone. In other abscesses that come from heads or chiefs, because they come from the heads of children and the roots of ears, we must open them every day if possible, to prevent the swelling; and treat them as seems fitting.
Many times happen these abscesses at the neck, and they burst, and are sore, and never come from anywhere else or from the bones, and are moist and are stuck together. And a simple scrofula is properly in its cavity, if like the head and the abscess of a chief, as we have said; and the signs of these scrophulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and if there are malignancies that do not want to obey to health. In those in which you see good disposition at the toucher, and is similar in color to the flesh, and dry from the part of the scrofula and is not red as the neck nor the artery nor the vein, and is not deep; if you must cope with it, and scorch the dry part, and extend the two thumbs of the hand as we have said in the abscesses of the chief; and treat it as much and as little, and be careful not to touch the nerve or the vein, and do not be too quick, that you do not cover more than you should.
And if thou dost close the vein or artery, and this doth hinder thee from working, if thou put into the wound a piece of vitriol shard or any powders that remain bloodless, and restrain the wound; and leave it until the spasms have ceased and the wound is softened, and then commence to move. And when the pain is gone, if thou return to thy work, until thou hast finished; then ask thyself what sign is there that there remain no small abscesses, if thou dost cope and bite them. And if there be in the root of the abscess a great vein, if thou canst only cope that abscess in its root, but bind it with a strong double thread, and leave it hanging freely; then apply the wound dressing Egyptian fashion, and cure.
And if thou dost cope all the abscesses, if thou canst gather together the three parts of the wound and bind them now, then there remaineth no surplus because of the greatness of the abscess. If thou canst understand to cope with the root and draw out, and bind as we have said. Those abscesses which retain surplus, pierce them either that they open and die; and pierce them as before said, depending; and bring together tentes with ointment and similar things, so that thou overcome that which remaineth of the corruption; and when the wound is well drained, if thou apply an ointment dressing covering the whole, when it is healed.
And if thou dost cope the swelling, if thou canst gather together the three parts of the wound and bind them now, then there remaineth no surplus because of the greatness of the swelling. If thou canst understand to cope with the root and draw out, and bind as we have said. Those swellings which retain surplus, pierce them either that they open and die; and pierce them as before said, depending; and bring together tentes with ointment and similar things, so that thou overcome that which remaineth of the corruption; and when the wound is well drained, if thou apply an ointment dressing covering the whole, when it is healed.
The ancient men spoke of the size of the gorge; but I have never seen it done in our land, and that is the writing of their words.
Those who are squinting must understand that the epiglottis, which is the slit in the throat, must be freed; and this will not help, for all the veins and arteries in the body are filled with evil at these points which are above the teeth in the mouth, or in the throat or in the tonsils.</start_of_turn> When the disease is in the windpipe, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss which comes from strangulation.</start_of_turn>
It is obvious. When our tongues split the epiglottis, we split them from two circles or three at most, with a slight cut through, between two circles or according to the quantity of the cut on the surface, do not enter the cartilage.
And thus, if it is convenient with the section of the epiglottis, there is no scar, and the blood vessels are long enough.</start_of_turn>
And if the master is fearful, it is expedient that he extend the skin of the throat to its utmost extent, then cut the vein as far as it goes until it reaches the cartilage; and avoid the blood vessels of the blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the vein itself as we have said.
And it is proved by the section of smoke of the spindle which leaps up from the broken bone, and by the loss of voice;
And it leaves the wound open for a piece.
And when the wound has passed when we doubt strangulation, gather the four limbs of the wound from the shoulder to the heel, and bind them all around with the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause new flesh to grow, as long as it is safe to do so.
The wound should not be opened until the swelling has subsided and the patient is no longer in pain; and if the patient dies or has become paralyzed, the default should be abandoned. Therefore, hold the epiglottis for this reason that the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound; and thus death is prevented.
Therefore, command the old man to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it has passed in two or three days. And thus it is commanded to suture the wound and cure it, until it is cured;
and I will tell you what I have seen. I saw that a damsel took a knife, and put it in her throat, and cut part of the windpipe that was in front.
I fled called to help, and found her as dead.</start_of_turn>
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had escaped from it, and saw that it had not pierced any vein or artery except for the throat, and that the blood had come from the wound itself.</start_of_turn
I hurried, and closed the wound, and treated it until it was healed.</start_of_turn>
And she did not dare to speak any more, because she was rebuked of voice, and returned afterwards at her disposal.
For indeed I say that in the trimming of the epiglottis, I have never known fear.
of the great gorge.
These swellings are called "hernia of the throat," and are great swellings in the colour of jaundice, and are very common in women;
It is in this way that it is done in two ways: naturally, and by violence; for the natural method bears no weight.
And the violent method is in two ways: as when one is like grease to us, and the other method is like an incision coming from the artery; and there is doubt, and it is not worth working without fire, only in what is small, and the proof and search are at all the inward parts: if you find it thus as not grease, and do not enter any vein, if the head is closed, if as we close the hand, and the trail has all its hair, if there is none; And encircle all around, and treat him as he deserves, until he is completely healed.
And encircle all around, and treat him as he deserves, until he is completely healed.
Many times we have seen this, where I will tell you of the remedies.
And it is known that I must tell you the difference between the outward and inward movements.
I say that the origin of inflammation and fever that lasts, as long as the inflammation has not passed, and is accompanied by pain; then rest the fever and the inflammation.
Without pain or fever or inflammation, there is only swelling, which is its own bag and is like the color of gold, and begins like fat, and becomes thick.</start_of_turn>
And they are like grease, or moisture, or moisture, and the color is like I said in the division.</start_of_turn>
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the knot, that you first ask and inquire about the instrument which is called the “entromissoire,” according to its form or chapter which follows.</start_of_turn
And the manner of questioning the abscesses of the knee is that you take more moisture than you find in the abscess, and turn your thumb and index finger, until you know that the instruments have perceived the hair, then that it be in proportion to the greatness of the abscess.
Then draw out the entrails, and be careful that the spur does not burst.</start_of_turn>
When moisture comes into contact with the skin, it turns black, as I have said of other abscesses.</start_of_turn
And if afterwards the shoulder does not bring moisture, if the skin is oily, if the latter is done in a cross, and you take hold as hooks, and lightly scorch from a shoulder part and hold the sleeve or where you have grasped it with the thumb;
If you do not hold it firmly, if you tear it piecemeal so that nothing remains.
For if nothing remains, if it comes back to us many times;
If it lingers a little while, and if you grieve not, employ the wound of some corrosive powders which bite, restrain the wound and apply soothing things around it; and cure it of other cures as long as it is well.
If it is great, if cut the three pounds of the wound, and cure it of that which engulfs flesh.
If the vein beats contrary to you or another if you hurry and employ the broth of vitriol broken, and leave it lying for three days or two, as long as the wound bursts, and rest the inflammation of blood; then return to the covering that has departed.
See here the forms of the entromittent instruments, and they are of three kinds: great, middle, and small; and there are four squares which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are three kinds: great, middle, and small, for enclosing the fistulas.
They are also like needles with which the sorceries are sewn, and are of citrine, or iron, or silver, and must be of a color that is yellow, and are more experienced with black pitch for enclosing the corbes of the fistula.
And there are three kinds: great, middle, and small, according to the quantity of the size of the perforation.
The shapes of boils are like masses of various appearances, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and if boils have two cortices of two manners each,
The shapes of boils are like masses of various appearances, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and if boils have two cortices of two manners each, and are of two manners; or if boils have one cortex and are of two manners, or if boils have only one cortex and are of one manner; all these are necessary in their place.
The chief of these boils are trenchant, and there are some that cut only one side, from which we support the flesh, because of this we do not cut the vein or the nerve;
And among these introspective methods are the elements that are returned to the hands, so that the patient does not lose them through the opening of the abscesses.
And there are three methods: great, small, and medium, as you see;
One should use these only in the case of fractures, such as limbs, arms, ribs, abscesses, and similar things;
And never make use of any other small instrument, like the fists, as in this form, because it can cause bleeding:
And he must never be placed in the same place where he has previously grasped veins, arteries, and never again in the same way: for in this great form.
Never again swell the limbs of anyone as soon as they begin to corrupt, as though they were limbs of women;
remain steadfast and flee, and those who see them cured, if they are commanded to cease following this fashion from line b to line g inclusive then scrape off the fat, and use the medical salve poulating char, then join the two edges of the wound together with suture, and cure until it is healed;
And if the breast leans forward and is eased by its greatness, as with women, if the pain is in the.ij. ribs below, by.ij. similar rents. And if one holds the other at the end of both, so that the greater line contains the smaller according to this shape, from this line .b. up to line .g.; Then stretch the skin between the.ij. arms, and oil the fat, and mix in what we have said of suture and powder, and what is necessary for the cure, as long as it is healthy;
And if he is not sound, or if the incision is not thoroughly made, because the patient cannot rest, or because of the discharge of blood, if it is recommended, fill the wound with moist cotton wool in corrosive order. And leave it until the fat and marrow have healed, then cure it when it is sound again.</start_of_turn>
abscesses of boils</start_of_turn
These abscesses that arise from the buttocks are like hard carbuncles and often contain moisture.</start_of_turn>
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.: When the swelling that is in the abscess is emptied, if the wound is of great size, leave the cotton in place until the other side is reached, then extract all the cotton, and cure the wound that has resulted from this until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if the abscess looks like small carbuncles, if it is as we said in the incisions of carbuncles, and if the wound has burst, if necessary apply cautery as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
From the root of the artery
When the artery is cut, and the skin is split which is above, if there are many abscesses there as well as blood vessels escaping and bursting;
and if the surgeon knows well when it is for the artery, if the abscesses are long they will burst there.</start_of_turn> and when you sense it at your elbows, if you sense it, it is a dislocation; and when it is for the vein, it is a bursting of blood vessels.</start_of_turn
It is foolish to cover the incision with anything, and in the same way as when it is soiled with blood and pus, and when it is swollen or painful, or with a wound in the mouth or in other parts, it is large. Therefore, in this case, the cautery must be abandoned, and the one who is in charge must also abandon it, as in the case where an artery is burst by its bursting through the skin for a long distance
Therefore, in this case, the cautery must be abandoned, and the one who is in charge must also abandon it, as in the case where an artery is burst by its bursting through the skin for a long distance then one must cover the size as one would with sponges, and depart the artery from the tissues, as long as it is uncovered;
Then take a needle and pierce it through to the other side, and strain the artery with a double thread as thick as a barleycorn;  according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the arteries in the temples.
Then point the limb which is between the two bones of an intro-malleus as long as without loosening what is there, and cut the abscess;
Then keep the wound closed while the wound edges are still bleeding; Then cure the wound that follows, as long as it is clean;
and if the wound is large enough to reach the belly, if you must hold your hand over the wound from the very start. Then hold the needle in place over the limb that you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and there are two threads, so that you can pull them from the other side; Then bind the wound, as I have said, or tie one of these parts with two threads.
And if you doubt that the thread does not issue from force, if it rebounds another thorn at every attempt, remove the entire thorn from the incision of the first thorn, and strain the thread in three loops.
Then grasp the excess beyond what is necessary until it is spent, and then grasp the excess downwards and leave that which is joined;
Then put on a moist bandage of wine and oil, and mix together cures of bandages and ointments until it is healed.
from abscesses from nerves
Also as with an incision, comes from an artery and a vein, comes from an incision as soon as it is formed, or by too great a work, and similar things.
This also happens more often with adjuvants and must do so with too much work or joint injuries, for this is what causes excessive bleeding, and its color seems like dark blood, and is in many positions causing pain;
and when it is strained, if it causes pain, and is not like dark blood, but like urine;
and moves well in all parts, and does not go forward or backward, neither up nor down, and that which is in the joints cannot be closed by iron: by chance there comes contraction;
And he who is at the head or the chief or the front, makes the leather tough at the staple. If the abscess is small, if he has one nail left, and grasps it at the root.
If it is large, if the swelling has reached the bone, and scours, then cut the bone and join the wound at the suture, and cure until it is healed.
with great bleeding. Never is there in the belly and never elsewhere the smell of the other, and is a disease which is called "funge" because of the resemblance of mice, and is the root subtle, and the head large; and in it are small and great peas.
And I saw indeed at home where there were two or more bellies which resembled mice more than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had many roots, and were full of wind
I saw indeed at home where there were two or more bellies which resembled mice more than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had many roots, and were full of wind.
If the scab on the large scapula, and if you are present, perform the cautery with fire. For in this place there often comes excessive bleeding, and if it does not stop, then hasten and burn [the scab].
And if you see the patient groaning and pale from the incision of the flesh, then take one thread of silk well made, and bind the artery as we have said, and leave it for three days.
Then bind [the area] and do not stop restraining the thread until the artery is completely closed, and do the work with your hand; and if the roots are loose, if there is pain in the same place for the belly, but do not push too far, cover half of it,
Then perform the cautery so that it does not recoil; then treat the wound and keep only the hair that is of a tawny color and poor sense and milk-stained.
For it is a hairy swelling, and I will come to the treatment of the swelling later.</start_of_turn>
when the swelling is fierce.</start_of_turn
When the swelling appears, it comes from a burn or cut of the flesh, and is above the belly and in some there are pus, as in other parts, or blood that clots veins or arteries according to what is before, or windiness;
If it is by the root of the scapula and by the outlet of the bowel, if the color is like that of the abscess, it is a slight thing causing pain, and there are various discharges. If it is by the discharge of the intestine, then it is more diverse; and when it is pressed from its two sides, if it returns and comes back again, and by chance if it is tight, and causes swelling at the entrance of the bath and much work.
If it is by moisture, it is a slight thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, do not restrain me; and if it is by blood, if it opens with these signs, the abscesses are large and hard, and are fixed in quantity.
If it is by wind pressure, if the physician suspects it is due to a clot in the artery or vein, or wind pressure. If you must leave the dressing. For there is doubt and fear, as I have already said or in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.</start_of_turn>
And if it appears to be due to the intestines or the spleen, if you command the patient to hold his breath, and be still, and sign all around the wound; then command him to clap his hands together. Then go round the limb which you have marked throughout the circumference. Then hold the half of the incision at the base throughout the great circumference;
Then uncover the half of the incision which is extended above the limb, and put your thumb and index finger under the limb; and keep the intestines away from the wound If you find it seized in the gut, if you pull it out, and stretch the intestines away from the belly;
If you find the bile seized, if you grasp it at the spleen, and wring out the excess.
If the artery opposes you, or the vein, if it will go badly into the body, then return to your work and take again.ij. needles, and there should be.ij. four strings, and hold the.ij. needles in the place where you made the incision that you thought you would make pierce;
Then strain the abscess in four days on the needles, and if you see, break the needles, and leave the wound open until it has healed by itself; Or thou shalt seize it when it is subtle and bear it, then cure of that which thou shalt cover, and keep the abscess as we have said.
Or thou shalt seize it when it is subtle and bear it, then cure of that which thou shalt cover, and keep the abscess as we have said. Then drain the blood or moisture that thou findest, then cure the wound of that which it covers, and close the wound.</start_of_turn>
soothe the abscess.</start_of_turn>
We have said in the preceding chapters the signs of an abscess, and how it should be treated by medicine and how it should be cauterized; and we say that an abscess is in the marrow, and that great caution should be used in its cure, and that the old people say that when an abscess is in the bone or can be scraped out as when an abscess is in marrow, and in the hip, and similar things, and that it must be removed as soon as it begins; and when it is large and old, if it cannot be cured but must be approached, for I know of no cure for it; none have ever cured it before me.</start_of_turn>
And in the work, when it is in place or we can remove it, as we have said, let the patient purge no more than once the black bile; then make him whole if he shows any fullness; then give him wine to make the work; then discharge his vomitings or sores, and the head of all parts, and the bone of all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood flow freely, and expect well the limb from your hand or from anything else, and if it comes loose from the incision of the artery or vein, if you cauterize too much without it being stained; then treat him of another remedy until he is healed.
And in the work, when it is in place or we can remove it, as we have said, let the patient purge no more than once the black bile; then make him whole if he shows any fullness; then give him wine to make the work; then discharge his vomitings or sores, and the head of all parts, and the bone of all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood flow freely, and expect well the limb from your hand or from anything else, and if it comes loose from the incision of the artery or vein, if you cauterize too much without it being stained; then treat him of another remedy until he is healed. As we have said in the division, the signs of hydropathy are that the swelling is made of water, and the signs are similar to those of congestion, and the cure which is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: if it is only for eclipses; and one must not touch iron in these two signs: that is to say, tympanites and hydrophobia, because it is a mortal thing; therefore when medicines cause this sign of hydropathy which is called "eclipses" of medicines, and it does not profit, if you look if the patient is weak, or if there is another disease than hydropathy, as all and solution of the belly and other things; if there is no touch of iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient with great vomiting, and he has only hydropathy, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must do the work. Believe the patient right on your hands, and the minister grasps the belly at the lower part towards the heel, then take the thumb and index finger according to this fashion: Let them be bent at a right angle at the joint, and do not allow them to go further than the intestines when you insert them, and do not pull them out.
Then look if the dropsy is confined to the intestines: if you make an incision two fingers wide on the right side of the navel; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, make your incision on the left side of the navel; and if it is caused by bile, make it on the right side, and do not make the patient lie on the incision that the excessive fluid does not flow to that weak limb.
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and the sponge, and hold your hand over the sponge between the skin and the tissue like when escorting the amount of an nail or an inch in length; then pierce the tissue as far as the sponge comes out whole, and that is the liquid, then expel the sponge, and here is the instrument: It is like a silver nail with a slight curve, and is of iron or lead, and has at the upper part a small hole; and on one side, two holes, and on the other side, one hole, and the thumb is cut off like a pen, and that is the form of the incision which the writers make with the pen.
The head of the arm is the support, so that when the weapon comes to the point, if it is now resting on the weapon; empty half or a third part, for if you empty more than that which can be contained in that hour, by chance the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit of the weapon, or he will vomit, or he will approach death.
But empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue tell the patient, and his pulse; then draw out the weapon and hold the point, and it is held now by the thumb that is stamping the part that is above the facet, as I have said, that you pierce according to this manner; then repeat the weapon on the other side, if you see the patient suffering from that, and draw out a small quantity of liquid
do nothing further, and take care not to use too much until it no longer stays in place. And if you doubt the patient, and you give him too much liquid, if the surgeon of the burial or sand cauterize, and by vomiting or sweating and in the sun, and take care to drink; and the surgeon of medicines that are desiccatives until he is well, and cauterize on the stomach and the liver and the spleen after the extraction of the liquid, as I have said before.
From the swelling of the limb. Never are children born without a perforation in the limb, or the perforation is small, or it is not firmly in its place. If you command it too soon that there is no perforation at all, even if there is much swelling according to this fashion: then put in or perforate somewhat of lead, and bind and hold it for two or three days. And when it wants to urinate, if you keep the closure closed, and make the urine, and then put it back; and by chance you cannot do anything, for the urine that comes out will not leave the closure closed.</start_of_turn> If the perforation is small, if it is treated with a lead weight, as we have said, if it swells up. But those who do not have the perforation firmly in its place are pale, for none are born with the perforation at the head of the limb, for they cannot urinate before they raise their limb high; and they cannot urinate without this, because the material cannot come down to the marrow.</start_of_turn
And thus the work must be if the patient lies prone upon his back, for the head of the shoulder and the scapula are equal in size to a thumb; if the former breaks through the middle, if as it should be; and you must hold back the discharge of blood which comes many times, and if it comes, if you can staunch the bleeding of that which bleeds blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And thus the work must be if the patient lies prone upon his back, for the head of the shoulder and the scapula are equal in size to a thumb; if the former breaks through the middle, if as it should be; and you must hold back the discharge of blood which comes many times, and if it comes, if you can staunch the bleeding of that which bleeds blood, and cure the wound until it is healed. Many times come these white spots in the armpit, and are an appearance of bad blood; and there are both malignant and benign ones; if it is thought that you should take them out, that is to say, ligate them secretly, and cut off their heads and roots, then put on moist cotton in Egyptian fashion; then cure with diafinicon ointment until it is healed. And if the abscess is malignant, of a dark color and pus-filled, if you must bring in the cautery. When you have cauterized it, and if the abscess is at the root of the limb and extends partly into the nail and partly outwards, if you must break the abscess which is inside first; and when it bursts, if the cure has burst outwards. For when you cure it whole, if you do not firmly secure the limb that it is not pierced, there will be blackness and corruption in its bone and marrow; if you must remove all that is black and corrupt, then apply honey and flour which is made of pomegranate peel and sometimes, then cure it of other cures until it is healed.
And if discharge of blood comes, if you must bring in the lunar cautery in this way: The cautery helps with three things together: that is, with the discharge of blood, and with the corruption; and if the bone of the limb is corrupt and withdrawn, if you must bite or draw out a bundle of hair from the limb, and make the patient urinate; and when the hair comes away from the root of the limb which has not been circumcised, or there is wound or incision, if you must then cauterize with a blunt instrument until the vessel is loosened, and deliver the limb from all parts.
And if this is the grief of dividing this, if you must cauterize with a sponge, do not leave any scab on the head of the limb or the nail; then dry thoroughly between the two, and put in between a soft bandage of wet linen with cold water, which should not be disturbed.
De la circoncision.
Circumcision is not merely a matter of continuing treatment as with other wounds; however, when it is our work, we must do it with all our will, and promptly, if necessary, for our patients' well-being is more important than our reputation.</start_of_turn>
I say that the ancients did not teach us about circumcision, for they did not use it in their laws, and we have only what we have learned through experience.
For I would say that the greatest part of masters and healers who performed circumcision were fools. Indeed, there were forces and hurdles, and for all their learning, if the patient ran away because of the discomfort of the two towels, or if by chance the surgeon happened to cut too deep and left the wound open.
Or la recovient coper, and the pain is doubled, and at the loosening which is done too carelessly, the point of the limb is not firmly secured; and at the loosening of the ligament by chance escapes the spur, and repairs the work, and many times it happens that they grow without any loosening, and I desire it.
As for the loosening which is done too carelessly, I have often observed that it causes the weakening of the entire thread of hair; for the forces tear just as well from above as from below.</start_of_turn>
For when you press your hand, if you press equally from all sides, the hair will be torn; but if the hair is well stretched from the root to the skin; and if the movement of the first work makes you think of a child, if he understands, do not force him to hold the hair only by the root as little as possible, and do so for a long time; Then lay your hands straight apart, and bring the forces together between your hands or hold down your toes so that the fetus does not see them, not any instruments; then put your hand at the waist and breathe or cough, and draw up as high as the head of the fetus is engaged; then well knead the mass that is assembled there, then tie the limb with a double thread, and tie the other end to the index finger; and hold between the two threads as many as necessary, and keep the thumb relaxed and draw out the head of the fetus.
Then lay your hands straight apart, and bring the forces together between your hands or hold down your toes so that the fetus does not see them, not any instruments; then put your hand at the waist and breathe or cough, and draw up as high as the head of the fetus is engaged; then well knead the mass that is assembled there, then tie the limb with a double thread, and tie the other end to the index finger; and hold between the two threads as many as necessary, and keep the thumb relaxed and draw out the head of the fetus. Then let the blood flow out a little, and a little, for that is the medicine; and put powder on and under the powder put a bandage glued with egg yolk from a fresh hen, confirmed with rose oil and balm, and leave it on until the other side is healed, and cure again until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
The shape of the forces at the juncture is like this: the two thumbs should be tense and bent, and the fingers as long as the thumb equally:
The error of the mundane if it is when the nails are forced at the incision; therefore it is fitting that you extend your nail, even though it makes an incision; and grasp it equally, and if you do not wish to keep your nail, if you hold it, and then grasp it.</p>
If they trespass two days, and that which is beside the edge is swollen, if you leave it as long as the swelling subsides, and scorch it gently; if you grasp it as you wish, and hold on to the edge of the verge, it will do you neither good nor harm.</p
Cure then the limb of things soured with wound of powder, which we have said or treated with powders, and if we grasp too tightly, it will go down, if it does not already; cure then, as we have said, until it is healed.</p
Dou retenement de l’urine.
The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or blood congealed, or a tumour, or worms, or similar things, as we have said in the preceding section.
If the urine does not flow freely, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is in the bladder or the neck of the bladder, then you must make the patient sit upright on his knees; place the thumbs outside the back, and extend the abdomen from the part below the ribs, and restrain the patient so that he cannot move as much as possible; and then constrain the neck of the bladder to the expression of the stone above, so that the urine will flow out freely.
If it still does not flow, and the patient experiences great pain, as we have said, then you must administer extraction with the instrument called a “syringe”; this is formed like this: either of silver or lead weight about the size of a sparrow’s quill; or of lead about the length of a thumb and a half, or of silver.
And thus the method of issuing urine is as follows: take a pair of needles, and bind one to the head of a loop of wool or cotton, and pass the needle through the syringe; then drain the excess wool and stop at the head of the syringe, then join the syringe with oil or butter and beeswax, and make the patient sit on a chair, and raise the bladder and the belly with oil moist and oily and warm water.
Then put the syringe into the bladder, until it reaches the root of the bladder; then double the bladder downwards towards the pubic bone; then pull the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and feel the patient urinate until it is empty, and this must not be done except in this order, for if it is not done in this way it will lead to a twisting; then cut the thread at both ends, and the urine will follow the thread, and withdraw it forcefully, and correct the urine.
and restart the syringe until the bladder is empty, and align the patient.
Des maladies de la vessie.
When there are bladder stones or blood in the bladder, or putrefaction is assembled, and you see urine and medicines distilling, if you do everything that is called the «clepsedre», and this is the shape:
It is closed, and if it is pierced: half from one side, and half from the other, as you see; and it is grasped by the cheek so that the medicine coat is as thick as possible in the area, if we can remove the moisture, and push as much as is necessary.
And when you see the medicines flowing in the bladder, put the chief of the bladder in the moisture, and push with the hand that is inside; if you push the moisture from the hand, and then push strongly with the hand inside; if the moisture enters the bladder now, and it will be felt by the patient.
And this is the form of the subtle cluster which we clusterize the bladder: if it be thus:
And this is the form of the subtle cluster which we clusterize the bladder: if it be thus:
And if you do not have a bladder, if you take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it round about; then strain a strong thread through these holes, and assemble the circle as though you were assembling a wheel, and put inside what you see of oil, moisture and water, and bind it up; and do as you would with a bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere
We have already mentioned in the previous section the methods of extracting stones, and the medicines used for this; and we mentioned the difference between a stone that has been embedded for a long time and one that is new, and the signs of each; and when a stone of what size must be opened in the bladder, in the uterus, and in the testicles; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that a stone that is embedded in the bladder is often associated with an increase in urine, and this is a sign that the stone has burst from the bladder as if from its subtlety; and there is frequent hazing, and the patient complains of severe pain in his loin, and he urinates many times, and then becomes pale; and with these spasms the foundation is loosened; and it is light to cure the spasms until they have been going on for three years, and is more difficult in old people, and is like for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.
And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary, first cleanse the patient with a catharsis to drive out all the filth from the intestines. For it never hinders to explore the stone.
Then take the patient by the limbs, loosen and move downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and does not rise up again; then make him sit between your hands which are placed on his thighs, and his hands are placed on his buttocks, so that the bladder is all the way down; then explore and touch inside.</start_of_turn>
If you feel the stone in the space, if you hurry now to cut above the stone. And if it does not bleed at the touch, if you doubt, put your left index finger on the oil of the hand, if the patient is fat, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and robust; and press on its foundation, explore the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, if the marrow is at the neck of the bladder; then press above your finger, and the stone will come out spontaneously or you will see it cut.
And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand the testicles upwards, and his left hand to grasp the skin that is below the testicles in the part where the size is taken; then insert the sponge covering, as it is formed:
And make between the testicles and the scrotum, do not make the incision in the middle but at the cost of the left nipple; and be straight on the stone, and the two should be either close or on the foundation, and make the incision through if it is wide by pushing, and narrow within, according to the quantity of the stone, do not make it too large.
By chance the press if the stone which is or is not on the foundation, that it leaps forward in work; and sacs that there is part of the stone or it has angles, and edges: if it is grasped to stop; and if there is part which is soft, like a gland, and round, from which issue is light.
If there are angles and margins [at the joint], make the size greater; and if it does not yield, know that you must strain above the tendons which are like a file at the head, for the bone must be strained if it does not escape; or you may use an instrument like a curved needle at the head. If you do not manage to engage it, it is wide; if it is without decor, it is the straining of vitriol.
If there is more than one bone, strain out the greatest at the belly of the bladder first, then support above, and pull forcefully, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are several. And if it is large, cover it with silk and make a greater wound. For in these things that happen to the patient: or he dies, or the urine comes to him at a greater rate than it can be held together; but whatever you do to try to drain or remove the tendons, as long as you drain them piecemeal.
When you have completed your work, apply incense, aloe and dragon’s blood, and strain, and put upon it a wet bandage of oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the burn; then raise the patient up on his heel, and do not loosen the bandage until the third joint above.
And when you have pulled it out, if there is much blood oozing from the wound, then treat with lard of olive oil and vinegar, and with lard of beeswax, until it is healed.
If blood clots come out of the wound and corruptions, and swelling of blood in the bladder, and whether by that the urine is retained, which is known in this part as lacking the ability to urinate without difficulty: then give him a purge in the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and bring it about.
Then lift the wound of water and easily and cautiously, and give him support in every way that you can, until it is healed; and cover that all the times you treat it, that you bind the wound together with sutures, and collect the medicines above the limb
If the stone is small, and it is either in the bladder or the urethra, and is fixed there, and the urine cannot pass; if the physician has performed what I have said above, that you should make a large incision, then you will hear of the size for this cure. I have already proved this.
Take one fourth of an iron bar according to this form and make two angles fixed in one handle.</start_of_turn>
Then take one thread and tie it around the base of the stone in the bladder, so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then hold the bar gently in the bladder until it reaches the stone; and turn the bar in the stone back and forth, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; if the urine comes out then, press your hand on what is remaining of the stone which is in the bladder. If it is broken, and spurts out with the urine, and if there is blood, then the patient is sick.</start_of_turn
If you cannot do this for any reason, take hold of the bone at one end and another at the top; then bend the limb so that the bone is between the two joints, and pull it out forcefully, loosen the ligament, and massage the blood clot that is in the wound; and heal it until it is healed.</p>
If you cannot do this for any reason, take hold of the bone at one end and another at the top; then bend the limb so that the bone is between the two joints, and pull it out forcefully, loosen the ligament, and massage the blood clot that is in the wound; and heal it until it is healed.</p
When the bone is loosened in women, and this does not happen often, it is a good sign, and is defended by two things: the first is that the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well-versed in matters of love, even among the most learned.
And the third method is that if by chance one cannot find a woman who is well-versed in this art of hands; and the fourth method is that if the woman’s stone is more blunt than the man’s, for in that case it can make a deeper size, and great fear has it.
If you must do this, if you can take a mistress who is well-versed, and prick her true; if you do not find one, do not cast a coarse woman; and present a woman who knows well the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of this art, and command her to do what you command of her with inquiry of the stone.</start_of_turn>
and look well if the woman is a virgin: for in that case you must push her head or foundation and inquire about the stone; and if she finds it, if you constrain her bones again, you must command her to hold her hand left on her belly, and desire and press her right hand on her belly.
If it is true, when you move the testicles from the entrance of the bladder to the root of the thigh, and then press on the thigh at the root of the thigh, you will find the middle of the bone there where it is usually hidden, and you will feel the thigh in that part; do not move your hand above the thigh or below, and let the size be small at first.
Then tighten the wound to the size; if you feel the thigh is too tight, loosen the wound until the thigh can rest comfortably; and as for many times as you have pulled out stones, there are: small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and which have much blood. If the stones resemble these, it is an indication of discharge.</start_of_turn>
And if it does not go away, if you put in a bruised vitriol and hold it for an hour until it is stained; then return to your work, until the thigh is comfortable, and have the instruments that I have mentioned for extracting the stone be at your disposal to aid you in your work.</start_of_turn>
If it does not go by itself, it is the artery that is cut. Put powder on the wound and hold it tight with pins and bandages. Do not attempt to move it again. Leave the wound alone and do not touch it, except in the case of an accident that causes the patient's death; then cure the wound.
When the colour of blood is calmed and the limbs are relaxed, if you return to your work, as long as the wound is open.
of hernias of the intestines
Ramice aquouse is nothing else but an assembly of moisture or white fat, which is as dense as lead and as hard as stones, that contains the egg; and it is called "syfac," and never is it truly in the belly of the egg, if we take care that this is not another exercise; and it is the skin of the stone between the white fat that we have mentioned.
And the generation of this ramus is of weakness that comes from the stones, and is spread throughout that matter
And never does it come from percussion on the stones, and this moisture has many colors: sometimes it is pale yellow, or it is without redness, or black, or pale blue, and this is more
And these are the signs of a dislocation of this joint, for if it is white and smooth as we have said, if the abscess is round like the head of a fish and does not swell out, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the flesh itself, if the abscess is round with a part of the egg, and for this reason it is thought that it is another fish;
And if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the smooth surface, if one feels well; then when you see the color of the moisture, if it is of the color of the surrounding matter, thus it is like before. According to this, therefore, which comes after the introduction, judge of what is within.
According to this, therefore, which comes after the introduction, judge of what is within. And when we bind them with iron, if you must, that the patient be sound according to their desire and the filling of their body; then lift them up on their back, upon something rather high, and put cloths under their knees;
then sit on their left side, and command the minister to sit on their right side, and extend the limb towards one of the two ribs of the breastbone at the bottom of the ribs;
then take the towel that is left, and grasp the skin of the ribs among the bones from below the nipple, and make a straight incision dividing the skin of the ribs up to the white line, and eschew superficially according to their desire.
Then pierce the face with a large hole, drain all the fluid, and then place your fingers on the face above; do not touch the root of the teeth, but only the face itself; grasp all or in pieces immediately the cost of it secretly, for if you do not grasp it well, the fluid will return.
And if the liquid spurts from your work towards your eye, if you hold it in its place when you have completed the work of the face; then assemble the two parts of the teeth with a suture, and cure it as with the others wounds, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if you find the liquid corrupted by another disease, if you must tie the veins that are suspended, doubting the decay of blood; then grasp the bone throughout the suspension, drain the liquid, and cure it as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And if the wound is assembled in two parts, their stems being two branches; if one part is grasped as the first was made even, then wipe the blood, and put linen soaked in rose oil in the wound.
and put further linen soaked in wine and oil on it, and put on the two joints, and put over doubled cloths, and bind it up in the way that is suitable for this shape:
Then take two cloths, and use coarse wool like this in the semblance and assemble them by stitching in the neck of the gown, and one of the arms takes hold from the foundation up to the back, and the other from the armpit part; and the other two fingers take hold of the two angles, and everything is assembled with the restriction in the loop of the gown.
And never is this cautery branch medicine for its size like iron; and take only a cautery with a fine point, and burn the hair, and if it is eschaufed as we have said, when the white substance which contains the fluid is discovered.
If you take the cautery as we have said, and prick that membrane as we have done, and burn with this fine cautery, scorched is that substance at this point.
And burn in all ways as you wish, until you have scorched it all; and keep that fire does not touch the wool; and soak that wound so that this blood will be more fluid; and keep that you are careful of excessive bleeding, and more so than in the treatment of wounds of greater size;
And if nothing else hinders you, or an abscess bursts or blood vessels burst or anything else that is contrary, if it is necessary, cure that which is contrary to it, according to what is said above.
And if the patient is weak and does not wish to wait for this work because of its horror, if necessary, make an incision as I have said, and know for certain by the signs that we have mentioned that the wound is clean.
If you make the patient sit up in a comfortable chair; then pierce the abscess at the lower part with a broad needle, and put the perforation through to the bone; and if the opening is large, so that all the pus comes out;
Then put cotton on the limb, and bind it, and leave only the remaining pain to flow out, then cure until the wound is healed.
If the white wool does not allow the pain to escape from the wound, as you must give her a thumb or the instrument with which the pain is treated of the hydropic, as it is formed in this way; and enlarge, that is to say, widely open the wound, and drain that the pain returns, and reassemble after about twenty days or when the pain has subsided, and when it is reassembled as before, the patient will then be able to walk again.
of the opening of the veins
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse.
The wounds in this section of the limb are numerous, for it seems to me that the matter is worth leaving alone.</start_of_turn>
I say therefore that in the case of abscesses, both come from the bone, and I have seen many cases.</start_of_turn
It is known by excess of vinegar and water, which is spread out as boils, or from percussion;
And it is the color of the wound according to the color of the corn; and does not cause pain, and is grief.
And by chance it is a wound that is greedy, foul and bloody, of dark color, and never comes from a vein or swelling of a vein.</start_of_turn>
When it is not from a vein, if it is known by the position of the wound, when you press it to the side.</start_of_turn And you must not touch it.</start_of_turn>
He who is made of swelling of a vein is known by his arrangement at the expression of touch of the two thumbs.
and can well make the size on this semblance, and on the other parts of the body. and that you take hold like a leech, then the egg is up, and the thread for white silk, and release the supporter from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already swollen with these hooks, if it is to be known, that you must treat the egg and hold it.
If it is exposed to the surface, or within the vessels, it is necessary to deliver all the surrounding fat, and round off the edges.
If the marrow is coming out from the bone or the heel, if you must cover it all, remove the yolk, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Once the work is done, if you are treating a wound, smear the wound with coarse wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then apply other remedies until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
from the bites of the coccyx
This is a wound covered with a covering resembling a berry, with the softening of the bones. and the patient groans in pain when he moves it.
and the treatment of this disease is as perilous as this one before mentioned,
and all that we say about it confirms what the ancients have said.
It is fitting that you make the patient sit in a comfortable position, so that the supporter of the joints below rests against your thighs. Upon all the vessels that are proceeding from the groin, and grasp the master, and extend them forward;
then grasp the large scrotum at the testicles and uncover the vessels through the opening,
and then pull downwards from the groin part, as we said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples;
Then I insert a needle or if there is double thread, I tie it to the first root where the vessel has come loose, and I tie it to the other root. Then I hold the wound in the middle upright, according to the length of the limb, and I extract the corrupted moisture.
Then I treat the wound like the others or I apply a bandage, so that no vessel is cut except for those that must be cut off;
because in this way there is no harm, and if all the vessels come together, if you must cut the veins, it is better to cut them all at once; If the vein does not lose its nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and if it dries up and does not swell, aid is not needed.
from the root to the surface of the skin These events of this limb are by the section that comes or passes by the syfac, or the extension above the belly in the part of the flanks, for in this way the intestines descend from that route to one of the hips;
These events of this limb are by the section that comes or passes by the syfac, or the extension above the belly in the part of the flanks, for in this way the intestines descend from that route to one of the hips;
And the signs when it is an extension downward of the scapula, if there is little and little in the long tension, and does not come immediately; And the scapula hangs limp even toward the belly, because the scapula presses the intestines.</start_of_turn>
And the sign is when the scapula is fractured, that it immediately causes severe pain, and the scapula is displaced, from the stretching of the skin and the bursting of the bowels.</start_of_turn>
And never does the marrow go out with the intestines, and is retained as it is, and causes great suffering to the patient, even when it is pressed.</start_of_turn
And in these cures of fire with fear, for it is known to escape.
And thus in these cures of fire with fear, if you command or patient that he hold the bowels to his side in the wound, if it can return there; then either bind above his collar between your hands, and hold the buttocks;
then extend the arm downwards, and press all the skin of the buttocks down long; Then from the depth of the wound, as much as the size of your hand, according to what you have learned by opening the wound, or as much as it is possible;
Then pull out the hair that is under the skin, as much as the white hair of the beard is uncovered throughout;
Then hold your index finger on that which lies under the beard, that which is between the white hair that is under the skin of the beard and between the second hair
Then pull out the hair that is under the skin, as much as the white hair of the beard is uncovered throughout; and hold the thumb of your left hand against the beard, and keep the beard against the second hair all the way up to the size of your hand; And instruct the minister to extend the arm upwards, and loosen that which is behind the ligament.
And ask if there is any intestine or white fat enclosed or hardened at the shoulder joint, and if you find nothing, grasp the belly firmly.</start_of_turn>
Then take a needle or if there is thick thread made of twelve threads, and pass it through the back part of the fat, which is behind the leather of the armpits; then draw out, and cut off the ends that appear from the thread, until there are three threads left.</start_of_turn Then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and bind the fat, which we have said is behind the leather of the armpits, with a strong thread of six parts; Then encircle the head of the shoulder with thread, and bind it firmly in three places, so that no vessel except those that nourish it can enter there, only by incision it may go. And straighten the limb according to the first limb that is long three times as much as this one, and after these three limbs leave out the space which is between the shoulder blades like a loaf of barley that has been cut in two.</start_of_turn>
And afterwards according to the roundness that the eye carries; then bind in the part which is between the shoulder blades, as much as it is without pressure, and bow, as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
Then mix coarse wool with oil, and put it on the wound, and I mix in the thread that we have mentioned. And never is the fat cauterized beyond what we have said, after the incision, due to the fear of bloodletting.</start_of_turn>
For often it happens that the limb swells up with blood; and if it is delayed in rising, if it is from a hot bath, put on what we have said, until it swells up.</start_of_turn
Then cure the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed.</start_of_turn>
De hernie carnouse.
In this matter, I have never seen anyone who could cure it with iron.
And the old people say that it is made just like the branch that joins the nut, in part like you bind the blood vessels, after the size above loosely to the dose;
then put them together, and cure the abscess of what causes it, until the blood vessels groan; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Never comes routine among the angers, as we have said, and open the chest; and do not find any intestines as coils, and if there are, it is to their disadvantage, and repair them every hour.
and whenever it stays too long in that place, if one believes the wound or swelling, as long as the intestines are found;
and this comes from the extension of the sinew which is in the angers, as we have said, because it is swollen, then is softened and emptied by opening the chest;
and it is cured by cautery, as we have mentioned before; and never by iron in this manner:
And it is that the patient lies quite still upon his back between your hands, then grasp the limb of the route enfleit downwards according to the quantity of two palms.
Then draw out the scab which is beside the leather that covers it, then take hold of the root and bring the limb appearing from the scab outwards.
And press on the front of the belly, then cut the two thumbs appearing from the scab on the top of the root, and cut one and the other.
Then draw out the root, and do not cover the scab or extend the gut or anything else, as I told you in the cure of the root of the intestines;
Then treat the wound by the treatment of wounds. And when you have closed the wound, if the wound bursts and heals the wound, as long as it is healed.
The surface is contracted, and shows no mark in the course of treatment, and the cautery is useless in this location, and the surrounding parts are more susceptible to health.
of the softening of the leather of the nails
Many times the nails of the house are softened in lukewarm water, for the nails that are within are softened, and it is seen; and it is necessary, when one sees it being cured, to make the patient lie on his back, and to scrape off the softened leather on the natural leather; then assemble the layers one over the other with a seam, and if you see that, close the first excess of softened leather with two or three stitches firmly; then scrape between the stitches and cure as the other wounds, until they are healed, and cut the thread.
Dou chastrement
When the limb is chastened
Saiches that chastening is commanded in our laws, and for this reason I do not wish to speak of it in this book; and it is not necessary to do so for two reasons: the first is that the patient will respond when asked in the saige; and the second, because we have often had to cauterise beasts for our attendants, as with oxen and sheep and goats and other beasts. I say therefore that chastening is done in two ways: by traction or by incision.  In the one that we do by traction, we make the beast sit in warm water, until the hairs are softened and pliant; then we grasp them with our hand, until they are set and you no longer feel them.  Of the size of the chastening: it is necessary that you hold the beast, and press the skin of the hairs with your left hand, then bind the suspenders, and grasp each heel with one hand, as when you have well supported them; and leave no wound or any secret wound that is outside the vessels; and this method of chastening is milder than that which is done by traction, because at traction remains by chance no part of the hairs, by which the beast desires to loosen.  Then cure the wound until it is healed.
Hermofrodie est selonc deux manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les deux coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine. Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et deux coions. Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.
Hermaphroditism is according to two manners as in homes: one if between the two testicles opens as with the figure of the nature of a woman, or if there is hair, and sometimes in the court it urinates. And the other manner if it is in women, and has upon the navel as a beard and two testicles. And the cure of the womb and fame if it is that you cut out all the seminal vessels, and the cure if like other wounds; in the second manner, of homes whose urine leaps through the skin of the testicles, if there is no cure.
Tentigene is a seminal vesicle upon the natural part, as long as it is too heavy to see; and many women have it as much as a hand. And the cure is this. It is necessary to hold the excess of the tenticle at your hand or as desired; and do not go too deeply, for from there blood does not come; then cure from another cure until it is healed; and there is another thing that comes from the mouth of the marrow, and the emptying, and by chance leaps out, and is like a bladder, and for this reason it is called the ancient "madness of the kidney". If it is possible to cut it out, as we have said the tenticle, and cure it until it is healed.
De erratique.
If the nature of the woman is not clearly discerned, or the opening is small; and if it is natural by birth, or an accident from disease that has come to be; or by a char of garlic, or a soft or thick syfat, and is made by pushing in the armpit, or in the breast, or on the genitals, or otherwise; and if it is suspected that there is an embolism nearby, if there is pain in the two thighs or the groin. If there is a soft syfat and it is nearby, and if there are two levers, if you hurry, and pull them together: put your two thumbs together, and let the woman be on her back, spread her legs; then the two levers will form, as long as the soft syfat is round, and let it go over the embolism; then take hold of the limb, and anoint it with oil, and put it on the limb, and let the woman lie down comfortably, if it cannot be healed. And if the syfat is hard and thick, if you must cut it with a scalpel resembling a berry leaf. If the embolism is of a nail, if you suspend it on the navel and cut it off; have the medicines that stop bleeding, such as acaice, dragon’s blood, incense, together with many eggs; then mix in a large dose of lead. Let the wound be long, and mix in a string of linen; and let it be cured of other cures until it is healed. And if in the armpit comes a nail, if you cover it according to this manner, this will prevent infection. For infection is what is in the armpit, do not touch it with fire.
of emboli.
Emorroids are openings of veins which without restraint usually happen; and when they are old, they become tough. As we have said before in the division, the signs and symptoms are these which announce healing. I say that emboldened veins and those which are full in the marrow do not feel pain, except when they are cured by fire. Those which are at the mouth of the marrow, we can feel, are those which we can cure. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then extend the thumb and hold the index finger at its root, then sprinkle on medicines which restrain blood, such as alum and dragons blood, and incense, and the like; then close her up an hour later, and put her in cold water; and if there is any remaining blood, if she sits in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and elderberry and the like, and then drink barley flour, and mix it with honey and anise, and make a paste of it. And if it has clotted, that is good. If not, make her cough up phlegm at the back and put on a plaster. Then take linen and moisten it in the juice of plantain or in the juice of elderberry with wine vinegar, and make her cough up. And when the abscess is quiet, if it is cured, the limb will regain its natural position as long as it is healthy; and the one which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a severe wound, if you cover it as I have said the tough one; and then it will be cured as long as it is healthy.
Emoroids are openings of veins which without restraint usually happen; and when they are old, they become tough. As we have said before in the division, the signs and symptoms are these which announce healing. I say that emboldened veins and those which are full in the marrow do not feel pain, except when they are cured by fire. Those which are at the mouth of the marrow, we can feel, are those which we can cure. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then extend the thumb and hold the index finger at its root, then sprinkle on medicines which restrain blood, such as alum and dragons blood, and incense, and the like; then close her up an hour later, and put her in cold water; and if there is any remaining blood, if she sits in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and elderberry and the like, and then drink barley flour, and mix it with honey and anise, and make a paste of it. And if it has clotted, that is good. If not, make her cough up phlegm at the back and put on a plaster. Then take linen and moisten it in the juice of plantain or in the juice of elderberry with wine vinegar, and make her cough up. And when the abscess is quiet, if it is cured, the limb will regain its natural position as long as it is healthy; and the one which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a severe wound, if you cover it as I have said the tough one; and then it will be cured as long as it is healthy.
Emoroids are openings of veins which usually happen without restraint, but when they become old, they harden. As we have previously mentioned in this section, the signs and symptoms that suggest healing are these. I say that emboldened veins and those which are full in the marrow do not feel pain, except when cured by fire. Those which are at the mouth of the marrow we can feel, and these are the ones we can cure. Therefore, it is necessary to put the woman in a cold house, extend the thumb and hold the index finger at its root, sprinkle on medicines which restrain blood, such as alum and dragons blood, and incense, and the like. Close her up an hour later and put her in cold water. If there is any remaining blood, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and elderberry, and drink barley flour mixed with honey and anise. If it has clotted, that is good. If not, make her cough up phlegm at the back and apply a plaster. When the abscess is quiet and cured, the limb will naturally regain its position. The one that is called "albathir" is red and resembles a severe wound. If you cover it as I have mentioned, it will be cured.
De l’enfantement.
The master first teaches at the play that she knows the figure of the natural birth, and the signs are when you see the woman press down on the jaw, and desire to smell the breast: then the child comes out with force; so his limbs that are naturally born according to the figure are born with the head down, and comes out head first, and is accompanied by it; and when you see these signs, if you press lightly on his belly, if the child comes out head first, he is delivered; for when he descends upon his head, he is accompanied by it, and the mother delivers the afterbirth by natural force; and this is not in any way natural. For it does not come once from its parts, but comes from force of the womb or the uterus, or the hands, or it comes from its belly, or even from behind, and is converted by an accident from its collar, and by other harmful figures; if the master is at the play that she is wise and discreet in these matters, and avoids error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures that we must help her with.
When the child comes out head first by natural birth, and the woman is groaning, and her strength is weak, if you make her sit on a chair, or the women hold her; and arise her nature from oil or rue or fennel seed, and then bring her between her two legs the little cushion from which this is the form: Et fend la secondeine, et copie à son unguile tant qu’il moistures qui est en soi fuers; et prend le ventre de la femme tant qu’il enfants descend, et s’il ne descend, si covient clisteriser la femme de muscillage de fenugrec avec huile de sisament; puis la fais prendre et esternuer de condisi, et tiens sa bouche et son nez une heure: si istra maintenant l’enfant. Et si les mains icelles sortent vers le haut, si covient qu’on les ramine légierement peu à peu; et s’il ne les peuvent entrer, si met la femme sur un siège, et li tiens les pieds en haut; puis déboute le siège sur la terre, et tiens on la femme, qu’elle ne crie au déboutment; et si les mains ne peuvent entrer, et l’enfant meurt, si li copie les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.
And split the secondine, and press at its nail as much as the moisture that is in it flees; and take the belly of the woman as much as the child descends, and if it does not descend, if it is necessary to clip the woman with fennel massage with sesame oil; then make her take and expel seeds, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: if it is now out. And if the thumbs are pulled out towards the sky, if it is necessary to keep them gently less and less; and if they cannot enter, if put the woman on a chair, and keep her feet high; then pull the chair out to the earth, and hold on to the woman, that she does not cry out; and if the thumbs cannot enter, and the child dies, if it grasps the thumbs at the wrist which is put here, and pulls out the child, and leave equally. When the child comes out on its feet, if it is necessary to push up; Then the tendon turns back and forth, as long as it is even;
Then the tendon turns back and forth, as long as it is even; then grasp its pieces and extend it back and forth.</start_of_turn>
Cant it jump up just as much as it wants, if the command has grasped it, and make it spit out its contents.</start_of_turn> if it jumps further, if God wants it.</start_of_turn
If it is not forced too much, as we have said, if the bone is slightly bent and twisted, as long as it is in its natural position. For indeed it is easily broken.</start_of_turn>
If it is not forced too much, as we have said, if the bone is slightly bent and twisted, as long as it is in its natural position. For indeed it is easily broken. And if there is force too much, take a muscular grip of altitude, olive oil of sisal, gum masticated, and broth all in.i. mortar.</start_of_turn and place over the nature of the woman downwards and drive away this swelling.</start_of_turn Then make him sit upright in acute pain until the ribs are stiff;
And when it is moist from there, make him drink one-eighth of a spoonful of myrrh, and give him something to drink, and leave him for an hour. Then make him sit on a chair, then make him cough and strain his mouth and throat, and gently press his belly, for he is now vomiting. because of the issue of the child on his knees. When the limb comes in this shape, if he puts his hands together, palm to palm;
And thus the child cries and cries; and instructs the woman to hold her attention until the children are done. And thus the child cries and cries; and instructs the woman to hold her attention until the children are done. And thus the child cries and cries; and instructs the woman to hold her attention until the children are done.
If it does not move, if you make it manage over the lit, and the legs stretch out;
then apply the muscle I mentioned earlier.</start_of_turn>
and if it does not budge, if you make it sit on its seat, then study to bring the limb back in its place.</start_of_turn and as the limb moves according to its natural figure, and you make it erupt, and command it to stay still until the swelling has gone down.</start_of_turn>
From the issue of the child upon his neck, and his hands spread wide, and his face turned towards his mother's back. I command that you hold his hand, then turn it back and forward, and hold it lightly;
and when it is even, if you put on the muscular substance of elevation and oil, as we have said, then command that it move forward and backward
and when you have done this, if you make it sit on its seat, and command that it rest; and it will sneeze. From this same measure at all the second time.
From this same measure at all the second time. When it comes from this measure at all the second time, if the second time touches your nail, while the moisture is emptied;
and if the swelling swells up on its face and neck, if the swelling bursts, that it must not be held back, and the boy will die.
then take the child out, as long as you have put it if it is convenient, and command the woman not to do anything again:
When the dislocation is slightly loosened. When the swelling of the shoulder dislocates repeatedly, it is not strange, and often happens. When the swelling of the shoulder dislocates repeatedly, it is not surprising that many people die from it; for this reason, you must first reset the dislocation.
I know that, when multiplied, they are dispersed by the liquid which divides them, which is bound to the gut;
and never naturally comes out like all of them together, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And if it comes suddenly, if the treatment is as we have said, and whether the seizure is subtle, make a light touch and gently do what it does; and make as if it were worth saving life. Furthermore.
Furthermore. Sometimes they are formed in the marrow, that is to say, in a circle, or a crescent, or a half-circle, or three-fourths of a circle, or five-sixths of a circle, or two-thirds, or up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the holy sage.
and it is right that one should praise all this, for by chance many things are happening; if one does what is right.
From childhood until death.
When you treat a woman who has had a stillborn child or an abortion, if as I have said in the division, and there is no great rush, and you are constrained by the work of your hands; then you must believe that the woman is of sound health, and has no accident or is in danger of death;
if you believe that the woman is conscious on her back, and her limbs are inclined downwards, and her legs are lifted up;
And the nurse must hold the arm at a right angle, or if it is bound to the bed, until it descends naturally from the child.
Then wipe the mouth of the patient with moist olive oil mixed with alum and fenugreek seeds and linseed, then anoint their hands with these oils and these poultices. Then put them in the bowl lightly, then give them one or two drinks of wine or other liquids that are convenient for this case,
and take care that the child does not rise up on their head. If the hair is plucked out in the eye, in the nose or in the mouth or in the ear, or if it is pulled out from the beard or from the eyelashes or pressed against the ribs,
if the hair has been plucked out from the eye, or the nose or the mouth or the ear, or from the beard or from the eyelashes or pressed against the ribs, and the wound has descended to the bone, it is necessary to pierce or cut and to press the ribs together.
and you must hold the hair with your right hand, put the thumb between your left thumb and index finger, and press it firmly with all your hand, and hold the hair firmly in none of the places mentioned above, until the bleeding has stopped
Then the hip finds another bone, or the thigh is affected in its middle, so that the extraction is even;
and then it is stretched evenly by moving forward and backward, so that the muscles relax, and if it is grasped by teeth to hold it, as is the case:
and if part of it remains, if anyone grasps a little of its oil, and puts it in that part, and treats the other part;
and if there is no more to grasp, if you put this ointment or more high up inside, and make it until it comes out whole.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned by the tension, then you must wrap around it with your thumb, as much as necessary;
then grasp the limb at the joint of the palm or the wrist, and so you must do in the other hand, and hold both thumbs together.
and if the limb of the child is large and is twisted in the extraction, or if there is swelling or a sharp pain collected, If it is certain that you have reset the bony spur between your two hands, and hold the head firmly, then draw out the pain. Or you may bind it to the instrument which is called the “almidach,” from which it comes with the instruments or bandage which follows this;
and in this way make it swell with a great natural chief; and then treat for the bones as tenacious,
And if the head of the shoulder leaps out violently and is strained by force, whether it is fractured or the moisture that is or has come out leaps out;
and if it cannot be held, if the limb is broken into pieces by the force;
and if the swelling is in the belly or if the ribs are broken, if you must surely pierce as much as the moisture comes out.
and if the swelling is on its side, if the attraction is slight, and the approach to the mouth of the marrow is slight.
And if it is swollen on the belly or on the hand, it is proper that you extract it, that is, to uncover what is enveloped over the hand. And keep the belly or the hand, as long as the moisture that is in it remains;
and if another limb is fractured and the limb is dislocated, if the limb is fractured from the wrist to the elbow, and is treated until the marrow is exposed; Then indeed. I will anoint or grease, and proceed.
and if the mouth of the marrow is retracted by the hot cautery that has come, if I cannot pass it, then I must bring moist and fatty things. and I apply plasters, soak in soft and moist water.
And if the infant is on his side, put him even, if he remembers what we said about the living child.
and if he does not remember, if he cries out involuntarily, do not leave anything of the afterbirth behind.</start_of_turn>
And when you have done this, if he remembers what we have said about afterbirth, as it comes in the belly.</start_of_turn
and if there is discharge of blood comes, if there is any restraining water, and other cures are administered.</start_of_turn
And I saw a woman in whom a child was born dead, then consulted with another concerning it, and refuted death in the other. After a long time, there came a swelling in the belly, and it burst open, and began to swell greatly.</start_of_turn>
I went for help, and I thought for a long time, and could not stop the bleeding.</start_of_turn>
I put on strong compresses, and out came a bone, and after a few days another.</start_of_turn I marvel at mouth, for this belly has no bone.
I thought that these were the bones of a dead child.
I wish for the wound, and in treating hands bones, as long as the woman was improving; and I saw the woman long tense in her bowels, and that was already a little bowel movement.
And I have never seen this chapter except for the time when the master found an unusual thing, and he had to ask for help.
to reset the dislocation.
Then comes the form of the pressure, which is to keep the book closed; and there are two returns as two fingers of two hands. However, the horns are more subtle than the restraint, and are made of ebony or boxwood;
And let the mouth be wide open, i.e. two fingers wide, and the tongue must be drawn out, and as long as a palm and a half. And in between let the two limbs be two fists wide apart, which are closed together, half a palm long or more;
And these two fist-closures are held in the mouth of the patient when the corners are turned over
Another form, more subtle and lighter, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of the nails; And he has twice struck his joints twice at the shoulder, as you see, from a wound that is long and wide.
And when you see the wound opening up all around the instrument, if you make the woman sit with her head resting, keep the feet still and the legs over then take the two joints together in the wound and hold the instrument between her thighs. then cover your hand over the instrument as much as you see the wound opening up in the mouth of the wound, until the pain ceases.
These instruments are all very sharp, and their resemblance multiplies their danger; and when you behold them appear, the work hastens, and the higher you are in your home the greater is your quantity.
If you do not covet the instrument when you do not see it, for its necessity is not to be excused
When the secondine is retained in infancy, if you command the patient to retain its limb, and then make it cough out of condition, and strain your hands to the mouth and neck; and if it leaps out for that, well is that.
If not, take one pot and make a hole or incision, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the marrow, such as chamomile, rue, anis, camomile, cassia and centaury.
All these herbs, or some of them, whether cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put a sponge or incision in the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marrow.
and hold it until steam comes out of the marrow; then make it cough, as we have said. If the second joint is sprained, If the second joint remains after this treatment, and is not better, as it is commanded at the dance, she must moisten her left hand with oil of poppies or with alum, and then put it back in its place.</start_of_turn>
and if she has found the second joint, if she grasps it and stretches it back and forward, so that the marrow does not groan at the extraction.</start_of_turn but must move gently forward and backward, and then treat; for if it comes and disappears.
And if the mouth of the marrow is open, as we have said, for the cure of yesterday, and fumigation of herbs.
and if it is not from all of that which we have said, if you keep silent about it
but it befits that which is at the mouth of the marrow, you bind to the hip of the woman, and then clench with oil tetrafarmaçon.
if it boils and returns, and comes out forcefully; but nevertheless, when it boils thus there comes a bad smell from the belly and the head, and turns pale the patient.
If it is deemed necessary, then appropriate fumigations are useful in this case: neither of the ancients have proven the effectiveness of fumigation with rosemary and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which we fumigate the woman at the retention of urine and the secondine if it is necessary is this:
And it is like a cane, and we put the handle over the fire;
Or let the fumigations be over the charcoal, and the brim until it is consumed, and begin again.
To pierce the foundation
Whoever pierces the foundation does not give birth to children who have not fully grasped its support, but has stifled them with a subtle snare. Therefore, if one must pierce that snare, do not pierce it cruelly with a pointed instrument, but hold the lacement so that it does not touch;
then put on coarse cloth soaked in wine and oil, and the cure of ointment until it is healed.
If you doubt that it will not stay in place, put or draw in a weight of lead, and leave hands clasped, and be still until the swelling subsides.
Never again will this wound or abscess come to mind; if it covers itself: if it is cured, as we have said concerning the weight of lead.</start_of_turn>
of fistula from its foundation.</start_of_turn> Fistulas that come from the foundation are nodular and grow greater when they come from the base of the foundation, or between the two parts,
If there is a fistula or several; and when that swelling is old, if it persists, and is accompanied by moisture which causes a white or bluish swelling,
They never stay put; and are known by the fact that they occur when there is discharge or wind pressure when the patient evacuates, and by chance when one leaps forward.</start_of_turn>
And if there are fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to half of the thigh; and reach up to the joint of the hip, and up to the navel.
And thus one knows the permanent fistula from the transient. And it is that you bite your thumb or foundation, and insert a subtle needle of spider or iron into the fistula when there is no swelling.
And if there is swelling, if you insert a slight attempt of sponge, or hair, as long as you feel the attempt or hair on your thumb;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of blood or wind or swelling, as we have said. it is not pierced; if you hurry to cure it.
When the fistula is formed up to the bladder or the urethra, if in leaping the urine escapes and cannot be stopped by medicines.
If it is seen up to the hip joint, if there is a vein running up to the limb; if there is no twisting and the limb is not bent, if it is only slightly bowed, and no medicine or ointment will help;
and in these fistulas formed up to the bladder there is no other cure than toil, and the vanity of fools who interfere with it.
In that which is neither new nor old, hope for health with fire, as I have seen.
and that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and keep the legs stretched out as far as his thighs, and let his thighs lean towards his belly then make an attempt to stretch, or press if there is stiffness, until you can see or feel that it is relieved.
if the patient feels pain in the foundation, if you must, bite your thumb index,
He feels that he has perceived it; and whether it is discovered or you feel between your shoulder blade and your chest, then the wound that is perceived. if it does not slip away with it, it cannot be healed.
We can do everything well enough to heal it, but that does not always happen;
and if we do it cautiously, according to the size of the fistula, as it is said; And the remainder of the cavity in the fistula, as long as it comes from below the foundation; make this once or twice, until you know that these hairs must be burned, which are like a quill of oil.
And then treat the soft scabs with burning, until these hairs vanish; then treat the wound with ointment, applying pressure and closing the wound.</start_of_turn>
If it is well closed, that is good. But if not, it cannot be healed;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule à ce qui enseut la coverture dou keur. and if it (the head of the shoulder) tries to slip between [the bones] and does not pierce until it reaches the root which is or is based on the foundation, and between the root and the attempt put on a thick covering of felt or syphac, and you will see the fistula to that which is enclosed by the covering like a knot.
and it will be delivered the attempt, and will be loosened; then command the nails of the nails which seem like a bird’s beak, and leave neither of them.
And if he will not move, and the surgeon is between him and the work, if the fire cautery or the medicine is hot.
For the fire cautery brings together three bones: namely, the burning of these cartilages, the evacuation of blood and the drying out of moisture.
Then the cure of soft tissues, burned or cut into pieces, until the bones crack and the cartilages burn in the wound;
Then cure the wound of the sores with dry powder, and these are the dry medicines.
For when it is restored, if it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula arises up to the root of the bone, and is loosened from the flesh, if the bone or root is grasped or questioned concerning this.</start_of_turn>
If you feel the attempt, and there is blood or pus, or a tumor, or it is near piercing, if there is no other way out but hope, by the administration of one of these three methods:
you cauterize as we have said, or you drain it until it is empty, or if you wish, you may try and cure it from the beginning.</start_of_turn
And do not go too quickly, for you must cover the dwelling that holds the foundation, and come out in the direction of the will; otherwise you will cause ejections. Then extract it, as we have said before.
Then extract it, as we have said before. By chance if you are sound, or you loosen that covering and the mud then when it is cut off from the foundation, or by attempt or by any other pointed instrument; Then hold tight the flesh which is in the wound, as you can;
Then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula at the lower part of the foundation: if it is more gentle for the patient.
And never are fistulas like this: and it is when you bite through the attempt in the fistula, and it is either costs the skin of the underside of the foundation or breaks the bone beneath the skin if you take a perceived attempt at the head like this: And indeed, if there is a thread of hair torn in two, and you bite through the attempt at the head throughout the fistula until it is at the root.
If the limb is grasped at the root of the foundation, then stretch out the thread of that which is torn, as you would a tooth or foundation;
If the limb is grasped at the root of the foundation, then stretch out the thread of that which is torn, as you would a tooth or foundation;  and draw out the head of the thread, and reunite the joints together, and strain one against the other, and leave it one hand or two hands.
and the restraint never once, as long as the thread holds these nails that are between two bones, and that crack.
then cure the wound until it is healed and sound.
If the fistula does not burst, if you force it to burst in all the ways you can, it will not be too much harm.
For it does not be worthwhile making it burst by force if it is too deeply embedded, and then you must cure it as we have said, while it is still sound.</start_of_turn>
The shape of a spiny bladder from which the fistula is made is thick and has a part that is rough and jagged.</start_of_turn and on the other hand, because of this we must not pierce it, as you see here.</start_of_turn
Emorrydes are of two kinds: either they are deep-seated, like grains of sand, and are small and large in number, or they are close to the surface of the skin without breaking through it. and if there is one or more of them, they are displaced from the socket and from the root of the bone; but those that are displaced often have moisture.
and are often accompanied by bleeding or a yellow or bloody discharge, and have a pale color.
And the cure for these things that are within the foundation, if you command the patient to groan and rise up to his chamber, as long as the foundations are firm, and it will become clear. If you hurry, and grasp it with your nails, or hold it with your finger, then grasp it at its roots;
and if it slips from your grasp due to moisture, if you take hold of it with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chammock cloth. and draw it towards your shoulders, then grasp it, and powder over it hot powder that are in lieu of cautery. or thou causest them to cauterize as it is said or as in the treatise of cautery, and then heal them of other remedies while they are whole;
and if the foundations cannot withstand, if you bite the patient with biting and rough tweezers to uncover what is or is under the foundation, if it can be loosened openly.</start_of_turn>
cannot the patients endure, and if the strings are too tight for the foundation, if it is the gentle cure;  </start_of_turn and take them at your nail or with forceps, and hold them, then cure them as we have said, while they are whole, and make the incision with iron to stop the bleeding.
If you consent that you will follow this manner: take one thread and pierce it through a needle, then pass the thread through from below and draw out the needle from the other side, and twist the two ends of the thread around the needle. If it is large; tighten the thread further, then knot the thread, and draw out the needle, and make sure to secure all the others, leaving one to correct the excess blood;
then put upon the foundation one moist bandage in rose oil or beeswax, and put on the foundation, and command the patient to rest;
Then leave it until it shrinks, and when it has shrunk, if the treatment of oil and other remedies, while sane.
when it is dry or firm. Many times there is dryness of the bowels due to constriction of nature, and when the disease is advanced and medicine is of no avail.
If you can, rest at the point of a scab or at your nail the crust underneath, which does not let it moisten; Then treat it until it is healed as much as it can;  if it is necessary.
and if it cannot be calmed, if you must repeat the scraping more strongly than before, until it is numb, and be escorted; Then treat it until it is healed
completely. Formice est une petite apparance fautrée antor le corps, et va mout em parfont.
Formice is a small appearance that appears before the body, and goes through without leaving a mark; and never is its touch perceived, and it is felt as if death is near, and comes throughout the body, and more is found in the hands than anywhere else.
And the cure is that you take a sponge of a hen’s quill, or a quill of strong vulture, and put that sponge on the wound, until the blood circle encompasses the wound all around; then tighten your hand with all the sponge so that you can encompass the wound all around, and put it through, and scrape the wound from its roots.
And if you see that he does this with a needle or iron as it is said above, and be subtle and restrain his limbs:
And if you see that he does this with a needle or iron as it is said above, and be subtle and restrain his limbs, do not make it obvious, for it must be kept secret, and press firmly.  And if you see that he does this, if it is before or during the cautery procedure.</start_of_turn>
de the form of a blister. Never make a blister with silver or gold, or with melted lead or mercury; and never make a blister with these small and large instruments, as they are brought.
Those who are feeble and painful in their children and infants are puny.
Their form is small and great if it is excessive, or the belly is tied up in this manner:
and if there is a swelling or the belly is tied up, as you see, and the limb is pierced through or split open; there is a hole on one side, or on the other side.
or the belly is filled with the best medicine or parchment, and the hole is pierced all around the wound
And between each part there must be space, then stretch these parts apart with a strong thread of strong thread twisted in a cross or hooked at one end, and assemble the belly as if it were a nail. When the medicine is inside, if there is an instrument before a strong thread, then clinch; and this is the shape of a circle:
Neither too hot nor too cold, and join the head of the clinch with oil or balm of egg, or something similar, and hold it lightly.
Then grasp the minister with his two hands assembled, until it is completely visible, then withdraw the clinch, and leave the patient his legs at rest,
If the physician sees that the limb is still painful, if he can tolerate it, and if he sleeps all night without pain; this is a greater aid.
If he has put it on in a state of sickness of swelling of the belly, and the physician wishes to depart, if he begins as soon as he is well.</start_of_turn>
If there are pus or swelling, or an abscess, if the swelling is as subtle as that of a child;  </start_of_turn
and that is the form of the subtle swelling on which the skin is strained:
wounds
We have already mentioned in the previous chapter the treatment of wounds; or rather, the treatment of hands and medicines, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on what causes them, and depending on the limbs or parts of the body that are wounded, and how they are made
The things that cause wounds are by the bite of a stone, and the size of a spear or nail, or of a lance or fist or stone, or similar things;
Or that which is done according to the laws of the cure, if like wound that bites upon the neck, or upon the head, or the shoulder, or the belly, or the liver, or other limbs.
Or that which is done according to the laws of the cure, if like wound that bites upon the neck, or upon the head, or the shoulder, or the belly, or the liver, or other limbs. And I shall tell you of the cure for simple wounds, for the memory of it will come back to you in this chapter.</start_of_turn>
I say that when a simple wound comes or chief, and the bone is not broken, if you take care that it is not from a stone or other things, and the skin is completely ruptured and the wound is great, And you doubt the wound's depth: if you do it too cautiously, the head of the casualty himself will suffer from the blood of the wound; or let the blood flow in the opposite direction of the limb.
and listen to the patient's swelling of wine and meat
and if he does not see better, if he is fed meat, do not drink wine, do not eat cheese;
and put out the wound, if it is festering, soak in oil of roses only, or in astringent wine;
If there is no oozing from the wound, if you put a dressing on it when it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, dust, I shall tell you about it later.
If blood has been moved, put on some ointment until it has healed.
And if the wound is great like a nail and some, and the layers do not gather together by tension, if you gather them together by stitches, as I shall say for wounds in the belly, of stitching
If the wound is uncovered of bone, and is open, and can only be held together by a thread, if you can; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hair instead of skin. And instruct the patient to eat plenty of solid foods, such as testicles and wheat bread, as well as poultry, and similar things.
And if you find or see putrescence on the skin, and it does not touch the bone, if you bite down firmly, and lick the wound, then cure it.</start_of_turn>
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be staunched by medicine, if you can tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread.</start_of_turn And if this does not help, cauterize it.</start_of_turn>
And if these wounds are small and simple, if it is a minor cure: then put on this powder which solidifies as soon as it has moved.
And the manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon’s blood two parts; and chalk three parts, and grind the powder finely.</start_of_turn> and apply the wound, and hold it firm, until it is well aired and unites with all its blood.</start_of_turn>
and then bind it firmly, and let it drain, if it does not swell; for we do not keep the medicine until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And never do we do this chalice solely, when we have neither incense nor blood of dragons, but only when the wound has not moved.
But if the wound has moved, even in this state, if one does not put on this powder;
but put on some gentle poultices made of digested vinegar or flour gruel made of water and honey, until it oozes blood; then treat with other cures until it is healed.
And if a bone breaks with the wound and it is small, if you remove the splinter with fine tweezers.
Then I will tell you about the breaks of the head bone later.
of the wound of the neck.
The wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut
If this is the case, if there is no other remedy except to leave the wound open, and do not put anything restrictive, for it is night and it makes the wound retract; And do not put anything rough on the wound, for the substance of the night is cold, and its continuation is with the marrow, which is the strongest member.</start_of_turn>
but either the medicine should be warm, like boiled chalk soaked in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and chickweed soaked in sweet water.</start_of_turn> and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moist ointments.</start_of_turn
If the wound is large, and the edges are bent inwards, then hold it together until it is healed.
If the wound is deep and filled with pus, if the opening is high up or lower down, then...
If an artery is cut, and blood flows out, if the bone is fractured, and the flesh and fat are burned together, then...
If the shoulder joint is dislocated, or the arm is broken, and the limb is held in place, because the meat will otherwise be damaged. If the nail of the thumb touches the throat bone in the gorge, and do not touch the throat but rather return it to its natural position. Then the strain will come immediately, and leave it untouched for a while, then cure the swelling of the abscess until it is healed;
and if the wound has made an imprint in the bone, if that is the case; and if there are pieces of bone, if the veins are torn out, and that which you cannot keep, if you leave them as they are, And let the dislocation be freed and aligned at its origin.
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle some powder on the powder that I mentioned before.</start_of_turn> And if there is bone in the wound and there is fistula, if the cure must be made as I have said in the chapter.</start_of_turn>
of from a wound of a lance or a knife</start_of_turn
If it be lance or dagger, and the wound is deep, if you see that the wound is in a windy place where the patient cannot lie down: draw out the arrows then, for the wound is mortal.
If it is not deep and is fresh throughout its extent, if you do not put powder in it at the first hour, do not bind it up with the blood that escapes, for it does not stop bleeding by itself.</start_of_turn> Return to the body and comfort the patient.</start_of_turn But I put an attractive weight upon it, and I hold it for three times the hour;
But if there is no weight, put in the wound much cotton to soak up the moisture.
and keep the patient resting on the wound for two or three days or more; if there is no spasm, do not move badly or feel faintness; And when you see the bones displaced, if the wound is saved. Then do other cures, such as stitching and other treatments, until he is healed.
If it cannot be healed, and if there is an opening, as there is fistula; do the cure as we must.
If the wound is an incision with a spear or knife, and it is simple or deeper at the front or at the back, if the cure of what is before is sufficient;
If it is great, of suture; and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has broken pieces, if you wish for the wound, and the threads will burn if they are loosened. If they are not loosened, if you leave the wound open, if it will align the extractions.</start_of_turn>
And for other wounds as other limbs is the judge if we have said it.</start_of_turn>
Pain of the belly
The pain of the belly is great, medium, and small.
The great wound does not leave the intestines at any time, or the nerves of the intestines, because of the presence of worms;
and the large wound is more painful than the small wound ever is.
because of this it is more proper to point the intestines in and out again rather than to leave them exposed. Forasmuch the intestines swell greatly that they feel the fruit, if they return inwards more by points,
Because the intestines swell greatly that they feel the fruit, if they return inwards more by points, it is worth noting that the spleen may be injured, for because of this we must keep the intestine in its place like others.
And the wounds that arise from the rupture of the belly are in three ways:
the three common sutures appear in the belly suture,
And the stitching of other wounds with silk and thread is common as other wounds;
And all of them are more pure with the stitching of the belly, and I shall speak a little and declare.</start_of_turn>
I say that when the wound is small, and there is no gut thing inside, and if anything is grasped, this is in two ways: Or for the slightness of the wound, as we have said. Or because the intestines are swollen with the fruit.
And when it is cold, evacuate the vomit in parts sparingly: wet a sponge or rather a cloth in cold water only, or thou causest the fire to singe and prick and pierce. and cause the intestine to swell as much as the belly is bony;
and never make this wine restrictive, and is mute that it is more useful when the belly is swollen.
and when you see the swelling depart, if the intestine is moist with water or cooked and bad, For in this way is aligned the entrance to all things.
and if it cannot enter, if there is an opening in the wound at the instrument, we grasp the hemorrhoids there.</start_of_turn>
and the first cure is mute as the size, because there is no need to cut with great necessity nor to go too far.</start_of_turn
And this is the instrument for cutting.
if you cut downwards in the curve and do not veer off, and once you have made this shape:
and when the wound is swollen, and the intestines are forced out, if you reset it according to its natural form in its own place, If you are in doubt, for this is worth considering.
When the wound is wide and is in the lower part of the belly, if it is necessary to manage the patient on his back, and raises his legs higher than his head; And if it is in the lower part of the belly,
and if it is in the lower part of the belly, and if the root of the belly is in either of those parts. and if it is in the lower part of the belly, if you put the head and the heel higher than the lower parts, and if the navel is above the other part of the belly.
And thus it is proper to administer that which I have said concerning great and painful wounds.
Small wounds do not require such measures
then hold your hands apart, that is, administer with great care, which will keep all the blood vessels open and close the wounds. And this is the common method of stitching.
And this is the common method of stitching. and you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the wound's size, then leave some of the wound's chief, i.e. space, and pierce a needle or there is good strong thread; and pierce the two holes in the leather with the two holes in the silk,
and brings together the three heads of the shoulder together. then assemble the three heads of the limb that are coming forward,
Then leave some space and insert another hook. Then leave some space and insert another hook. Then hold the thread as you did for the first hook.</start_of_turn> and do not stop doing this until you have made several hooks.</start_of_turn until all the wounds are restrained;
And be the needles blunt, between marrow and bone, for the blunt needles pierce all the marrow, and the too great if they do not penetrate me well to enter: because it is proper that they be blunt;
and must not pierce too deeply into the marrow or skin,
They do not hold and open the wound before the suture.
Then close the holes of the arrows, so that they do not bleed the patient at night, and put patches or cloths over the holes of the arrows to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed;
And this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds. because there is often a needle or two involved.</start_of_turn>
The second stitch is common.</start_of_turn and that you assemble the hair of the leather and the hair of the silk together with a needle or there is much fine thread in between; And when you have perceived these things all together,
And when you have perceived these things all together, if you remain calm at the part where you began, in this way you will keep the spasms in check.
and place between each suture the thickness of a small hazelnut;
this suture will be sufficient for the home,
And I sutured a wound thus when one had a wound on the hip or belly,
which was caused by a knife.</start_of_turn> and was more than a palm wide, and it was filled with blood to the amount of two palms.
And it was the wound in the belly. Then I brought back the intestine when it had been out for twenty-three hours.
And the wound was closed after fifteen days, and the patient was healed, and was well again.
And they marveled that he had died, and this was a miracle;
And I will not fear the washing, for I am in a place where one does not go, neither with medicine. And thus more sense is made upon the wound seven times a day, and the washing of honey until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Or you will say the two right ways of dressing:
take the needle, and pass it through from the lower part up to the part inside;
When she has perceived the right shoulder in the right place, if the head hangs limp or is stiff or the hook has been pulled out,
and makes her perceive from the other side of the limb up to this very moment.
and understands this matter as well as a tailor does the hair and leaves one side of the shoulder, and takes it back from the other, until the dislocation is completely healed.
The second method of stitching, as Galen often does,
if it is like this with no other, which assemble the two parts naturally, and join one chief to the other cheek, in a partial manner:
insert a needle or hook nearby, and make the latter slip only, et laisse les poils dou syfac. then prick at their base, and hold the eyes steady until they grow to the root, as hair on the face;
then prick at their base, and hold the eyes steady until they grow to the root, as hair on the face; then prick the one and the other from the lower part until they reach the root, with other hair between them.
And this is the most frequent and usual method of treatment.
If this word is repeated, and no one testifies to it,
we must suture the belly with nine or ten needles, or there must be thread in the wound;
and we must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds;
and the arrows that when they are withdrawn from the belly, and the arrows that when they are withdrawn from the belly, if the wound is deeper than usual, the pain is greater.
The judge of the wound is like the judge of other wounds:
and when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even though it has moved, If you reset the intestines and the pain persists; then put on a coat of char-pulverizing powder.
If you reset the intestines and the pain persists; then put on a coat of char-pulverizing powder. If the pain persists even after resetting the intestines; then put on no other dressing except what is necessary, until the wound is healed.</start_of_turn> Close the wound, and keep the dressing in place, and observe; Then cure the wound like any other until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if you have no medicine, if you put it on, as soon as it begins to swell, cotton wool, And if you have no medicine, if you put it on, as soon as it begins to swell, cotton wool,
For there is no need of other medicine in many cases where wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not spread to the principal parts, If it is certain that you moisten coarse linen cloth in hot oil of poppy or rose oil, and put them on the boils, and anoint the sores.
if there is pain or decay in the bones, and it happens often, if the clusters of black wine swell up and the marrow comes down to the intestines;
And the spleen, and the intestines, if they are large, are lighter to cure than the small ones.
The large intestine which is called the "jeun" cannot be cured when it is swollen because of the swelling of the veins and the delicacy of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
if it be spurted from the wound, if it is returned behind as soon as the intestine, while it is fresh;
If it is dark and becomes black or blue, know that you must bind the black limb, for no blood flows there. for there are veins and arteries;
and bind what is between the limb, and put the joints loose from the lower part of the wound until it is displaced when the bone is cut, and the wound is healed.
From the root of the bone.
When the intestine is round and the wound is small, if its position is restored in its natural place,
because I have seen that one bone was fractured or belly of a lance;
And it was the wound on the right side of the stomach, and became filled with pus, and in this there was vomiting and diarrhea.
I put it to cure according to what I could, and did not cease until it was healed, and the wound closed.
And when I saw it closed, I doubted that the patient would be well in his belly; And there is no harm, but remains in many arrangements, meals and drinks.
And the physicians say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be ligated in a timely manner. having taken great precautions, and then unite the layers of the wound, and when the bleeding has ceased, if you put on the skin the two layers,
then put another bandage afterwards in this way as before, until the wound is completely healed.</start_of_turn>
and bind the wound.</start_of_turn> If the head of the shoulder is dislocated in the intestine, and causes no discomfort to the patient,
If the head of the shoulder is dislocated in the intestine, and causes no discomfort to the patient, one can tie the intestine with a fine thread which is cut from another intestine.
thus. and take the head of this thread of intestine which is freed from its discharge, And then bind the chief of this thread, namely a thread of fine linen, taut. Then pass the thread through the needle, and through the intestine, and hold it in place in its path;
and this manner of stitching is not fierce but according to the way of the vein and the expectation;
and if the wound is great and wide, even if it is in one of the great intestines, if there is no other remedy, save only by subtlety.
From fistula or whatever it may be. When it covers all wounds or incisions, whenever it breaks open, it is called a fistula universally.</start_of_turn> and even when it is closed and returns inwards.</start_of_turn
and fistula is according to truth a nodulation that must be hard and white, or where there is no pain, And it is just like the feather of a bird;
never straight in clear water, and sometimes spread out. never quite, and sometimes quite widely.
that every wound that is not cleansed will have its discharge, and there is no pain that does not leave its mark. This is not fire but by one of the eight causes:
namely, by the smallness of blood or bone; or by its malice; or by the violence of movements, or because of the hardness of some substance within, and upon the limbs, which prevents new growth. or il i a trop de bowe; or there is too much bow; or the limb is protruded, and the matter is of bad quality. or the medicine is not good in the cure. or because corruption is rampant like pestilence; Or for the property in the region is late the digestion, and late the health, and flees by nature. Or there are veins or bones:
and I have already mentioned these causes, the signs, and the cures of medicines in this division.
Or you must know that I will tell you the cure of fistula which is made by the sweat of hands.
Hair that has become fistulated appears in all limbs with pain. for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the spleen, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in some of the bones, or at the shoulder blade, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are of this manner are of grievous healing, and there is nothing but toil and ignorance.
and if there is no fistula that does not come out except just as I have said, and you have promised a cure, and you see that it is known, if you take an attempt to drain or burn it, if the fistula is straight, if the wound is cured;
If the fistula bursts, if a cunning worm attempts to plunge, for the worm plunges into the cavity of the fistula.
and if the fistula has holes and you cannot close it well with sutures, if the bladder is burst by one of the holes,
For the moisture is so strong from a pierce to another, and the earth is made firm.
then when its weight rests on your belly, you must know if there are bones or nerves, and that it is firmly supported,
ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press your hand, and where he feels it;
and when you know truly the limb or its place, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or a vein, Or in other cases which I have mentioned, if the limb conforms to what I have said,
Or in other cases which I have mentioned, if the limb conforms to what I have said, and the bones are stiff and corrupted that are within. and then the cure must be completed when it is healed,
and if the fistula is well deep from the right side, if you must pierce through, as much as you wish, Then I put soft compresses in medicine of the fistula, and I keep them until the head of the fistula.
Then I put soft compresses in medicine of the fistula, and I keep them until the head of the fistula. until the medicine softens the excess that is dissolved at the bottom.
and then I put greasy substances on the wound, until it is healed;
and if it does not heal by this, if we must cauterize as we have said,
And if the bone is corrupted from a fistula, take hold of it. If the belly or nerves are not grasped or the principal limbs, as we have said.
and if the bone is discovered, and there is corruption and blackness, if the limb remains as long as the corruption is complete, then cure for such things as are dangerous until it is healed;
If he is not healed, and if he returns home like before, if he is not cured, and if he goes home like before, he will certainly return again soon.
if he persists in his sickness and stays at home just as before, and restore the limb;
And if it is still sound, that is good. And if that is not the case, know that corruption has spread too far, and there is no use in proceeding further; unless there is some other remedy save leaving things to their own course;
or if there is a slight fracture, and you try to mend it with pins and needles, If the extraction is made with a suitable instrument, it covers that which is convenient.
If there is any remaining bone, if the thread is torn, do not leave it there;
if moisture opposes you, and there is no doubt or fear, if bone and moisture and hair are together, and the bone is freed.
And if you do not remove them at an hour, if you put something upon the wound that encourages corruption, leave them so long as the bones are exposed.
and then the bones will be more easily fractured.
it is important that you do not move them. If the patient feels such great suffering as to cause the corruption to swell as much as the marrow is white, Then restore the wound.
and if there is a great part of the corruption, and it comes up to the marrow bone; then cover it with a bandage and cover all until the corruption is healed; and then cure it until it is healed completely.
And I will tell you of a fistula that had its origin in the home of her leg. if you take this as an example and assist in your work.
There was once a young man about .xxx. years of age, who had a pain in his leg caused by something within the bone,
until the matter came to the leg, and there was a large abscess, and no cause was found by opening;
But the marrow thereupon bursts so much above as the abscess bursts. and from there bursts out mouthfuls of matter, and becomes a fistula, and there comes out mouthfuls of pus that all clot and moisture with blood.
and remain for a year and a half, and there is no wise man in the art of healing,
since I was called here, and saw the limb and the medicines which were being used. And that which is cured by the wounds has great pain; And becomes red like blood the body of a young person, and had the color of citrine.
I bound a loop in one of these wounds, and then circled all the wounds,
and found that one vein followed the other from all parts of the limb.
I hastened then, and grasped in one of the holes until I discovered a piece of bone, and found it fractured and perceived it, and knew its decay went right down to the bone itself.
I saw that which appeared to me a fractured bone, and I thought that there was no other decay except for that which I saw;
and began to restore the wound with various medicines so long as I could, but could not mend it.
And then I repeated the procedure, and I discovered the bone as before.
And I found the disease continuing in the bone, the marrow, and the blood vessels, and I considered soldering the bone together
but I was unable to do so until I had fractured a part of the bone, and the marrow burst out completely. then I restored the remedies; and he was healed and restored to health immediately.
And he will no longer dare to renew the work because of the patient’s weakness, who cannot endure. and for fear of death which I fear for him. For often there is the evacuation of blood, but he remained entirely well,
For often there is the evacuation of blood, but he remained entirely well, and he produced in his place a hard bone, and was of good disposition and did not suffer any discomfort or anything contrary to all, neither fear nor coming to an end
And thus is the head displaced, if you draw the corrupt marrow from the socket. and uncover the marrow above the bone or you see silk there, that the silk does not stain the marrow; and put a swab or a towel of lead over the bone to cover the corrupt marrow; and cover so much silk as one can see and feel the corruption, and cover again.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open wide, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover the whole limb; then put one stone weight on it,
and then stretch from one end to the other the corruption, and keep it stretched for a space as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, if you join the corrupted joint, and stretch the bone or the part which contains the other part;
And if the corruption is continuous in the neighborhood of these two joints, if there is no other vessel except the vein of the groin.
And if the corruption is at the root of the arm or the thigh, if it is strong in this matter but in any case you must inquire about the cause of that dislocation, how it happened to you. and be mindful of all means, but that the vein or nerve does not impede you;
And the nails which he incisions and the threads which cover these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of swellings. and their thickness and their thinness, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness; and because of this it is necessary to appear similar to the work of his instrument;
and the nails which he incisions and the threads which cover these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of swellings. And the testimony of the manners of diseases; And the testimony of the manners of diseases; if they think the instrument with which you are dealing is appropriate, according to what it is commanded
according to what it is commanded, fire The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
And when you have treated that corrosion with the remedies of medicine, but it does not help, if it is necessary to cover that limb up to the root or the corrosion recurs. if the patient escapes by that of death, or by malice, which is greater, the defect of the limb.
if the patient escapes by that of death, or by malice, which is greater, the defect of the limb. and the limb becomes black, as if burnt by fire, And thus after the dark, then comes that corruption of limb against limb, And thus after the dark, then comes that corruption of limb against limb,
and seizes throughout the body; if you are hasty in your covering,
and if there is percussion from venomous creatures such as scorpions of the sea, vipers and similar beasts, if the head is struck, and you do not give it space to move until the hand arrives.
And if it comes up to the wrist, if the bone at the joint is fractured, so that the decay does not reach the forearm;
and if it comes up to the arm, if the bone at the shoulder is fractured, so that the decay does not reach the upper arm. and only then will there be no other remedy than the strength of its virtue.
and whatever you do, when the corrosion comes or is delayed: if it comes to the first joint, if the bone afterwards reaches the other joint;
And if it comes or if it is urgent, grasp all the urgency; And if it rises to the limb, if you grasp at the joint of the elbow.
And if it comes from below the elbow, if there is no other remedy but to leave the patient dead;
and the patient’s limb if you bind it below and above, And extend one minister from the lower lip, and another minister from the upper lip, And you shall split the lip that is between the two lips with one inch of space, until the bone is exposed.
then cover it with pitch or silk, and put one bandage of linen under the lip so that the silk does not touch the sound tissue. and come to the patient other wound and incision.
And if blood comes out when you work, if you cauterize the limb urgently, or you apply some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is accompanied.
then bind the limb securely with a strong bandage, and treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you that there is a home for you here.
He had a blackening that seemed to burn with fire.
and that corruption first arose in his armpit, so that it blackened the whole limb.</start_of_turn>
and when we saw the corruption, if we covered the limb, it healed;
and long after that it returned, the corruption or the shoulder, and I came to him,
And I put upon him things that rebound after the loosening of the skin, and I cannot cease the corrosion.
And he bids me grasp his hand, and I do not wish, for I avoid any hope of rebounding the matter. and I doubt also that if I cut off his hand, he will not die, for the worth of a man is weak; and he awakens all, and returns to his land, And so he covered his hand, and it healed;
I have nothing more to say about this matter except that for this reason we do other things when necessary.</start_of_turn>
Sometimes the vein comes out in the marrow and stays out as long as it causes great swelling of the limb.</start_of_turn Then it bursts and breaks through, and in leaping out, it breaks the bone, and it remains broken.</start_of_turn And the skin which is under is just as subtle as a silken drape that is unrolled. and does not reach the bone or the nerve, and such an ailment is called "sain".
but if it is so elongated that it reaches the bone embedded in the marrow, it is called "fistula".
And if you grasp that leather entirely around, and even when it is subtle, like a drape. it does not feel its decay at all
and if you hold that leather firmly, and the corruption does not reach its depths, the leather is thick like a fistula.
Observe if the wound is large, and the foulness which is in it is of a foul odor. Therefore, make the application of Egyptian medicine which is thus made: take oil, and ointment, and beeswax, equally, and mix them together in a vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
Then take according to your need, and make it hot and sweet. Then mix it up in a stew, and restrain the opening; and let the medicine stand for three hours, then strain it out while pressing;
Do this several times, until the skin is softened and the bones are weak;
And never is clustered with water of emeralds. when this medicine is not present, and you take emerald powder from must of grapes, and drink water from below,
then the swelling will go down, and will be clustered, until you know that the pain has gone away.
and if the patient cannot bear the pain, neither the Egyptian medicine of water of emeralds, If the blister is filled with water and honey or if there is a bit of thick pus broiling; or you cauterize it with honey and wine mixed, so that the honey has the property of softening and washing away. and the wine makes the wound dry.
and when you have done this, and you have confirmed that the pain has been softened, If the clinking of that which makes birth comes to an end in him,
If the clinking of that which makes birth comes to an end in him, or you clink it with some medicines and poultices, of which I have said the properties or treat with poultices;
and if it is slightly pierced through the skin is small, and the clinking does not enter, If an iron point is swollen, and you put on an Egyptian bandage, if an iron point is swollen, and you put on an Egyptian bandage, or a bandage of basilon, as much as it is swollen;
and if the wound is too large, if the edge and the tissue leave too much swelling.
and if the wound has burst that the blood vessel is at the bottom, if the bone or more is lower than it should be. For when the bow is in the flesh, if you do not leave some hair; then you must leave some hair there; and if you do not cover your eyes as you see, it will go down further than it should.</start_of_turn>
And if thou canst not cover thy wound as thou seest, if you cannot cover your wound as you see it, and take consolidating medicines to put out the wound,
and extend over it a cloth of linen that covers the whole wound; Then take hold as firmly as you can the torn part inwards, that is to say more widely than at first. Then hold the swelling downwards, that is to say another layer according to the quantity of the torn part, and put it over the torn part in the cavity to align the bone, and do not remove the large covering until once the bleeding has stopped;
and that which is outside often stops the bone from dislocating, And the discharge from the wound comes from the bowel, if it is venom or pus or enough, or digested, or indigestible.
And take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has been applied and you see the nature of the swelling on the surface of the wound, if the swelling has already appeared, and approach the health of the wound.
And then loosen the bandage in the morning, or the third day; and when you loosen the wound, and if another bandage is changed, renew the dressing.</start_of_turn>
And if the wound bleeds profusely afterwards every day, soak the wound that the blood does not flow excessively.</start_of_turn And if subtle wounds fester for a long time, if you do not take care of your health,
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And if he remains stiff and jumps up suddenly after remaining still for a while, his veins burst and his skin swells, so that his breasts no longer feel soft;
and if his breasts grow late, and are drawn out, if he is given cooling medicines which are moist in substance and dry in virtue, If, therefore, the origin of the disease is defined, because there is a great part of vitriol in it, and this is the last medicine.
Take the origin of the disease and make it with rue oil, and rose of oil equal in quantity;
then keep it warm and use it; and this itself makes honey stick and engrosses, when the swelling of the disease is not present,
Or thou takest marrow and aloes and incense, and broilest them, and grind them on honey when they are out of the fire. And then smear them on a cloth, and stretch them out over the breast, and never give an antidote that is too long, and root of lilies celestial, which is just as coarse as flour sometimes and a hundredth part;
and root of lilies celestial, which is just as coarse as flour sometimes and a hundredth part; and in the use of simples or compounds: grind them up, and make powder, and put honey on it as I have said, and use it. And if the wound is prolonged, and has not healed by this treatment,
And if the wound is prolonged, and has not healed by this treatment, then the wound becomes corrupted, and leaves an imprint in the bone, or causes stiffness of the limb, or damage to the nerves.</start_of_turn> if the treatment of the fistula has not healed as we said before.</start_of_turn>
of the abscess of the armpit.
Panarice is an abscess that arises from the swelling of the pouch of the hand. or from a wound, or by chance it arises in other parts.</start_of_turn>
if it comes to an abscess, one must take care, for otherwise it will lead to a serious infection.</start_of_turn and it is often necessary to cut off the root of the hair and remove it entirely by chance.</start_of_turn
And comes the erosion until the bone, as long as there is sharp pain, and the head of the shoulder is dull and pale.
When you treat it as we have said in the dislocation, and the treatment does not help, then you must take away all the superfluousness that is left from the dislocation. Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The fire cautery is great help if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy.
and if the nail presses on the flesh and starts to prick, and the blood boils, then you must know that you must keep the nail away from the flesh. and hold the flesh above, and gently and cautiously remove the hair, And put the remainder of the charred medicine on the burn, which is both warming and corrosive, to drive out all.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, if you break it, and treat vigorously, because as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal;
and if you see the bone cracked, if you break it here as it has been said before.</start_of_turn Then treat him while he is still conscious;
and if he is fierce, and foaming at the mouth, and feels great pain, then you must first restore him to consciousness.</start_of_turn> then bind up the wound of the acute spasm by cutting through beneath,
and guard that the cut does not reach up to the marrow which is below the bone, for the patient would feel too much pain;
If it happens, put something over which brings peace.
If it happens, put something over which brings peace. If it happens, put something over which brings peace.
And none of them are born in the root of the joint, or their birth is in vain for us. For none are born at their root, or their birth is for naught to us. and those that are born at the joint must necessarily move;
when the limb is thick, in part because of that: Tail le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.
The fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even at their root. If they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady until they grow.</start_of_turn>
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.</start_of_turn When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
The sudden pain that comes from two together comes by birth, or from the coming of an injury, or from the application of fire, or from other things like these.
If it is possible to bear that sudden pain, if it must be repaired according to their natural forms; then put between two supports or bandages soaked in rose oil, which do not stick together; or you put between two pieces of soft lead, as long as the wound is closed, if it is necessary.
When swelling comes to neither of his two hands with the palm, if the thumb is stiff like it ought to be.
When swelling comes to neither of his two hands with the palm, if the thumb is stiff like it ought to be.
When swelling comes to neither of his two hands with the palm, if the thumb is stiff like it ought to be
When swelling comes to neither of his two hands with the palm, if the thumb is stiff like it ought to be.
It is appropriate to administer neither purge nor oil to the patient immediately, then the rest of the treatment.
The treatment of fire is as follows: two methods: one is with vinegar, and treat the black wound; and the other method is to ligate the vein and treat thoroughly
The size is as follows: arise the first the hot water abundantly, until the flesh is soft, without breaking it. Then strain the limb of the patient from below the hip joint up to the part below the knee. Then hold the vein in one loop, or two, or three, of a large size,
Then loosen and pull out the black blood from your hand from the one shoulder to the other, as much as the patient can tolerate;
And then bind it, and command that he keep himself warm with warm meat;
And resume the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and it does no harm to the patient.
And the nourishment of this sort: open the limb of the patient, if there is moisture of hair, then put it out or bathe it, and raise the limb of the heat until it becomes red, and swell the veins;
and if you have no bath, if you burn with fire, and then cover the vein from the shoulder to the elbow, or in the lower part at the ankle;
Then remove the skin from the navel, and compress the belly from below the breastbone until it appears when you feel it.
and you will see it red and black, and when it comes out or the skin appears just like a white thread.
then tighten the belly, until it is level with the skin, and then insert it under the navel lightly,
then pull it in once more two fingers; and compress the skin over the belly until it appears, Then the patient must stretch his arm up, as you have done; and the pain will depart from another part, as you did before.
Then grasp another size, or several if necessary, and then stretch, and grasp at the root of the bone.
Then draw out and hold until the second size; then remove the size gradually, until it is gone completely, then grasp.
and if you do not pull it out and lift it, if there is a strong double thread at all times, And the arm and the shoulder, and there are some bones there which are round, and twist your hand from one side to the other, until it is loosened; And hold that it does not touch, for if it touches, if it cannot be moved or raised, there results in harm to the patient.
And when you have finished treating it, put out the limb of the wound with clean wine and rose oil; and care for it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if the patient’s limb is contracted and twisted and bound together, and is not straight, as we have said, If you think it is necessary to force it, do not cover it; and handle it as we have said before.
If you think it is necessary to force it, do not cover it; and handle it as we have said before. If the bone is crooked from which the nail is to be extracted, do not pierce it; only hold the bone still so that it does not move.</start_of_turn>
it is of great curvature, for if it were slight, it would pierce the vein, but if it is large as we have said, this is the form:
Of the civil vein.
This vein is enclosed in the leg, in warm places where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture.
and sometimes it happens outside the leg; this comes from corruption that comes from the decay of the leather.
if it comes from the marrow bone towards the heel, enclose between skin and bone.
and if there is a great inflammation of this vein in the leg, Then the limb is changed, and the vein starts to swell, like the root of a plant.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated, if you think it is necessary, you must wrap around a piece of lead from one and a half inches to two inches, and the knot,
and leave the lead in place on the limb, and every time it moves, if the wrap is around the lead, and the knot. and if it is too long, if you cut off a part, and wrap around the remainder, and do not cover it in its root, until it is completely healed; For if you seize it, if it returns to the socket, make an incision and perform an evacuation or extraction of pus or blood, and treat the disease.
Therefore it is necessary that it be treated promptly and thoroughly, and that nothing remain or be left behind.</start_of_turn>
it is never enough to treat this wound when it is treated with five palms of length, or ten.</start_of_turn> and one has come to me of one who had it from ten palms of length, and when it was seized, if there were one or two hairs left, it pierced to the marrow.</start_of_turn
If all is well; and whether the matter which is within be evacuated, restore the medicines which are within and mix them together without delay, then treat as with the apostemes.
Never touch this vein with your hands, even when it bursts in the joint of bone or bone, and if it comes out whole, do not touch it; cure it as we have said before.
From the navel to the heel between leather and hair.
This ailment is called in our land "beef disease", because it often happens after bouts of eating.
it is a small swelling that arises between skin and bone, and spreads throughout the body, ascending and descending and causes great pain in all the limbs, as long as the skin or the bone is pressed, or if it bursts
it is caused by the inflammation of certain humors, such as veins, arteries, and blood clots or worms and tumors
And doubt arises of its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and comes to the oil, And indeed it returns by chance, and destroys the oil; and this has happened many times.
When you see it cured and treated, if you cannot drive it out until it is gone:
then you must certainly bind the limb above and below with a strong and well-stitched ligature,
Then grasp above and forward, and if the limb is grasped too tightly in the chair, you will not find it. If the fire cautery is done above, as long as it burns;
and the greater harm it makes is when it runs into the oil, as we have said.
and if you see it coming or close to the oil, grasp above and forward, and grasp tightly
And you must instruct the patient to use various medicines that dissolve bones for the harmful humors that are carried.
And warn him of eating rotten meat
Of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called in our land “vakirir,” and is a pain that comes in the limbs, And thus, if it moves from limb to limb; and I have seen that which I told you.
I went to see a sick woman, and found her arm swollen at the elbow;
and as I looked afterwards, I saw that the swelling had gone up like a worm to the shoulder. more swollen than anything, like gold that has been cut in two;
The pain departs from that limb and spreads to the shoulder.
and then afterwards it turns crooked throughout the limb, until it reaches the opposite arm.
and I heard that it twisted back towards the limb, as I saw it.
I marvel how it moves from limb to limb, because I have never known of such a disease like this before. Whatever, I advise that if you wish to keep me, do not move your limb with pain towards another. but I do not wish that, as if I saw it in a woman;
and I thought that this was because the women had dry skin and the veins uncovered, and because of this appeared that constraint of the wind;
And they do not depart from me according to this reason for those who are delicious, and who have moist bodies and veins filled with blood.
When you see that this illness is cured, and the patient feels the pain as we have said, if the liquid above and below has become stagnant, and then swells up as much as that constraint of the wind opposes. and cauterize the limb; and if you do not see it at your eyes,
If the physician who dispenses these anti-inflammatory remedies, like foul pills and pilules of serapin, and similar things.
If the physician who dispenses these anti-inflammatory remedies, like foul pills and pilules of serapin, and similar things.
If the physician who dispenses these anti-inflammatory remedies, like foul pills and pilules of serapin, and similar things.
If the physician who dispenses these anti-inflammatory remedies, like foul pills and pilules of serapin, and similar things And those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those where there are pieces; and those which have two joints, and those which have tongues, and those where there are fragments; and that which tears in no limb tears in two ways: either in the main limb it tears,
or in the forearm it tears. In the heel, the elbow, the shoulder, the hand, the foot, the intestine, the bladder, and similar limbs. When it tears in no limb of these limbs, and the sign of death is shown, which I will tell you later, you will learn: If you suspect that the extraction of this arrow will cause damage, for indeed the blood comes afterwards in various positions. If it is clear that the sign is bad and you do not perceive the arrow to be deeply embedded, if you hesitate, cure the wound.</start_of_turn>
The sign of the fracture is that the arrow pierces the bone, and leaps up the substance which is above the brain.</start_of_turn This is when the body is cut, soaked in sweat and vomit, with pain in the belly, vomiting of bile; inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and loss of consciousness, and vomiting of the bowels.</start_of_turn> And by chance it is without force of noses, or ears; and by chance it takes away speech and voice. And from the wound moisture white appearing like beads, and in the same way like brown hair;
And if this sign appears to you, if you keep to the treatment, take out the splinter if it is not embedded.
The sign of the splinter when it hurts or swells, is that it is near the left breast, and feels as though it were fixed in something hard, do not break it open; And by chance the scapula moves like the nails, in dark blood, and comes cold sweat and cold sweat, and fainting. There is doubt that death approaches.</start_of_turn>
And the sign of the scapula which never departs from the wound is that there is no swelling of the wound, the throat swells, the patient’s face turns pale, and he sighs loudly and stops eating.</start_of_turn>
And if the scapula breaks through the covering of the pit, if there are little bones there; there is great pain, great swelling and great pain, and he sighs; and all the limbs of the shoulder move.</start_of_turn
And if the spleen or stomach bursts open by chance, nothing of the indigestible meat escapes from the wound.
And if the spleen or stomach bursts open by chance, and by leaping out of the intestines nothing escapes from the wound, if there is no hope of recovery, do not attempt to extract the spleen.</start_of_turn>
And if the spleen bursts open in the bladder, and the urine spurts out and comes out in flow, and the patient feels great pain: the wound is mortal.</start_of_turn>
As for the other limb, if like the face and the throat and the chest and the shoulder and the armpit and the spine and the backbone and the thigh and the calf and the ankle, the limb mentioned above is subject to many conditions.</start_of_turn When the splinter is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I have said before, because of this the patient makes another thing.
When the splinter is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I have said before, because of this the patient makes another thing. There was once a splinter which slipped or drooled at the root of the tooth: I tried to grasp it, and drew it out from the grease of the ear, and it was cured without any harm.
And drew out a splinter that had slipped into the grease of the oil from the ear of a peasant. And the arrow was settled, and it did not reach anything except the tip towards the flank. And it was an arrow from a Turkish bow, quite light in weight; the wound was clean, and there were no bad accidents.
And carried an arrow from the throat to a crest, and the Arabic arrow had an ear:
I saw the beards, and endured until I carried it, and was saved from the crest.
And he shot an arrow at home, that was in the thigh or belly, and thought he was dying.
and then that he did not pass thirty days, if he did not mend his way; I cut off the arrow, and bound it, and pulled out the shaft, and there was no further mishap.
And if a man at home had an arrow go through or back, and the wound was deep above;
And immediately he removes the bandage from within, and does not change his natural inclinations. he finds no satisfaction in any of his natural works.
And thus another man, to whom he applied a bandage to his face, was healed of his wound;
and immediately he suffered great pain; and many others suffered like him.
And carried out an arrow at once from among the princes of the king, who was sitting close to them all. and was leaning to the right side; and the arrow was fully retrieved.
I went to see the patient after two days. If I found the wound much more swollen.
I put it under a slight tension, and did not feel it; And he felt no tingling or pain from his ear to his jaw. I thought it was the tip of an arrow.
I put on a protective plaster bandage so that it would not swell; and he appeared to me to be the tip of an arrow.
and he appeared to me to be the tip of an arrow. I place the thumbs at the joints, and restore the wound to its proper place, and maintain the patient’s hand long tense.
as long as he feels the splinter [arrow] still inside his wound; and he tells me so. I place above the wound corrosive medicine with my thumbs, until it is well over,
I touch it and feel the head of the arrow which is coming out; Then I assisted in the opening of the wound by that cunning physician, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly.
and stayed there for three months altogether.
and then I enlarged the wound so that I could insert the nails, and the two parts together, and I could not bear it
then I continued to toil and devise various methods using instruments, until I finally obtained a pair of nails well made, According to what is said at the end of this chapter, as long as I remain here, I will treat the wound and restore it.
And it is judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was entirely cured.
Or as you have said the quality of the extraction of some arrows, If you place your treatment upon that which I do not understand, for the book does not teach me all;
but you know masters well enough about many great things, and about that which is present and wanting.</start_of_turn> Find nine works, and a new instrument, for the descending of strange things that arise in this art.</start_of_turn>
I say that the towels do not grow from limbs or are made of anything other than by means: Or by land or by water, or from some other place;
Or by land or by water, or from some other place; and that which leaps forward by itself, that is an arrow transfixed in the flesh, and leaps nevermore.
And if it does not leap now, if you leave it until the flesh is rotten, and rejoice at its issue;
And also if it is pierced in the bone, and it cannot be extracted, if you leave it there a few days, and move it every day.
And thus it leaps, and if it does not leap, if it has pierced through all that is subtle, as long as the wound has been widened, then draw it out.
And if the splinter is returned to the bone if it cannot be seen, if the wound has healed entirely; And if you sense it, if the limb has no visible support;
if you do not find support by the width of the wound and by the depth of the arrow and there is no bone, nerve or blood vessel, if the wound is so great. and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there is an ear in the arrow that holds it,
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there is an ear in the arrow that holds it, If the bone that is hooked by a joint moves away from the muscle that you pull, Then it breaks or tears the cartilage of the bone, as long as you can pull it out.
Then it breaks or tears the cartilage of the bone, as long as you can pull it out. And take great care that you do not break the bone, that you only pull out the cartilage.
If you do not do it once, if the limb remains bent even after you have pulled, then draw it out once more, for extraction is joyful. And if the discharge of blood opposes you, if you recall what we have said about the treatment in this chapter;
and beware of the incision of the vein and the vein, and put in place as you will there where the arrow went out with danger.
or if he is open or closed, firmly or slightly; and put the patient in the position in which he was when the arrow went out of him, because that is the greatest aid that there is, and if you do not know how, look at what they show you.
The bandage that comes from another place, or it opens nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in the place where it is seen or felt.
The swelling therefore increases so much that the nails can no longer bear it, and then it must be removed: if it happens at this moment.</start_of_turn>
And if it is retained in the bone, if you round your hand around it as much as it enters the bone, and dilate the bone, then extract it.</start_of_turn
And if it cannot be extracted, if you leave it in, and then resume the extraction until it comes out.</start_of_turn>
And if the splinter is firmly stuck, it is necessary to grasp it all at once.
And if the splinter is firmly stuck, and you see an instrument that can grasp it, grasp it immediately, if necessary.</start_of_turn> if the point of the splinter gets caught in the hole of the instrument; and then pull firmly,
and if the splinter is firmly caught, if the instrument has a pointed end that can enter, to make it easier to extract.
And if the wound is surrounded, then it is necessary that you grasp all the surrounding flesh or the venom is there, if you know. then treat the wound if it is possible.</start_of_turn>
And if the wound leaks blood or pus from the belly or the bladder or the ribs, and it is close, and you know it, cover it immediately.</start_of_turn>
and keep the wound covered and the nerves, and then extract it, and then suture the wound, if necessary.</start_of_turn And the treatment is until it is healed.
The shapes of the nails from which we treat the wounds are similar to the beak of an oyster, and thus is this shape:
There are various kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the amount of the wound
it is common. it has or has not head or root,
It is known that: the batons following the ears, which are close to the painful parts. and the veins which are in the temples appear; and the veins which are in the armpits, which are close to the armpits, are called "aspirations". and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the back of the head near the ear; And the armpits which are swollen; And the armpits which are swollen; and the veins which are raised above the mouth, which are called "augeherich". And the armpits which are swollen; and the veins which are swollen below the tongue.
The veins which are commonly known are in each arm:
One is the cephalic [dislocation], and is on the left side of the costus [breastbone], and they call it the people "chief of the head." and the other is called "fast", and is composed of the cephalic and brachial [dislocations]. and they call it the people "chief of the head"; and the brachial is either on the left or right side of the costus. and they call it the people "chief of the head"; and it is above the navel, And that is the one which is always seen, which openly manifests above the pocket.
And the saving one is the vein which is between the thumb and the index finger, and if there are two of them;
and in the limb and where the bone is, there are two veins: one if it is beside the elbow of the left side of the costal cartilage, and the second one runs at the ankle of the right side of the costal cartilage; and the vein which is called “nesse”, which is at the ankle of the other costal cartilage;
And in the other limb are two veins close to those.
The blood of the veins that are behind the ears helps to produce old purges and diarrhea. and the quality of the blood, as I have told you, is that you restore the head of the patient,
and the quality of the blood, as I have told you, is that you restore the head of the patient, and rub the limb or the veins are rough; then stretch the patient’s neck with a finger, As long as the veins open behind the ears toward the head, depending on the chief: since their root approaches the head, whenever the pulse is felt at their root, if it signifies a suspicion of an embolism.</start_of_turn>
then take the lancet and pierce the vein down to the bone, and then keep your hand over the entire upper part of the vein, and hold and split the skin and the vein well to the depth of two thumbs, and do let blood flow until you see;
Then he strains and holds it steady, until it is healed;
Then I have already mentioned the incision and the cautery or the first book.</start_of_turn>
The blood of the two arteries that are in the temples, if it is like an ancient emigration, and sode, and has become accustomed, and in the body of tears as drops;
And thus it is with the health of a man; if it be as I have said. And that the patient is tormented by his neck, so that the veins open wide. And that the pulse of his hand is pale, and then turns pale;
and that you will take the pulse on his arm above his wrist, and you will pierce with the lancet at his index finger, And keep the vein high up, and the cuff, as you did with the last three veins, and do the same with blood pressure as you deem necessary.
Then loosen the patient, and put your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put on a bandage;
Then bind the limb firmly, and leave it until it is healed; as we have spoken of its packing and extraction, or the way to begin the book
The blood from the front vein is just as important as the blood from the cephalic vein, for there are diseases of the face of old age, such as migraine and redness.
And if the patient strains his neck by twisting, as when a vein bursts. Then take the instrument which is called the "forceps," which is like this:
And put the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand, or something else, and let blood spurt out as much as you see fit; Then deliver to the patient the neck, and bind the vein until it is whole and never more with a wide flame.
Whatever, let the flames be too strong; and the same through, because the bone is close, and by chance breaks the flames when it is subtle.
The blood of the veins that are in the armpits if it helps with the eyes, and with the tongue, and with the redness, and with the swelling in the fat, and with diseases of the face;
and the quality of their blood if it is that the patient pulls his head to the side by twisting any thread, as before;
Then the same, and let the blood flow freely, a long distance from the flame, because there is no hair.
And if the flame is subtle, by chance if it breaks; then make a drain of blood, as much as you are able, and then bind it up, and hold it firmly.
The blood of the vein does not matter if it is like water, and in sobriety, and in fevers, if it is like emigration and redness that comes to the face, and even when it is old;
and if the patient’s pulse is tight, then strain his neck with your left hand, And take the burning flame slowly long, and hold it against the liver in the space between the two nostrils. for the vein does not open easily, and it will not begin to heal now;
do not go too far in incisions, and do the evacuation of blood according to your need, then bind it up for a night, for it is often restored after treatment;
The blood of the armpits helps to stop the swelling of the spleen, to the beginning of mumps, and to the mouth of diseases, and to swelling, and to corrosions, and to herpes, and to tumors.
When the quality of the blood is that the patient strains his collar alternately from one side to the other, as we have said before. or the master is standing over the chief of the patient, and the patient sits on one seat,
then take the vein along a long way, and then draw blood calmly, or as much as is necessary;
Then repeat the process on the other side, then loosen the ligament and strain lightly the middle veins, Then repeat the process on the other side, then loosen the ligament and strain lightly the middle veins,
Of the blood of the veins The blood of the veins of the limbs above helps to cause collection in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and ulcers of the tongue, and pain and swelling.
And if the quality of the blood is to make the patient sit before you, and restrain his neck as I have said. then turn the palm of the hand up, and look at both veins, one on the right side of the hand and the other on the left and you will know them by their blackness, and because they have small black veins running through them: then take both of them, and if you are in doubt,
then take both of them, and if you are in doubt, If the greatest of the shoulder bones is displaced downwards, and the same happens with three veins which are below and beside, for this is a treacherous method.
From the blood below the tongue the tongue will hang down. The blood of the veins that are below the tongue helps after the blood of the head, and this is at the widening of the throat, and there are diseases of the eye, and there are diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the air is that if the patient sits between your hands before the sun, and he stretches out his tongue, and looks towards the outside of each shoulder, he sees a black vein.
Healthy then, both of them, and do not advance too eagerly, for these are the arteries.
The veins which we commonly cauterize are usually healthy in two ways:
or by pricking at their base with a fine lancet, like a twig or olive branch if you cut deeply, and is called “anesil.” and are large and subtle according to the size and distance of the veins. The flame of the fire cautery is known to be mild and wide as you see.
And must be used to open wide veins filled with great blood that appears, containing great blood and turmoil.</start_of_turn> It is the olive-like flame form:
and is more pointed, and is for safer veins, or where there is clear yellow blood.</start_of_turn
The blood of the basilisk, which is one of these veins, if it helps, has diseases such as nausea of the throat, or cold, or pain, or belly;
and it is useful to the patient that he remain calm, and that he abstain from eating from the artery which is nauseous.</start_of_turn> and if he grasps the artery, and blood flows out, if the physician is vigilant, as I have said.</start_of_turn> and must not be afraid of the flame, but should seize it as if by an animal.</start_of_turn
And if the vein does not open visibly, if you must extract it, and tie off another; or you desire no blood to spill, or you leave the vein closed in the arm: it will open visibly. and the burn at the flame will vanish, as we have said.
And if you see the limb of the bloodstained, if you must extract the limb, that you touch the limb as long as you know the pulse; Then sign the limb endwise, and then bind the arm, and clamp the vein with the flame anew.
And beware that you do not cut the artery when you see the limb swollen, for that is the artery: close it off immediately.</start_of_turn>
And if you see blood flowing upwards like the urine of a child, and it is neither red nor frothy, consider that there is no artery involved.</start_of_turn> Hurry and place your hand along its length, then tighten your hand if it is not bleeding, for this has happened many times before.</start_of_turn
The arm is held close to the body, and the hand is left loose, without moving the patient; and if there is fear, do not move until it is healed.
If it is not stained, and it is painful, and the doctor is not present, if the artery bursts, because the head of the bone is pulled back; then hold it still without touching it.</start_of_turn>
And take a support of mustard seeds, and make it, and take half of it and put it on well until the other half;
If it is not stained, that is good; but if it is, as we have said, powders that stain blood.
The wounds do not bleed excessively in many cases, except for the small vessels of the wound and the tension of the limb.
The blood of the vein helps to hold the wound shut so that it heals properly, and from the shoulders to the wrists because it is composed of the basal and cephalic veins, as we have said;
and it is necessary that the vein should be wide enough to allow the nerve to pass without being compressed, and if it is too narrow, the nerve will be compressed. And he swells and his sanity is either seized or gone, and by chance cannot be healed.
And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some way by its subtlety, it is certain that you must take away its sensation from the instrument; and keep the nerve away from your sight.</start_of_turn>
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, if it is too long.</start_of_turn
The blood of the cephalic vein helps, that it brings blood without pain, and helps the veins.
And it is recommended to cauterize with olive oil fire or with mirtin fire, for these are the safest of all veins, because they do not contain nerves or arteries.
However, it is necessary to test the fire first, and do not be discouraged if it does not work the first time, and we repeat it.</start_of_turn> And by chance, it happens to burn someone’s face the first time, but that does not matter.</start_of_turn> The quality of the blood is according to your thinking.</start_of_turn>
The first thing you must know about health is that blood is not to be shed except for the preservation of life,
...and to prevent diseases from arising. or in one of the two veins which are or should be: namely, the cephalic, facial, and basilar and the sign of replenishment appears;
And if one must renew the first joint or the third, after a quarter or two of an hour.
The healing which is administered for diseases has no definite measure, but whenever there is a need for joint or nut, in all hours and at all times.
and must not be renewed more than twelve and a half years, and a woman who is pregnant must not be treated for more than four months until the seventh month. Must not be treated those who are older than sixty.
When others see health restored in any way, even if it be by a slight laxation of a hernia, ...if it has the strength of madness retained, so that the veins do not draw out the intestines with the nourishment that is in the principal parts.
...neither those which are too lean from meat, neither those which are too dry, neither those which are too fat, nor watery;
...and if after a violent passion, vomiting, and swelling of the belly, multiplied by an abundance of eating and drinking, and this in the midst of all the virtues, or by some weapon or poison.
Then subtlety the humors, if they are not great, by foods and drinks and medicines, if you have any at your disposal.
Then give a lukewarm bath, if nothing else hinders you, to subtilize the blood.
and apply a warm compress to the area below the pit of the stomach, as we have mentioned before;
and guard against this work, pain, luxury, and similar things;
And so they lie bound and joined, and let the healthy side be above that which is to be sawn off, and wipe with the hands once or twice.
Then draw out the thread from the middle, for when it is too tight or too loose, it cannot be corrected without;
Then wipe the limb with the hands, until the veins swell, and you can feel them;
Then moisten the healthy side with a little oil, then put his left hand over that vein below the limb a little or where it seems healthier, The wound did not bleed and did not yield to the incision. For there are veins that flee like cords in the air, and if they are of such sort as are full of wind, if when one sets the flame to them, when one takes away the flame, they do not open the vein, and thus is this;
and if the wound is too deep, because of this it is necessary that the physician be advised in these matters.
And if the vein bursts the first time, it is good; if not, if it recurs again, do another scar there or in the neighborhood, if the wound is not inflamed.
If the wound is inflamed and the patient is groaning, if you leave it for an hour or two, and do not bind the arm: because in this way there will come swelling; do not enter or bathe, then repeat the bleeding if it clots again.
and if the wound is small, or if it does not bleed steadily and you doubt that it will not bleed as much as you see, if you are confident in the wound itself, then apply the cautery directly over the flame immediately
And in the work one must be cautious, even when the wound is inflamed; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the wound inflamed, do not renew the bleeding, and put on a little oil bandage, for it softens the pain of blood, and is mild in this limb the oil that is on it.
and give the oil bandage in such way as to stop the course of the blood.
and this itself makes the wound tremble and swell, when one puts it on the limb; if it is too thick it will tear away.
And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, even when it is not serious except for this time or the opening of the vein is small, if you are in a hurry, and put on a wet and cold sponge over the area and hold it for an hour.</start_of_turn>
and make sure to do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains fixed after a few days without any blackening or greenish discoloration, if that is the case.</start_of_turn> and if you see that, do not put anything greasy or sticky like beeswax, mustard, or similar things.</start_of_turn>
Many times there is swelling and discharge at the root of the arm: put your hand there, and if you find the limb soft under the compression of your hand, that is an evil sign. Listen well that you put nothing on it of what we have said, for by chance in court without an artery; but it makes it swell dry to harden the limb, then treat it with another treatment, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.</start_of_turn
If it is black without, leave it black as long as it is red; if you see it large, leave it until it is slight; if it is too thick, let it cool down.
And it must be done for the blunt and firm, and having the need for bloodletting, we make the wound larger and the flame greater;
and for the weak one, do the opposite, and keep it healthy somewhat, and do it more gently, not by pricking;
this method of bleeding saves from the loss of blood and the cutting of nerves, and is worth more than blood that lasts a long time does not last long.
And for those who have swelling in the groin, it is advised to give soft bread soaked in pomegranate juice; if he is nauseous, take two or three times as much blood.
And if he is of cold complexion, give beforehand the sick soft bread soaked in must or honeyed syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant syrup.</start_of_turn>
And if he vomits blood after the evacuation of blood, it is advised that he should drink broth of barley and fragrant syrup.
and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of the bladder.</start_of_turn>
If he sees his arm swelling up again, and gets better once, if it is swollen by a great amount of blood, he must rise up and rise up immediately, in proportion to the quantity of his continuous virtue.
If he sees his arm swelling up again after the first bleeding, and it has become stiff, if he rises up three hours after the first bleeding, or after the twelfth hour.
If he sees his arm is better on the other side, if he must get better slowly over several days or weeks.
For there is much blood in the limb that has already been exhausted, and it causes fever; if you must treat this with a great quantity, and dilate the opening so that it bleeds like thick soup. Then, when you have completed all the preparations of the blood, and you put your hand on the shoulder when it is sound, the patient does not faint from fear of pain. and this often happens when the patient is negligent;
and you must not believe me when you see the limb slip from its place the second time, and the wound is closed, that you must press firmly upon it; if it is crooked, extend the limb widely, for this would be bad;
But leave it until it grows again; or you prick it at the root of the flame, until it thaws without which is frozen to the very marrow is pierced from the vein. and put on it immediately some water, and press lightly.</start_of_turn>
And if the vein has fled, if you leave it and do not bind it tightly, as long as the incision is calm.</start_of_turn>
And if necessary is to draw out blood the second time, if the same is in this limb or in another vein, or in the other arm.</start_of_turn
The arm vein is bloody at the root because it is made up of many small veins.
And the color of the blood is that of warm water, as long as the vessel is red;
then it should be bound firmly, so that the vein opens well, and then let it pass through without widening or lengthening;
or if it cannot be passed through without causing harm, let the hand remain in warm water, and leave the blood to flow until enough has bled;
If it is thus, if you do not withdraw your hand quickly from the hot water, for there is more in the laver than in the heat.
If so, the blood of this vein is more precious than all the arteries and nerves.
The saliva of the right hand is worth against all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
Strain the hand and immerse it in hot water until the vein is visible. And if the limb hangs by the skin, and if you support it with all your might, if nothing is broken;
it will not cause you much harm, for the nerves are already detached from flesh.
Then put the limb into warm water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and do not move it.</start_of_turn>
And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, if you put oil and lint on the wound to stop bleeding, and then make a dressing.
The blood in the left hand is worth for the disease of the mouse, and do as I have said concerning the right.
The blood of the armpit is worth for all the diseases which are in the body, if like the disease of the mouse, retention of flowers, disease of the veins, and of old wounds and limbs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of this blood is that if the patient is in great pain, and wipes over the wound until it is dry, And he must hold the thumb under the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and from under the foot go out drops of rain.
The limb is pale or has large drops of rain, or at the ankle, that the pulse is weak.
And if you see the limb pale under the foot, if you are aware of nerves that are swollen, and the limb travels as if grasping; and let the flame be extinguished.</start_of_turn>
And if it cannot be cured, if you reset the limb in water, and let the vein discharge well.</start_of_turn
And if the limb must be reset for the first time, if it is repeated a second time shortly afterwards, because the limb is salty; Do not doubt, as we have said, and take the other limb equally alongside.
The limb of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of force, and its blood is worth as much as the pain of the hip, when it is for blood that is clotted.</start_of_turn>
And the quality of its blood is if the patient is between or in water, and it strains from under the ankle to the knee.
For otherwise the vein does not open; and if it does open, whatever way you may try, and even through and through. it is better to leave it closed, for its blood is thick, and it is more easily closed by the hands of a layman.</start_of_turn>
it is better to leave it closed, for its blood is thick, and it is more easily closed by the hands of a layman.</start_of_turn> And if you do not find it [the vein], if some rain of blood opens or comes out, and towards the little toe, and guard against the nerves.</start_of_turn
and do as much pressure with blood as you see, and then loosen the ligature, and put on cotton and bind; it is now healed.</start_of_turn>
Des sainies de ventouse.
Ventouses are made from horns, or hair, or leather; and the application of the ventouse should be done in the following manner: either by cutting and drawing blood, or by cutting alone.
And this application of the ventouse which is cutting alone should be done in the following manner: either it is with great heat, or with a little heat;
and there are three others in the ribs of the neck; and the vein of the tongue is exhaled through the mouth and the exhalation of the spleen; and the exhalation above the kidneys; And the windsucks swell the armpits; and the windsucks of the thighs. And the windsucks of the calves; and the swelling does not concern blood, for there are many veins scattered in the flesh.
Therefore it does not matter if one makes a bleed of a vein; It is not necessary to bleed for any ailment that comes from an excess of blood; for as long as the patient's body is void of any swelling, it is not necessary.
And if necessity demands it for illnesses, or by custom, if the attendants are seized with a sudden spasm in the beginning or at the end, and in every tension;
for there are some who, when they must vomit, have a heavy head.</start_of_turn>
and if there are those who have swelling and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the collar, and dark circles under their eyes.</start_of_turn>
and those who have a spit of blood in their mouth, and have lost their tongue, and vomit blood.</start_of_turn And if I have such ones who think, and see by nut blood and sweat and moisture and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and even when it is covered in moisture like blood and sweat, we command them to be exposed for two hours after sunrise.</start_of_turn>
The patient’s blood is of great help in the treatment of the chief … which comes with these blisters; and we command that it be evacuated only after the removal of all the flesh;
provided that the bloodletting of the cephalic vein has been performed.
And it is not permissible for me to advise anything except for one who has a cold complexion in use, or who has a rash, because this brings great discomfort to them.
And for this reason I advise only those who are in good health, who do not have or have recently had any serious illnesses.
And if anyone suspects that they are becoming unwell, it is better to put on the suction cup a little lower down due to the risk of complications.
The suction cup is better at the edge of the wound than at the center, because it avoids both the chief blood vessels and the nerves, and for this reason it is more effective for wide wounds. And at a fracture of the windpipe by the tonsils, and at vomiting, and at repletion.
And it must be known that if it [the windpipe] is held too tightly, it will cause obstruction of the belly or the stomach or the chest
The winds blow cold as cold as the collar of a coat when it is cold, and causes pain in the head, and swelling and pain in the root of the teeth,
And sometimes the mouth opens by itself, and the blood does not stop flowing.
The winds of the south blow loud in the mouth if it is caused by a disease of the mouth, and by corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and is in the cause of the health of the teeth.
The winds of the south blow loud in the mouth if it is caused by heat and swelling
The winds of the south blow loud in the mouth if it is caused by a disease of the mouth, and by corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and is in the cause of the health of the teeth. The winds of the south blow loud in the mouth if it is caused by a disease of the mouth, and by corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and is in the cause of the health of the teeth.
And instruct the patient not to fear too much pain, for the flesh is subject to char, and knows bones and nerves and arteries.
If there is a wound on the buttocks, it causes swelling at the root of the bone, and diseases of bones and nerves, and it is necessary that the dressing be large and firm, and that it adhere well; for if it is too loose, it will break and cause great wounds.
The wounds of the legs swell widely, because they draw blood from all over the body, and cause ancient pains of the rains, and of the marrow, and of the bladder, and swell the flowers; and are in place of the two buttocks, and the two ankles, and all of them gradually consume the body after a long time, and cause vomiting in various positions
The manner of applying the suction cup is as follows: if you apply it at first glance, and with steady pressure, and place it firmly, and move it equally, and do not cease doing so until you see blood tinged with flesh and the redness of blood; then rejoice, and remove the suction cup, and take care of the body, for there are many who have suffered from excessive tension and clear pores: if you only cut once, you will make large wounds and a deep wound; do so gently.
If it is not large, if you must cut once, do so cautiously at first to dilate the blood vessel.
If it is very thick, if you must cut three times; and when our wings draw blood, even a little, if we only cut once.
If our veins burst with blood, if we repeat the process too often; if it is not feared, if the pain intensifies, if the wound is perceived too deeply,
Then it is proper for one who has thick skin and is tough, and who has numerous pores, that you order the application of warming and dissolving liniment. If this is the case, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkinseed oil;
and if it is in ivy, with rosemary oil, or thyme, or chamomile, or something similar.
If the superfluous moisture is great and cold, take oil of marigold, or balsam, or oil of ivy, and the like.
If the skin is tight and has large pores, do not apply oil.
but it is permissible to wash afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or elderberry water, or cucumber water, or pearl water, or something similar.
And if there is moisture in the mouth, if it easily rises, or of elderberry and sumac, and the like.
And those who have excess of phlegm rise from wine strong, or from salt water, or from decoction of fennel or chamomile, or from other similar things.
and do not remember to be healthy after the bath before and after the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and do not sleep after the bath.
and must know when to bathe and when it is necessary to bathe. And beware those who are sickly are cold and if they are too hot and inflamed; If he grasps cold things, such as pomegranates, radishes, lettuce and milkweed, and similar things;
and eats barley bread, fat meats, and moist foods.
and he who has a cold complexion should take honey syrup, and scented wine which is between autumn and spring, and eat little, and drink wine and eat fats and herbs and spices.
and when he feels a draft, he should drink more than he eats.
And it is fitting to give some comfort to the patient at all times, neither before nor after the incision, in order to soothe the main limbs. Or do it cautiously without fail, but do not let anyone who is unskilled handle it.</start_of_turn>
The incisions which are to be made are those which are made upon the liver, and the spleen, and the foot, and upon the belly and the belly-button and the armpits and the groin, for these limbs do not suffer from incision on the outside.</start_of_turn
and only when it is necessary to draw blood from limb to limb.</start_of_turn If as we place on the limbs what is needed to drain the swelling which is in the limb; for to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, if as we place compresses on the belly and on the buttock to diminish the limb.
and remove the pain, when there is swelling or a stone, if by its virtue it attracts the swelling, or dislodges the stone from its place
and make it swell up when it is placed on the liver and the heel when there is retained moisture,
and these compresses are administered empty so as to soak up as much as possible; and never are they administered together with fire, and never are they applied with pure water.
If there is pain in diseases of the chest, and in such a manner that the patient has a fever and vomiting, or has taken herbs that are codependent on this.
The form of the applied ventouse is like this:
And has two large handles and a half palm of thickness, and has or costs at the center a small hole, as to push out an awl,
and be of leather, so that it does not burn the patient when put on the limb.
And there is in the middle a twig of willow or iron, to hold the poultice firmly in place.
and there are great and small ones according to the illness and the nature of those who take them.
for the swellings of the limbs are different from those of the organs, and the lean from the fat.
And must one put this poultice upon the limb:
Take hold of the loop of thread or line, and put it into the ventouse through the hole that is in the ventouse. If it is grasped at the bottom of the ventouse so that it does not burn the patient.
And then put it on the limb, and hold it either on the hole that we mentioned earlier, or on the opening that we have seen; and if when we look, if there is vapor, we remove the ventouse.
And grasp the thread firmly as before, and repeat it often if necessary.
In the suction which is administered in the disease of pleuresin, at all its sharpness, there is no bulge or perforation, and is administered only when it is clear of sharpness; and is placed upon the limb only as little as possible.
and thus is its form.
Suctions are administered only in limbs where we cannot place a ventouse because of their small size, such as the ears and gums, and similar things. and in the nakedness of hair, if for example nails or teeth, and other things of that kind;
And if you find nails that are soft and smooth, without any trace of nails, take them.
And put them in water that is lukewarm, until they are limp, and do not have anything in their bellies; Then either wash with vinegar and sponge, then scrub the limb until it is red, and put on the nails.
When they are flat, and hurt, if it is possible to put on a sponge or a suction cup, do so, for it is worth doing afterwards.
If not, raise the limb easily, then with some force, move it well, and then release it.
and if the limb remains too long after the swelling has subsided, if moist, let a cold drape of linen rest upon it until the swelling has gone down.
and if the swelling persists, apply a broken glass or bandage, and similar things, until the swelling has gone down
or you remove half of the barley grains and leave them on the limb until they are burnt out, which will stop the bleeding now.
And if you are in greater need, take other precautions.
And if these precautions are not sufficient, if you can, rub the limb with fresh blood, or insert a needle into it until the hair is gone. Then put them on, and as soon as they feel blood, if they bleed;
And when you see that they bleed, if you can, sprinkle over a little alum and some lint, or charcoal, if you wish.
Ci comence li livre des brisures.
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and displacement
Listen well, dear son, for this chapter teaches you things that no former book or letter has ever recorded;
and for this reason is it strange in our land, for I have never found such a thing before;
And I know nothing of it, except by the wisdom of the ancient books, or because I have studied so much that I have learned the science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life.
I have described it in this chapter what is contained in it, and I have abbreviated at the end, and I have made it clear the forms of the instruments which are brought into play, as I have done in the preceding chapters.</start_of_turn>
It is therefore necessary that we say or prologue of this book are the sum of words and the chapters or the learned man puts his understanding into them, and remains on the truth, so that those who are proved learn and learn this noble art, and learn from others.</start_of_turn>
I say that when a fracture, dislocation, torsion or swelling comes to none of these, if you command that the patient hasten the healing of the ailment from one side and from the other, nothing must hinder him, if it be from weakness of the body, or childhood, or old age.
or if he is not very strong, or too cold; and eat cold dishes, that is to say cold soups, broth of oil and garlic, and drink no wine, eat no greasy foods, and do not eat too much meat which fills the veins with blood, until you are sure that the after-effect of the cautery is not too great, nor swelling of the limb; if the patient recovers before the first day, return to the former treatment which he used.</start_of_turn>
And when the broken bones begin to restore, if you command that the patient be given no meat which makes great swelling, or which has viscosity, if it be like wheat flour in water, and rye, and testicles, and meat, and fat, and fish, and strong wine, and similar things.</start_of_turn For in part of its nourishment, it returns muscle and more quickly breaks the fracture.
And know that bones that break from marrow and cracks do not mend well together according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, just as if they were too tender, like bones of small children.
but there is no remedy, hold over the fractured bone, that is, strong tensions that are bound and unite the limb together, as much as it is firm as before; and do not move from its place, and for this reason it is recommended to nourish with great meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are of various kinds in many ways.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others by bending, as the size of a pen to write.
For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others by bending, as the size of a pen to write. And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small fissure.
And at the shoulder there is its engine, and its proper instrument in restoring it, according to what it remembers from its place.
and is known by the breaking of the bone by that which it is twisted, and opens well by pulling, and by pressing of the hand;
and when there is no dislocation, and no great pain, if there is no break;
but it can well have dislocation, or fracture, or a small break. If it is not possible to move the limb only by hand, but medicine is added afterward, then hold it firmly now.
If the fracture is split through the root, and if these are the two parts of the joint, it is necessary to hold them firmly in place now, as well as the incisions that are to follow;
if there are abscesses around it, if they are left untouched, as long as the abscesses are not calmed down; then hold it firmly and gently, and take care that it is not heavier to restore it than before, or that there are pieces left; and then hold it firmly once again afterward.</start_of_turn>
And if there are broken bones, if they extend from a third to a half of the limb, if it is the hand or foot, or at the wrist if it is a small limb, or at the elbow if it is two strings, or at the hand and foot;
and set the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the limb are freed, if you leave by all means the additional swelling in their place, and keep that in your work there comes no further damage or pain to the patient.
and carefully support the joints of the bones according to the best forms.
And he feels well in the hand if he seems that it is not well: if the wound closes well, and does not tighten too much, do not press as do some who make it come about by their work at the incision and contraction of the limb, as we have often seen.
And when the limb is stiff, if he stays well with the patient, that he does not move, neither watch nor sleep, neither turn, nor in any other way; take great care that the limb is so secure that he does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, if it is not at a point, and you can make him put it into partial use when he feels no pain.
For when he feels no pain, if it is not at a point, and you can make him put it into partial use when he feels no pain. and keep it properly aligned, so that torment does not arise when you restore it.
and as to the limb which is broken, it is like that which I have told you.</start_of_turn>
The breaks of the limb are various in small and great size and shape.</start_of_turn
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and the like: if you cover them with linen cloth which is soft and flexible.
And for those which are large, such as buttocks and thighs: if you cover them with a wide and hard cloth, because the large cloths embrace the whole great limb and constrain it equally, so that there is no slackness.
Then put on tight stockings, that is two or three according to the size of the limb, and constrain your hand one palm to the whole limb, and go up to the break and constrain less, that the break then lets go a palm of the break;
and soften the limb somewhat, so that you take a great part of the limb, then take another limb, and turn the tight bandage over the limb break;
Then draw towards the lower part of the break, and strain moderately, neither too strong nor too weak, as we said earlier.
Then put between the layers of skin some strips of linen or cloth, until they are all even, and then bind everything up above. That is, bandage, and then put your thumbs well made above, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, if put on above something soothing the abscess, which hardens the swelling, and leaves it alone for a few days.
Then strain on your thumbs, and let them be half as wide as a broad thumb nail, or of a fist from which you make nails, or of barley straws, and let them be as follows:
But it is necessary that the one who puts on the bandage should make it larger and wider than the others.
and be as long as is appropriate for the limb, whether small or large;
then is strained on the edges as you did at the first hour, and then bind under a thread subsequently, as was done at the first hour on the bandage;
more is tight underneath, that is less; and it is necessary that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of linen wool.
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make them bind linen thread too tightly, this is a great mistake, for the thread will not be even if it is too subtle, and I advise that there be at least a finger's breadth of space between the knots.
If the patient is nauseated by the blows of the stones after the stretching of the limbs, put some sponges of linen or coarse cloth on them so that they do not bruise.</start_of_turn>
When there is a wound with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will speak of the treatment of that later.</start_of_turn>
The wounds that he cannot bear to endure from these stars shall break all the limbs at the first moment. When the limb is large, he cannot bear to put these stars there except after five or seven days, or more, according to the severity of the wound that comes out;
and when the old wounds remain to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: take some flour that adheres to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of eggs, and put this confection, not too thick not too thin, and use it. This is the common method of dressing that restores the fracture in various positions, and is suitable for both women and young children, because it is neither too tight nor too loose.</start_of_turn>
Another method of dressing that restores the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take three barley and linseed and ivy and asafoetida and gum arabic and mugwort, in the amount of X; myrrh and aloes, in the amount of V; chamomile, in the amount of VII; and mix them together. If the patient’s complexion is hot, use this dressing, because it is of good composition and restores the fractured bones quickly, and is worth more than many homes.</start_of_turn>
Other method of reduction worth torsion: take mugwort and vismut, 10; rue, mirre and aloes, 78; acacia, 5; arnica, 10, and grind well, and confit with water or plenty of eggs, and administer.
Other method of reduction worth torsion: take mugwort and vismut, 10; rue, mirre and aloes, 78; acacia, 5; arnica, 10, and grind well, and confit with water or plenty of eggs, and administer. Take new linen, moisten with oil and boil, and apply to the sore. These plasters do not restore immediately, but are good for soothing post-burn pain, and properly relieve pain.
Other method of reduction that restores fractured bones: take dried fig leaves and terrestrial pell leaves, and grind together, and make a plaster.
Other means of restoring the fracture of the bone and removing the remaining abscess. Take root of vismalve, chamomile, violets flowers, wheat flour, and from chescune one part; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, mix with moist coriander water, or with water, and use.
Other means of support more forceful than the first, when a hard abscess comes with the restoration of the limb. Take root of vismalve, flaxseed, barley, melilot, violets and chamomile flowers, all of one part; and grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Hippocrates says in his book that he puts nothing on the broken limb except a little wax and oil, and nothing else, and that it should be between two things neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems Galen commands that we put something dry on the broken limb to restore it, such as mirre and aloes and incense and the like.
Another way of dressing that is good for wound and pain: take mugwort and chopped onions, or willow buds, and mustard, and mix them evenly, and grind them, and make a dressing of it and bind it.</start_of_turn>
And then loosen a little afterwards, and take care that the patient feels no pain, that the bones of his limb have not moved; if you do not loosen it by hand for a while.
And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling or itching, if you are hasty, loosen the dressing and place the limb in water; take a light bandage and a wet sponge, and immerse in water, until the itching ceases and the pain is relieved. Then leave the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, soaked in water or rose oil, and bind up with a nut, until you are certain of the wound has healed.</start_of_turn>
And rest the inflamed limb, and relieve the pain, then reapply the bandage and a little dressing, and do not bind too tightly; and be gentle until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If you see swelling, redness, pain and swelling around a bone, and if the limb returns to its original position as before, you must immediately immobilize and support it, just as you did the first time.
If it does not recover the limb in the way we have mentioned, do not remove it for two or three days, or five or seven; and in no case leave it for twenty days, as we have seen, until the swelling has subsided and the limb has returned to its natural position.
Therefore, you must restrain it more strictly than before, and nourish the limb; as I said before. And if you see that the limb dries out more than usual, do not give it any nourishment; The waters of hot spring rise, whenever you loosen them, every time a third time or more, they split a limb like a thread.
By this work, indeed, it loosens the bones of the limb, and it makes them limp thus that the limb returns twisted: that is bad, and if the work is feeble, and I see nothing but to leave it and treat it violently.</start_of_turn>
of various breaks.</start_of_turn> There are many ways of breaking, and various figures, and the causes are diverse;
For there are fractures that are made by percussion of a spear, and the collar of bone is broken throughout to the syfac which is the marrow of the bone, as if made by a saw or a fist; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called a fracture of the haft.
For when the spear pierces the bone from below in a piercing fashion, and is called this kind of fracture an "absolute fracture"; and is the wound of these major or minor fractures.</start_of_turn>
And if there is embedded percussion, or fracture or break of bone, or fracture of bone on bone, or swelling on bone, or other similar things.</start_of_turn
And if there is a fracture that approaches the joint which is below the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if there is a wound that is close to the bone as much as a hair, and the fracture is small, it is called a "capillary" fracture.
And if the wound is made or caused by a stone, or by a thorn, or by anything similar, and it brings the piece of bone forward, as when coals are placed on the embers; if the bone is split in two.
And this is more common among those who have or have had moist bones, like children;
And there are numerous ways in which these breaks happen, when small pieces are loosened from them like these; and I will speak of them in detail.
And we know of all these breaks due to the detachment above them, and the inquiry of wounds, and the corrupt flesh which is above.
The blood vessel is known by this, that when one has discovered the bone, and has wiped around it, if the black break appears.
In the treatment of the break, take care of the patient's well-being, and if you see no other mishap, such as vomiting of bile, emission of urine, extension, and swelling, and fever, and the eyes becoming yellow and flushed, and other similar things, if it does not recover without doubt.
And if you do not see an impending accident, and you hope for health, then begin the treatment.
And when it comes to the swelling which appears first, and which is in the armpit, if you can remove the bone before the fourteenth day from the muscle which you must remove
If it is in this state, if you hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day from the bone which must be removed, then the tissue of the bone will be corrupted, and there will come the accident which we have said.
And if the breaking of the bone comes up to the tissue which covers the brain, if you can make the fractured part flexible: and it is that you take hold of the head of the patient who is groaning, and uncover the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more severe than you can.
And if the blood drains from a vein, or an abscess bursts, he should use what he can to hold it in place; and fill the wound with soft cloths soaked in rose oil. And keep the wound closed until the swelling has subsided; and be sure that there is no further bleeding. Then, once the swelling has gone down, turn the bone to its natural position; this is done in two ways: one way is if you grasp the nail of the wound firmly at the front, and the other is like this:
And then there is another incision more extensive than the first.
And thus if you have a variety of different sized wounds, some wide and some narrow, and some pointed and some blunt, and on a lighter wound, do not cauterize the head.
And if the bone is thick and hard, if you must pierce through, do not make the wound deeper than necessary; and must have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass through the bone; and you must have several of these, so that if there is bone left in the wound of the thickness of the bone, if you have several punctures you will remove all of the bone.  This is the form of two of these punctures:
The quality for piercing through bone is that you put on one tarer over the bone, and turn your two hands until you feel that the bone is pierced; then you remove the tarer from another place a little later, and do the same thing all around, and cut out the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do it more skillfully than you could, and lightly, as we have said, until you have brought out the bone from your hand, or from any instrument which you have like nails, pincers; and keep your fingers away from the brain and the jaw.
And when you have grasped the bone firmly, and treated it, if it is possible, reset the abutment that has come loose from the bone with any other instrument resembling an incisor, but it must be more tense and subtle than the other incisor.
And if it does not come loose any of the small bones, no nails, if the bones are slightly fractured; then cure the wound with sutures and bandages as we have said
And the other method of treatment is that of the Galenicians, which is more useful; and the load is very strong, and that is its word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, either that which is fractured or broken open, so that when you have uncovered that part, put back the tip of this lenticular incisor, for this is its form:
And do not cut too deep, for the part which is hollow in these costs lies close to the bone; then hold with a little mallet above, so that you may compress the bone gently, and take care of the cloth which is below.
if it is open to the bone, if the bone is slightly fractured, for we must move the bone gently, without fear or pain.
And if a bone breaks through the skin does not pierce completely, and is only slightly fractured by its underside, there are small pieces; if you can rejoin the fracture, and remove the splinters with a blunt scraper, which you must have in various quantities, to mend each limb as well as possible, according to the work and the nature of the fracture.
If there is before great pain, and afterwards more subtle, and does not cease to do this until it is well.</start_of_turn>
In some other size of capillary and fracture, it is necessary to provide the cause according to its location; and this is something that is not properly learned by anyone who has put his study into this art.</start_of_turn>
And if the burn is discovered, you must take i.e. a bandage of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and put it on the wound. Then take another bandage doubled in i. or ii., and soak it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first bandage; and do this more gently than you wish, that you do not damage the burn, then administer further i. linen, and do not restrain it more than necessary except as much as the wound allows.</start_of_turn>
and leave it thus i. or ii., until the swelling of the wound is pacified, then remove it, and administer medicines such as roots of licorice, flour of barley, incense powder, and mustard; and similar things; from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer adequate medicines without exaggeration.</start_of_turn>
And beware that the wound be perfectly closed, lest thou leave it open, neither shalt thou leave it to gather pus; for when pus gathers upon the brains, if it bursts and swells, it brings great harm to the patient; for when one places upon the surface of the wound any biting thing, if it penetrates not downwards.
Beware then, if no evil accident befalls the patient, as we have said, if there be doubt, sense be doubted.</start_of_turn>
And if nothing fierce comes forth save by the medicine we have placed upon it, that some virtue hath, if it be believed, that thou take a part of honey, and two parts of rose oil and in glue one drape; and put it upon the surface.</start_of_turn> Then comes the treatment of the ways to cure it, as long as it is healthy.
Then comes the treatment of the ways to cure it, as long as it is healthy.
And if one of the three parts is broken, if you should bite your little toe or pierce the root that does not belong, and put equal pressure on this break inside your index finger and the heel, until it returns to its natural position. and do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain from your work.</start_of_turn>
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the limb, and cannot come from the bone itself, then you must know that you must place the limb equal to the head of a radish.
And if the fracture is in three parts, if you make another one, and hurry to restore the limb first if you wish;
otherwise after the seventh or the eighth day, when the wound has healed, then you should bind the limb up to the fracture at the head of the limb, if the fracture is in a part.
Or you bind the other part once more, if the fracture is there; and let the bands be so strong that they fill the wound at the fracture.
And they say no restorer should moisten the tentaments in the burn, and die each one for himself. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened in the making of an egg-white and meal powder; then leave the tentation until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
And never do we see a hen's eggshell in place of the tentation, and if there is indeed a feather hanging, hold the brimstick, and blow the patient among them; or do as you see fit.</start_of_turn>
And if pus comes out while you are working, if you put some lint or cotton soaked in rose oil, or some of this vinegar.
And if pus does not come out, if put on plaster by force, of hemp flour, and incense powder, confirmed with a yolk of an egg, then put on soft supports, and do not bind too tightly;
And if the swelling does not come out, if put on plaster by force, of hemp flour, and incense powder, confirmed with a yolk of an egg, then put on soft supports, and do not bind too tightly;
and if there is no swelling in the wound, if you cure with bandages, and put on soft padding, as long as it is comfortable.</start_of_turn
De la routure de la mandibule.
When the mandible is fractured without any wound, and the break is only slight, and is not broken through, except for a tooth socket, if it is known gently.
It is recommended, if the break is in the outer part, to bite your thumb of the affected side in the mouth of the patient; and if the break is in the left mandible, if you take your thumb of the right hand, and touch the break gently, and hold it with the other hand by force, and keep it even
And if the fracture of the mandible is displaced, that is to say, if it is shifted, if you must administer an extension of the thumb by parts, as much as it is even.
If movement of the teeth comes about, or loosening, if they are strained by a golden or silver or silken thread, then put on a broken mandible cerate and put on a pair of double drapes; and put on a large staple well made, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, and tie it on to the tooth that you wish, and command the patient to rest, and eat lean meat.
If you see that the figure changes, if the tooth comes loose at the root, and then return to its place; and put on a dressing of powder with egg or oatmeal, after you have oiled the cerate; and put on a linen dressing, and if the dressing comes away, and the patient’s position does not change, leave it as it is until it heals; many times it heals in two weeks.
And if pus comes from an abscess, if it threatens what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, repair that neither piece of the bone is broken; if subtle from the bone has covers sufficient to this.
And if the wound is wide, if the edge has flared out as you deem necessary.</start_of_turn>
And when you have united all these pieces, and there is no longer any displacement, if the wound is wide, cover it with suitable bandages to prevent suppuration, as long as it is necessary.</start_of_turn>
forcefully. The forceful fracture occurs many times beforehand, in the shoulder, and if it is broken and dislodged in two pieces, there are fragments; and the most easy to restore. Or if there is a fracture with a wound.
And if the fracture is when the wound is toward the side, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the limb that feels the forceful fracture; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put the fracture back in its place, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor swelling.
And if you have to stretch further, put under the shoulder of the patient a round ball of lead, or linen, and be thick as you need; and extend and hold the fracture, and strain the lead with your hand, so that you put the fracture back in its place, as it should be.
And if you are unable to handle the head of the humerus away from its socket, because it has slipped downwards, know that the patient lies supine on his belly, and put a cushion under the shoulder, namely the middle ear, and support the shoulder blade until the bone of the humerus is elevated.
Then address the fracture towards your side, and if you find debris, know that you must cut there; and remove the fragments gently, and if the bones cannot join together by any means, if the pulp has gone into one of the incisors that you have; but that you put a cushion under the humerus, for fear of infection.
and seems like a scoop, and is neither wide nor narrow, and be as wide as it seems necessary, according to the size of the bone and the condition of the work; and has two holes, as you see, and one is large, and the other is small, as is the course of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
When you are assured of the depth of the wound, if the wound edges are small, or if you doubt the depth, if you apply pressure with drapes and bandages, according to the amount.
And if the wound edges tear, if moisture comes, if there is oil, rose oil, and vinegar, and put on top.</start_of_turn>
The stiffness of the bone, when it has wounds and is cut, is that you put on the bone the plaster of the meal of the fine flour and the yolk of an egg, and put on stockings loosely, and put a sponge soaked in oil below the seat if you need it.</start_of_turn Then take a very great bandage of a broad palm, then put on a double drape over the wound, and support it; then take a slender needle of two broad and long sizes, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage is pendant. And put the needle on the bulge, and twist the bandage around the collar, and support the skin surrounding the wound, and support the painful side; and hold the edges apart, and when you see that the ligature holds the bulge steadily, and you clearly see that the needle does not move from the bone, if you reward each jerk, and when you see it slip, if you restrain it.</start_of_turn>
And make the patient sit on his back, and put under his arm one small pillow to support the limb; if it will align the fracture of the bone by the alignment of the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the collar, and do not unbind it until it is well healed, for about twenty days.</start_of_turn>
Then resume the displacement, if you see that it is necessary, and hold and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is usually restored in about twenty-six days, and in less time than any man.
Then resume the displacement, if you see that it is necessary, and hold and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is usually restored in about twenty-six days, and in less time than any man.
Then resume the displacement, if you see that it is necessary, and hold and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is usually restored in about twenty-six days, and in less time than any man.
And if a piece of bone sticks forward, and does not yield like before, if it persists, hold the bone firm and make what we have said in the loosening of the forceps to soothe the abscess.
And if a piece of bone sticks forward, and does not yield like before, if it persists, hold the bone firm and make what we have said in the loosening of the forceps to soothe the abscess.
And never is the limb broken in the middle, but this happens often; but it often breaks from excessive force. And when it is broken in two, if it declines downwards, and causes the patient great pain, and weakness, and vomiting, and by chance blood, and opens the wound in the broken bone, and all that is well.
And if the patient lies prone upon his back, put one cushion between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulder blades together, and reassemble the joints of the two ribs in your hands, and subtly force them even in all positions that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should; then place on dressings and stamp upon the external heel of the bandage with fine salt, or some softer substance, and wrap in one bandage, and bind firmly over the fracture, if it does not move; and turn the limb slowly backward, and strain gently, and reward after an hour the limb, and if it relaxes, strain again; and if you fear that it will slip, due to corrosion or inflammation that comes from within, or pain or swelling, if you hurry, and it slips, remove the dressing, and address what has happened in the manner of treatment; then reapply the dressing and strain until it is healed.
And if the patient lies prone upon his back, put one cushion between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulder blades together, and reassemble the joints of the two ribs in your hands, and subtly force them even in all positions that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should; then place on dressings and stamp upon the external heel of the bandage with fine salt, or some softer substance, and wrap in one bandage, and bind firmly over the fracture, if it does not move; and turn the limb slowly backward, and strain gently, and reward after an hour the limb, and if it relaxes, strain again; and if you fear that it will slip, due to corrosion or inflammation that comes from within, or pain or swelling, if you hurry, and it slips, remove the dressing, and address what has happened in the manner of treatment; then reapply the dressing and strain until it is healed. And in the case of a broken rib.
Its fractures of the ribs only happen at the large angles behind the back and at the head downwards; and they do not happen for anything else except that they are glassy. And one knows well at the inquiry as two.
And if it is restored, set the fracture equally as before. Then place the bandage and bind it with a pin, if necessary.
If the fracture of the ribs has descended inwards, if the patient experiences great pain, pointing, as if of pleura, for the bone is pressing on the gut; there is vomiting and evacuation of large amounts of blood, which is a serious illness, and the former has put on great effort.</start_of_turn>
If any of those things mentioned above are done, it is necessary to administer food that causes the belly to swell, in order to push out the fracture.</start_of_turn>
We do not do this, for the wounds that remain closed do not heal if they are not opened. And if they are opened, if necessary.</start_of_turn>
And they say that no one puts sponges on the limb to soak up the pus, because this is almost a reason; however, there is doubt that the sponge will not pull out the pus from the limb because of the weakness of the limb.</start_of_turn>
And they say that no one should cover the limb with coarse cloth soaked in oil, and put on sponges between the ribs to make the yolk equal all around; then either cure with pleurisin dressing, meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that points to the heel, and there is doubt to the patient, if it is necessary to cut above the broken bone, and to put in a dressing; then one must pierce the bone lightly, and draw out the marrow gently, and then sew up the two layers of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with sponges. And if an abscess comes up, if put on wet cloths soaked in rose oil on the wound and leave it on; and cure while the bone is being healed, as long as it is necessary.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that points to the heel, and there is doubt to the patient, if it is necessary to cut above the broken bone, and to put in a dressing; then one must pierce the bone lightly, and draw out the marrow gently, and then sew up the two layers of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with sponges. And if an abscess comes up, if put on wet cloths soaked in rose oil on the wound and leave it on; and cure while the bone is being healed, as long as it is necessary. For in the bursting of the heel bone.
Never comes a bursting of the bone of the heel, and often there is pain; and the same with the spine of the back. And when this happens to no avail, and you know whether it will be cured or not, if you take warning when you see their hands limp, fleeing and dead, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, if you do not feel pain. Such is death in numerous conditions, and if you move them and feel well when you strain and point, the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient will be cured, if we put in cure.
And when something similar happens at the spine, and you know whether it will be cured or not, if you take warning when you see the pieces are softened, and if the accident is what is in the hands or on the back, and there is a violent vomiting and evacuation of matter; and when we have bound it on the belly, if there is still a violent vomiting. Such is death: if we do not work diligently in the cure.
And if this accident does not happen, if the matter is lighter.
And the cure is that if there is an abscess above, put upon the spine oil of roses or oil of nutmeg of an egg, until it is calmed; then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where there is pain, until it is healed. And if a bone is fractured, if you must cover over the wound; and fix the bone, then join together the two parts of the wound, if it is large, with a splint, and bandage it, then cure it with ointment until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "break of the jaw", if you have your left thumb in your pouch, and put it equal to the other hand in front, then put on the dressing and the bandage, if you need them; then strain it, and if there are fractured bones, if you leave it on, and fix them, cure the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the thigh bone
When the bone of the thigh is fractured, and if there is no immediate sign of concern at the head [of the bone]; and if it lasts long, and worsens at the root, and brings pain to the patient, swelling and breaking that which is broken.
And the restoration is that you place your hand on the [fractured] bone, as long as you are over the fracture; and stretch out what is fractured and the shape of the limb; and if the fracture is only at the head, put it in its natural position, until it is back to its normal shape.</start_of_turn>
And if the fracture is long or it declines at the root, make the patient rest on his belly, until the restoration of this fracture is apparent.</start_of_turn When you have set the hair even, if you place it on the shoulder joint, then place on a bolster of staff or crook, and hold the limb steady, so that it does not move; and keep the limb still until the hair has grown even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his side, or on his back.
And if swelling comes, do not touch it, until the swelling has subsided; and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and strain it as it should be strained, if there is no other mishap; and that is the way to do it
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder joint is that which is between the shoulder blade and the head of the humerus. If it is dislocated, it must be restored in one of two ways: one of which is to take a fistful of moist earth and restore it in this fashion:
And so take two fingers and bind them together, and lift the patient up on his seat; then place the arm broken over the fist, as far as the elbow, and have the fist bent with a curve, then place something heavy on it or the attendant will extend it forward; then put the hand in its place as it was before, until the dislocation returns as it should.
And the other method is that you support the patient on his hip, and bind the arm to his collar, and command the attendants to hold what is on the dislocation at his hands, and the others to hold below all the bones, and extend the shoulders outwards.
If the extraction is too strong, if it strains, that is to say, if it pulls out the bristle, on the bristle, and extends one's thumbs to their side. And if the bristle is close to the shoulder, one must know that one must place one's middle finger below the armpit, and the other towards the elbow, below the bristle; and in like manner if the bristle is towards the elbow, one must know that one must place one's thumb lightly, with effort, as long as the bristle is even on both sides. Then one must place the bristle even, if it is possible, and strain, for if the afterbirth does not come away.
If the afterbirth comes, if it does not strain immediately, place upon it a thick cloth soaked in oil of roses until the afterbirth is calmed; then strain, and keep the method of straining as if you placed the bandage over the bristle. Then assemble the limb on the shoulder and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; put on the drape and strain on the shoulder and the limb, so that the limb is steady, without anything hindering it, or without displacing the bone.
And if you doubt that the bone is not moving, if you use splints, and place on the bristle a splint wider and stronger than the others, and put between the thumbs two spaces as wide as the bristle; then strain on the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, stronger and less likely to damage.
If you see the elevation of the shoulder blade and the stretching, as we have said, when you restore the limb promptly and doubt the incision, if you leave it connected until the seventh day, as we have said; then look carefully for two days. If swelling does not occur nor does life regress, or the swelling does not reach the limb, the wound has healed. If necessary, as we have said.
If no such thing occurs, if more than two days have passed, and the patient lies on his back with his hands on his stomach; and put the limb in a cushion made of equal wool, and look for an hour or two to see if the limb is not moving, or if the ligaments are not softened; if necessary, by the power of medicine, and do to the limb what we have before recommended, in a moderate way; and when it begins to mend, if it is large. It is customary for the assistant and the limb to be retaken in forty days. And then one must loosen and administer warm baths and ointments for the proper healing. And if the dislocation is stiff and full of blood clots, one must wait to loosen for one or two months.
... and if the dislocation is stiff and full of blood clots, one must wait to loosen for one or two months.
The arm is composed of twelve bones, which are called the "femora", of which one is small and is like a nail that supports the pouch; and the other is large and is like a socket, over the small bone. By chance, the large bone only breaks sometimes, or the small, and sometimes both together.
When the small bone is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; but when the large bone is broken, if the healing is bad, it is more painful than when they are both broken together. If only the small bone is broken, if you can, extend it slightly, and make it even.
And if it is the large bone that is broken, if you must tighten it more; and extend over one cushion, and keep the pouch of the hand higher than the other, and the small one must be lower than the others, and let the patient cross his arms over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher than the patient himself, so that the patient does not suffer any pain; then extend the limb from the shoulder to the wrist, or to the elbow, and one assistant at the other side. And then put it back in its normal position, according to its best form.
And if it breaks into pieces, if you put some of them back into their place, and if there is none left to grasp or touch, and you are unable to restore it to its place, if you leave it as it is and the bone, as we have said before.
And if it breaks into pieces, as I have mentioned in the previous chapter; take hold of the cure.</start_of_turn>
And if in the beginning of restoring comes out abscesses, put glue, namely a drape made of rose oil and white wax, that it is neither too thick nor too soft; and bind it loosely, so that the abscesses are appeased. And then bone the wax, and put in the splint of powder of meal with abundance of eggshell, because put the stars, and make the star of the fracture stronger, and one wider than the others; and be careful that it has as many stars as there are joints or limbs in various positions: either that the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two; and is more strained on the fracture than elsewhere, and all the days less by supporting, as I have said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bands be soft and moist on the fracture, and not too hard or rough; and let the thread that is strained be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.</start_of_turn If other misfortunes arise with the limb, as with itching that arises with the limb, then you must elevate the limb with hot water until the itching subsides; and leave the limb still. Then resume the treatment, and if the tendon is softened and the bone is loosened, and similar things, if necessary.
If it is observed that the swelling will not subside from the limb, because it is too severe, then you must soften it indeed; and leave it alone for some days, until the swelling subsides, and then stretch it.</start_of_turn>
And if neither of these things that we have said will help the patient, if not until after twenty days or more, then you must hold his hands to his chest, and keep his neck even, and prevent him from moving and from eating, and let him sleep on his back; and give him food only when the swelling has subsided in thirty days or so, or in twenty days, according to the composition and temperament of the patient.</start_of_turn>
Of the fracture of the hand
The bones at the back of the hand, and there are two of them, often break; and it does not come out but pours blood many times.</start_of_turn>
And when the hand is fractured or bleeding, if it is suspected that the bones have shifted, and if the patient is sitting crookedly in front of him, then put his hand on the extended cloth and extend the physician’s fingers. Break the fractured bones, and put them in their place; and put on the dressing and the bandage, if there is no further bleeding. Then put on a splint as appropriate; and if necessary cover it with a bandage.</start_of_turn
And if the fracture is at the elbow joint towards the belly of the limb, then make a tourniquet of cloth, and command the patient to tighten it at his fractured limb; and then strain from a long bandage, and the splint should be as wide as the limb, and tighten, as it should.
And if the break is at the shoulder, if you command that you place a splint on, and another below in the root, so that the hand is overspread and straight, then you must bind it tightly around the hand, and keep it bound between the two.
And if the break does not come from either side, if it is at the pouch, if you put it even, as it should be; and strain it with the root, and if you see that it does not move when you put on a right-angle splint, and it remains still; and if the break is elsewhere, as in the index or any other, if you put it even, and bind it with the two fingers that follow; or you bind them all together, holding the wrist, or you put on a splint, as for a pouch; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the burn, and heal that which comes.
and if the break does not come from either side, if it is at the pouch, if you put it even, as it should be; and strain it with the root, and if you see that it does not move when you put on a right-angle splint, and it remains still; and if the break is elsewhere, as in the index or any other, if you put it even, and bind it with the two fingers that follow; or you bind them all together, holding the wrist, or you put on a splint, as for a pouch; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the burn, and heal that which comes of the bruise.
The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see it when it bends forward and backward; and the restoration is when it is bound with a loop above the fracture and another below.</p> The patient lies on his face, and extends his limbs symmetrically; and it is when the fracture is fixed in the bone.</p
And if the fracture is close to the thigh bone, if either of the limbs above the ankle joint or the other below the fracture. And just as if it were close to the knee, and in general, if either the lower limb or the thigh is flexed; then put the thumbs of both hands under the bone, as much as it is possible to do so according to its natural position, and then put on the dressing and bind, if necessary.</p
If there is an abscess above, if you leave it calm and then return to your work and your treatment, the binding is done in haste. If there is an abscess above, if you leave it calm and then return to your work and your treatment, the binding is done in haste. It is necessary to wrap around the limb with a strong bandage, doubled in two or three places, and to hold the excess taut, then to stretch the limb until the nails reach the root of the nail; and to pass a thread along between the hip and the limb, below the groin, and to bring the thread up at the top; then to stretch the limb and the hip together with the bandage, and to place stars on the abscess, and to place a star on the bone of the limb; then to use eight or nine threads between the limb and the hip of coarse cloth to make the binding even, and to begin to bind making two or three knots on the abscess; and the more you go up the abscess, and the less the strain; and when you have put in eight or nine threads between the limb and the hip, and have tied two stars that are below, then to renew the thread at the top until you see from the nail; and the strain, if it does not move from its place, then you must leave it alone, and it will not cause any abscess or swelling or anything similar.
If there is an abscess above, if it comes loose, and if you address what has come, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, it is necessary to remove them; and if that is not possible, it is necessary to cut the limb open, and drain; and to treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And never is the bone broken in this case when one puts in stars, as in the arm and the shoulder; nevertheless, in the restoration that is made, it does not please me the patient.
And the stitches that the bone is restored in, in a day or less or more, according to the diversity of temperaments.</start_of_turn>
of the rue de Genouil</start_of_turn>
The stitches in Rue Genouil break often, but they bleed many times. And if they break, it is not but a tear, or a hole, and there is pain all around, and pain in general, and this is well known.</start_of_turn
And thus, if it is necessary to put things right, equal what is round with its mate, so that they are joined together firmly; then place the bandage, and place a round cushion if you have need of it, and strain it as it should be strained, then reward all the arrangements that we have said before, as for example incisions and other similar things; and put in every mishap that it may concern him, so that he may be well.
And thus, if it is necessary to put things right, equal what is round with its mate, so that they are joined together firmly; then place the bandage, and place a round cushion if you have need of it, and strain it as it should be strained, then reward all the arrangements that we have said before, as for example incisions and other similar things; and put in every mishap that it may concern him, so that he may be well.
And thus, if it is necessary to put things right, equal what is round with its mate, so that they are joined together firmly; then place the bandage, and place a round cushion if you have need of it, and strain it as it should be strained, then reward all the arrangements that we have said before, as for example incisions and other similar things; and put in every mishap that it may concern him, so that he may be well. Saiches that there are in the limb have two bones, of which one is called by right "muscle" and the other is called "foscile"; and there is often a fracture as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is just like that of the arm, and the work is all done in one.
And if two bones are fractured together, the limb is twisted throughout.
And if a marrow bone is fractured, the limb is twisted forward.</start_of_turn>
And if a large bone is fractured, one feels great pain, and one sees it well; and it is twisted. Then one must bring extension, and make it even, and bind the bones evenly; however, if the fracture is serious, and there are many pieces, even if the extension is smaller and lighter; and adjust according to your skill.</start_of_turn>
And when you have finished your work, if you take three strips of coarse cloth which wrap around the limb from one side to the other, and be as long as the limb from the groin to the heel; then encircle with three pieces of linen, which are strong and soft, and bind them together in the middle, and with this binding the limb will not slip downwards or upwards; and this is good; and no one will administer any more medicine which is long on the limb, and if there is swelling, and it is of bone, and puts on the limb; and make the limb still by this binding or any other accident; and move each joint of the limb, to see if there is any other fracture or any other accident; if the cure until it is healed.
Of the breaking of bones due to pain.
At the ankle, there is no fracture; but in the bones of the forearm there is never a fracture and two are enough; and there is no other cause of death.
And if there is a fracture of the bones of the forearm, and you see these bones pressing against each other, if you put such great pain on the limb as if it were going to die, and then put your limb back in its place, where the bones were raised up, then press on the limb until they return to their natural position; then put on the dressing and bandage, and put a little bandage under the bone at the level of the fracture, and bind the limb steadily, and when the pain has subsided, wrap up the limb with cloth and other things as you deem necessary.
And when two or three days have passed, if the limb is not healed, because you will find the bones equal, whether they are fractured or not fractured.
If there are two breaks, if you restore them as we have said, do two of them with your hand; then put at the end of each break a splint according to the length of the break, and make it wider; and put on the thumb that which I have said, and strain immediately; and if there are three or more, break them, and put on each break a splint according to its quantity, enveloped in one layer of linen, and strain the thumb from the bone.
Remember also the other things that I have said about other breaks, as we have said; and secure each accident as it should be secured.
... of the break of the thumb bone.
When the arm of a woman is broken, if she sits enlarged, then bend her towards the lower back; and hold her there behind; then fill the belly with cotton, and put as much in as a stone; then draw out the woman, and keep her back and front; and then jump the cotton out until it reaches the entrance of the belly, and return the bone with the stone; and when she sees her piss, if the stone is in the cotton, and when she has pissed, she will recover; for she will have made thirty-nine days or more: if the fracture is restored, and if you see it, take a bladder of Berber, and tie a string around the navel, and pour all the bladder into the belly; then blow through the string until the bladder is expelled: the belly will then return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it as it is for a few days, until it is healed.
When the forearm bone of a man or a woman is broken, or if it is simply fractured, if you restore it as we have said concerning the thigh bone; and these fractures that are not seen often are those which lie in the hands of those who study and use them, and they understand my book. For a fracture means in many cases the right way to restore is through these very methods: so do them.
When the limb is broken, take a goose’s neck and put it around the limb; then wrap it with cloth, and leave it for two days or until it is healed, and it will be completely healed.
Break with wound
It is fitting for one with a fracture with wound, even if it is great, as with a bone of the thigh or shoulder or the like, that it should be sound now, as the wounds themselves bear witness.
And if the wound is healed, if the rest of the vitriol remains, if you have nothing else, then restore the fracture in this way once more, or that one, for if the pus does not come.
And if pus comes, if let the restoration be until new morning again, as long as the pus is calmed, and do not touch neither a third nor a quarter, for you will bring about a bad accident.
And if the bone breaks are open above like a cover discovered, if you must know that you must put your hands lightly on them at a small extension.
And if the limb does not extend naturally with your hands, if there is a steel instrument which is about twelve or thirteen inches long, and its width is in proportion to the amount of the wound; for this reason it is necessary at the mire that it should grasp three or four inches, according to what is necessary in the case of a broken bone; and be round and somewhat thick, so that it does not crush the limb during the work.
It is called "palainche" because it must be placed upon the head of the apparent bone; and once it has gone once, it must be equal so that one meets the other. And if the fracture is slight, and the instrument cannot well grasp the bone, if you must know that you must hold the head of the bone as long as the instrument has possession of it.
And if you cannot restore the bone, as we have said, if you see the head of a bone displaced by an instrument that can cover it, or by incision or excision, at your peril; then take away what is hindering the bone from snapping and from its rough edges.
And when the bone is restored, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, the limb is not in its natural position. If you do too much to return it to its place, then moisten it, i.e. cover it with black vinegar, and do so cautiously; and put no cerate or anything else on the wound, for it will cause putrefaction and corruption. Then administer stars when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the dressing thoroughly, according to the quantity of the wound, and take care that the wound is not strained with the fracture; for many times this has happened to fools, and it has caused the patient’s death or serious illness many times; or the bruise has been softer and more fluid than the others.
And if the wound is small or large, and you doubt that healing will take place, as we have said, and you find pain in the limb, if it does not suffice to administer stars; but cover the wound thoroughly, with dry cloth, and bind it. And when you see afterwards that the wound is draining blood profusely, if you have put too much on it with vinegar, put on healing salves, such as ointment for wounds and the like.
And you must keep the limb bound for one hour in the morning and evening, until it is healed and sound.
And you must keep the limb bound in part as much as is necessary so that the limb recovers easily.
And if the limb persists [dislocated], and it cannot be set right again, with small fragments of bone, because it is necessary that you should attempt to close the wound, and remove all these fragments of bone that cause this pain.
And if a fistula comes to the limb, or other kind of corruption, if you must cure it, according to what is said in this chapter above. And when the bone is broken, and is open on the limb, as the bone of the thigh or the shoulder, and other similar parts of the great limbs, if you do not treat them, for many times death comes from this; but you must leave them as long as they bleed; by chance it will heal by itself after twenty or thirty days, and then cure the wound if you wish; but if you do not wish, leave it alone.
From the root of the bone that comes out from the swelling.
Many times we come after the swelling of the bone root, even when it is close to the joint, and it is good to see the shape of the limb; and by chance we cannot make the limb do its natural work.</start_of_turn>
Take care then if it is fresh: if you administer astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcodea, acacia, and similar others, make sure that you take none of these things, or all together, and mix them with wine that is astringent or with eggs or with oil; and put them on the wound, and strain it well, and do not remove it from the hands for days; and then remove the dislocation, and do it again until the nodulation is bony; or you strain on a well-made piece of flesh; for the property of flesh is that it makes all the swellings under the limb rigid; and if the nodulation has already become hardened as much as stone, and it is necessary to break it, if the swelling above is great, and make the apparent surplus; or do not remove it at all, until it is bony, and cure it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
When the fracture has been restored, and remains feeble after the limb has been bandaged, if there is any pain: sometimes it is because it was too tightly bound and was not sufficiently loose; or because there are too many bands, and it cannot move smoothly; or because of many wounds; or from too great a movement, not even in its proper place; or because there is blood in the bone, if it is feeble.</start_of_turn>
And the cure is that you make the patient move around and keep the limb firm, until the pain has ceased; and give him baths, and make him comfortable; then put on a poultice over the limb, so that the poultice absorbs the great nourishment, and the wound often suffers from excessive heat, until the nourishment returns to the limb; and bring it back to its natural shape.</start_of_turn>
The limb is twisted after the injury.
When the limb is twisted after the restoration, and the bone is fractured open, and the limb is deformed, although it does not lose its natural movement: if one does not believe the fools who say it must be fractured anew, and many have done this in our land; this practice is blamed, and it brings great harm, and by chance the patient; although when the swelling and the torture are fresh, if it is considered that they have arisen from hot water, or soft herbs are cooked, as ivy leaves, and roots, and meadowsweet, and similar things; and it makes one.i. emollient plaster, as with good aquaintance, and you take the nourishment of ivy, and confit it with fat of gelatin or olive oil, and make plaster of it; or you take greasy figs, and grind them with horse dung, and similar medicines that soothe the swelling.
And under no circumstances is the bone displaced by continuous and prolonged rubbing with wet hands. And provide the limb with rest every hour.
And if the dislocation is swollen and hardened, like a stone, and requires iron, if it is covered up to the bone, make an incision slightly deeper; and place padding and a dressing over the wound.
And thus begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to no avail, if it is now to bring back into its place.
For if it is late, if by chance it is reset, we shall have pricked the limb at its root; for because of this it must not be moved while it is inflamed: many times this has caused vomiting and other pains.
Whenever this happens, if the patient is able to bear the pain, leave the wound alone until the swelling subsides; then raise the limb high and liberally, and move it gently, and cure each limb as it comes back to its place.</start_of_turn>
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the shoulder joint from the root to the wrist.</start_of_turn
Des mandibules.
The jawbones.
When the dislocation is small, if it returns by itself in multiple positions.
And if it is entire and accompanied, if you must, immediately restrain it, do not delay;
And in such manner that the minister grasps the head of the patient, and behold the eye that is opposite the pocket of one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the mandible within the mouth, if the dislocation is of a third part; and the other hand must be pushed out, to make them even; and command the patient to soften his mandibles and move them from all parts.
And behold the eye that is opposite, until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn>
And if it returns grasped, even if the two mandibles are together, if they are raised with hot water and oil, so that they remain lightly; do not force to return it, as we have said.</start_of_turn
And when they are returned equally, and the patient’s mouth is closed gently, if you put on moist cloths in a circle made of rose oil and beeswax, then bind them lightly with linen threads.
And the patient lies on his back, with his arms resting between two cushions, so that they do not move forward or backward, neither do they clench, but take hold of the limb gently, until the pain is gone, and keep the jaw closed;
Then gently move what you see, and do not open the mouth to eat or drink, until the jaw is well closed and healed.
If the two jawbones do not wish to return to their place at a single hour, and are not otherwise converted [back to their normal position], if in comes fever and customary sickness, and by chance solution of the belly, and by chance vomiting of pure bile.
When you see this, know that it is a loss; and many times death is the result, in eight days.</start_of_turn>
of the forceps
The forceps cannot dislodge from the costae without causing damage to the surrounding area, and is always damaged when forced, and one can feel it well.</start_of_turn
And if the patient lies prone on his back, extends his arms; then press the limb towards your palm, and it will return; then place the bandage and bind securely, and restrain.
And if the limb which is towards the knee cannot be loosened; if so, and if it dislocates once, if you leave it in place, as we have said; then place the bandage and bind securely, and restrain, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
And in the meantime, the limb is returned to its place, when it is loosened from its bone.
Of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder is dislocated only in two ways: when it slips at the edge of the socket downwards; or when it slips at the edge of the socket upwards; or it slips from the upper part, and this is very dangerous.
It does not slip behind the shoulder, nor does it slip inwards through the nerves; it slips downwards towards the socket, just as is often the case with those who have a great deal of flesh; or with those who have little flesh, it slips at the point of the shoulder blade, and returns to its place.
And sometimes there are blows or fractures, and the shoulder is dislocated by a thick swelling, and one must take care that it is not dislocated by this.
You must indeed believe that it is dislocated, as long as you are certain; and then immediately begin the treatment.
And it is known that a dislocation occurs when the limb is tilted towards the scapula, and when the bone is twisted, and you will find between their difference the cause of the pain; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a socket, and the scapula pressing on the head of the shoulder, just as if it were a nail; and the patient cannot move their limb in any way
and thus, if it is dislocated upwards, if it is not hidden, because you will see it immediately when you touch it;
And this manner of dislocation is not useless to restore, when it is new, or when the limb is painful.
And the way is that the hand of the sufferer be held high, then put the thumbs below the armpit, and hold the joint firmly high up; and the sufferer holds the hand, and stretches it high, since he puts it down; if it comes promptly.</start_of_turn>
And if it does not come as we have said before, if it is to be known that the patient be bathed in warm water; and he is given soft nourishment and soothing, as decoction of alum and fennel and honey in water, and is given to drink;
Then keep the patient reclining on his back, and put under the armpit a cushion of linen equal in size, neither too soft nor too hard, and put the thumb of the hand over the cushion, and keep the shoulder joint firmly in place, and treat the painful hand.
And another minister holds the head of the patient firmly, if it does not move backwards; that shoulder will return immediately, and if you see that it remains in this manner, follow this method.
And that you make it present, that is to say, someone who is greater than the patient; and that you place both hands on the sides of the chest, and hold the shoulder below the patient’s shoulder, and stretch the shoulder upwards, so that the patient hangs from the armpit And another minister grasps the patient’s hand backwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, if you put anything heavy with him, the dislocation will return immediately.
And thus we must also do in another way: the stone is long like a mustard seed, which must not be too thick or too thin; then put the hand loosely over the patient’s side, but with a soft drape, and let the limb be long enough to reach the fistula; then extend the hand forward and the joint will return to its place steadily.</start_of_turn>
and if all these things do not make it return, if you do this cure: take a fist of three fingers wide and two of thumb, which has the thumb bent to enter into the navel, as in this form:  </start_of_turn>
Then lay upon the head of the arm a cloth damped with sweat, that it does not bleed the patient; and put the hand of the patient on the seat; extend the arms over the arm of the longth, and support the limb on the arm, and the hand to the wrist, and put the arm over an inch of a span of a finger, and let the hands hang down, or leave the forearm hanging down: the joint is now restored.
And when it is restored, in whatever way it may be, if you command that you put on the seat a ball of wool equal in size, then put the dressing apart with powdered barley, with incense and alum of egg, upon the whole flank and around, then strain out the moisture from the seat immediately, and draw the limb over the dressing, and embrace the hand to its collar, and let the hands hang down together.</start_of_turn>
And it is commanded that he should drink little by little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then drink more after five or six days, and move it; and if it is stiff and is not softened, if it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if the joint is forced from its place by moisture, or for another cause, if you must administer cauteries to it twice, immediately and as soon as possible, as it is placed before or alongside the cauteries.
And if you do all this, and it remains loose for thirteen days, and the joint does not stay in place, and cannot lift the upper arm, then it is likely that the nerves of the shoulder are compressed, stretched or softened; and that the joint will never be stable in its place again.</start_of_turn>
When the dislocation is towards the elbow, and the bones, or behind, if it is done by impulse, and extension of the arms, and another support is administered; and it is cured as long as it is done properly.</start_of_turn>
If after healing comes a tingling sensation in the limb, and later on stiffness, if the patient washes many times, until the tingling sensation is gone, and returns to its first state.
If after healing comes a tingling sensation in the limb, and later on stiffness, if the patient washes many times, until the tingling sensation is gone, and returns to its first state.
If after healing comes a tingling sensation in the limb, and later on stiffness, if the patient washes many times, until the tingling sensation is gone, and returns to its first state. If after healing comes a tingling sensation in the limb, and later on stiffness, if the patient washes many times, until the tingling sensation is gone, and returns to its first state
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.
And it must be remembered that if it is possible to restore it again after the spasm has passed, grasp the hands with both hands; and extend the arms, and let the hands hang down in accordance with the pain of the joint, front and back, and reassemble the dislocation with its sockets together, or at the root of the bone, until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn>
And if the dislocation is in front, if it returns when you double your hand over your hand, and press from the root of the bone that is loosened.</start_of_turn>
And if it does not return to its place, administer strong extension; and if two ministers extend the arm and hold it by two ministers, if it does not move during extension, then twist the arm from the shoulder downwards; then surround it with a double-folded long and wide cloth.
When you see that the limb is at its joint, if the limb has been deprived of any oil to lubricate the joint, then stretch the limb until it returns to its place; then keep it stretched until it returns.</start_of_turn>
When it is in its place, put on dry patches with egg white, and tighten the limb, and bend the arm at the shoulder of the patient, and leave it thus for some days, then take it off.</start_of_turn>
And if the joint is firmly fixed in its place, if you see that it does not move well, if you rejoin the limb and leave it as it is for some days, until it is firmly set; then you must release it.</p>
If after the joint has been repositioned, there is pain, and it moves, bathe and massage it well, and press until it is eased; or put on the joint a greasy mutton fat pad, then leave it in place for a day and a night, then take out the bone, and let it enter the bath.</p And when it sweats, wipe the joint gently, then put the pad back on, and then enter or bathe; and do this three or four times until it is healed; and if you see that it returns to its place, put on a moist poultice filled with soft wool, and bind it up tightly.</p
The dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand: the joint of the hand is loosened, and the return is laborious, more so than other joints throughout, so it must be immediately repositioned in its place, while it is loosened, even if the bones are fractured, or if there is contamination of the wound.
And if you place the painful hand on a table, and the assistant extends the limb, and you look at it so that you put its palm on the surface of the joint, and hold it until it returns to its place
However, you must watch that it is well positioned; then put the painful hand backwards on a table when extending and returning it. If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of his hand on the table, and I will look and put his hand on the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that is well.
If not, if the strain of the tendons is appeased by post-traumatic changes, and you leave it in its original position, let it resume its natural course.</start_of_turn>
And if it cannot bear it, and you do not put it back after a while, the joint will become stiff.</start_of_turn
neither does it harm the patient for as long as the hand is softened, and it cannot strain anything: so that if the nerves are cut, or the veins; if there is no other cause for straining except to cauterize, that is the only thing which is worth doing.</start_of_turn>
And when the hand is at rest, if you put on the bandage we mentioned earlier, then strain and leave it for three days, then remove it and leave it be.
And if it cannot move well, and if there is no pain, if there is warm swelling, and you rub it until it is healed
of the dislocation of the shoulder of the hand.
Never are the bones of the hand dislocated at the front or at the back or in the belly;
When it is thus, do this, and hold the dislocation firm in your pouches until it returns; then support the head of the dislocation towards the part where it is joined.
When it is thus, do this, and keep the dislocation firm in your pouches until it returns; then support the head of the dislocation towards the part where it is joined; and do not bind it, as we have said, but rather loosen and move it, and bind it again; do this often, until it is firm
When it is thus, do this, and keep the dislocation firm in your pouches until it returns; then support the head of the dislocation towards the part where it is joined; and do not bind it, as we have said, but rather loosen and move it, and bind it again; do this often, until it is firm; and do the same if the dislocation is loosened from the arm, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same if it is loosened from another part.
From the loosening of the scapula from the back.
When the scapula of the back or the neck is loosened, or there are several loosened, if there is no remedy, for the patient dies quickly.</start_of_turn>
And the sign is that the evacuation of the urine runs contrary to its course, it cannot be held, and many times the limbs are softened, or the knees or arms or feet.</start_of_turn
And often the scapula moves three parts; that which moves at the back is called "gilbosite."
The wound is cured if the swelling has come from childhood: if there is no cure or healing in any way.
And that which comes from wounds or impacts or similar things, say the old physicians in their great words, or there is little or no benefit in it
but I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the swelling that comes before, there is no real healing;
And thus also when it comes directly in the groin, and it cannot be cured except for that which comes from behind, as I have said.
And thus also when it comes directly in the groin, and it cannot be cured except for that which comes from behind, as I have said. And let the patient keep his face firm in one place, and have strain from behind, that it does not move;
then stretch the limb forward toward the earth forms, and the other hand grasps, and bind a thread around the patient’s flanks, and the other hand grasps the flanks, and the thighs, and the calves.
and two assistants know the threads, one at the head and the other at the hands, among the six threads;
And let them be well closed, as we have said, and look that he puts his palms on the spine, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, take a spoonful of .iij. palms of length, and press the thumb against the belly, and let the patient be on the side, and hold the head of the spoonful against the belly, then put the middle of the spoonful on the spine; and put his eyes on the other head of the spoonful, and press firmly, until it returns to its place; and if you see, do it at the turn that turns at the hand.
And hold his arm at the shoulder of the patient with a great hand, and towards the pieces two others, and have between each shoulder, a sow and a bandage, a palm of spice of length;
And in each basin is one hole, or the nail runs out; and let the basin be firmly set in the earth, if it does not move; and between each two basins are two nails, one of which is returning, as the thread returns, and there are in two returns two small nails of the length of a thumb, to return the nail.
And then the thread which is among the nails towards the head, and the other thread towards the pieces towards the other nail, and between the basins the minister twists his nail throughout the thread, and the master puts the pin even as we have said
And when it is even, put on a dry patch with plenty of eggs, and then press, and then support with a piece of tablet of two thumbs’ length, which covers the root of the ribs and the part of the spine that is painful, then bind with a thread, as we have said, and use the patient’s natural nourishment, until it is healed;
And if nothing more comes to pass at the end of the illness, if it is necessary, administer soothing and relaxing medicines, as we have said before; and never give a dose of lead.
And never let there appear at the back of the spine a swelling of the bone; this is dislocation; for in this case there should be no presumption: it is by chance that death comes.
hip dislocation
The joints of the hip and shoulder do not come loose except for dislocations alone, and it does not come about in any other way; and the joint of the hip is damaged in three parts: front and back, and above and below; the more it is damaged in front, the more it is damaged behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation is such that when one joins the painful limb with the flesh, if it is longer, and opens more the pain of the disease than the normal, and cannot double its knee over the fire. And it is the cause of this that is taken away by cautery of the abscess, for in this way the head of the scapula comes away from its place.</start_of_turn>
And the sign of this is that if these accidents are contrary to the preceding ones.</start_of_turn
And the sign of this is that if it is well supported, according to the completion; nevertheless, do not double the knee with pain, and if you see it done violently, do not do so before, and retain the urine, and swell the belly, and when it goes, it passes over the heel.
And the sign of the one who has it behind, if he cannot expand his knee, cannot double it, and the leg is shorter than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is dislocated from the socket.
If this semblance of dislocation persists, if indeed the dislocation is old and persists according to its nature, without any remedy; I do not know that there is any hope.</start_of_turn>
In this case where the dislocation is fresh, there are three methods for dislocation; if you are hasty and turn the joint too quickly, and stretch it outwards and downwards; perhaps it will return, and there will be no need for any other remedy.</start_of_turn>
And if it does not return in this manner, if you must know, apply force, that is, minister strong, and hold the limb firmly at both ends, or at one of them as you please. And another minister puts his hand under in part as much as he can stretch out his hands below his buttocks, then he grasps it with a loop of thread above the hip; and another holds the head of the limb.</start_of_turn>
And extend upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.</start_of_turn
This method of extension is commonly used in three out of four cases; and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If not, it is necessary to apply a remedy for the sign. When the dislocation is complete, it is necessary to elevate the limb above the level of the heart, place the limb on the root of the thigh, and pull the limb down towards the groin, and then extend the limb upwards towards the groin and outwards towards the forcele.
Then take another assistant to hold the patient's arms, and embrace the great limb of the affected thigh, and extend it outwards towards the front: if it returns to its place now; and this method of dislocation is less severe than the others.
If you do not hold it firmly in this manner as we have said, if you must tie the patient’s limbs together with a strong thread over the toes and the knees, and over the thighs, so that the limb extends more than the others;
If you must suspend the limb from the top of a pole, or over the ground with the arms outstretched; then command the minister to grasp the head of the scapula, and let another minister hold the patient, who graspes the scapula, for the joint is now returning correctly.</start_of_turn>
When the dislocation has gone away, if the patient is lying down as we have said above, and has grasped the limb properly, and on the heel as well;
Then put the thumb and the index finger together at the head and the other as pieces, and then insert the index finger between the buttocks of the patient in the form of a triangle. And put moist towels around the patient, so that he does not bleed, then stretch out the chest and hold his hand steady, and look to see if the dislocation is equal on his hand.</start_of_turn>
If it comes back, that is good. But if not, put on the table and press on it as we have said in the swelling, and keep the patient lying down on the side of the pain.</start_of_turn
And when the dislocation is forward, if it is necessary, extend the painful limb as much as possible, as I have said; and put the eyes on the painful part of the limb, and press on the other hand, and extend forward towards the groin.</start_of_turn
And if the dislocation is urgent, if it cannot be delayed, do not extend the patient, do not lift him from the ground, but rather that he remain as he is, as if he had been previously loosened at the urgent moment, as we have said above concerning the .ij. inches of the armpit. And if he be on his face, and the limb is extended as we have said before, and must press upon the joint at the table;
And will be at that point when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then support the buttocks, put on the dressing, and strain with a bandage, so that the arm does not move;
And if it rests for two or three days, then remove it and place the support there; and if you see that they are even, if strained as before, leave it for two days; then remove it and make it swell gently until the limb is comfortable.
And if it rests for two or three days, then remove it and place the support there; and if you see that they are even, if strained as before, leave it for two days; then remove it and make it swell gently until the limb is comfortable.
The head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture in two ways: forward and backward; and do not make it worse in front.
And the sign is that if you order the patient to bend his limb at his knee, and he does not bend it to his buttock, his heel will be dry.
And if you make the patient sit upright, and extend his limb if he can, and put your hand behind his face, and put his heel on your knees;
Then take his thigh in your palms, and pull between your thumbs, then bend his hip joints gently; and another assistant extends his foot, until his knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he has properly bent his knee to his buttock lightly.
And put a compress on, and make the limb rest against the buttock, and hold them together firmly for two or three days, then take it off. And do not let the patient move until the limb is comfortable.
And if the limb is not out of place, if an extension is administered firmly, as we said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
And if the limb is not out of place, if an extension is administered firmly, as we said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
The limb is never completely immobile, and never completely relaxed, and is always somewhat tense and painful.
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and that it hangs forward towards the part where it is loosened:
When the limb is relaxed, it must be gently extended with the hands when it is simply suspended.
And when it is thoroughly dry, if you must force the patient to sit upright, and hold him firmly by the leg, under the ankle;
then take the limb in your right hand, and then in your left hand once, then extend it upwards, and keep it well stretched out;
and do this once more, as we have said, while holding and pulling the limb; if it returns, that is good; if not, repeat the procedure, for it will return.
If it cannot return to its place, if you make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and stretch his legs firmly in the earth between his thighs, and place a cloth around his waist, that he does not bleed the patient;
Then hold the arm firmly, and another assistant should extend the limb at his hands or wrists, which is placed on the collar of the limb; Then extend the thumbs of both assistants equally, and hold the patient’s body either between the thighs or below the armpits to hold the patient when extending it;
Then he sets the dislocation with his hands, and another attendant grasps the limb firmly at the shoulder, and the dislocation returns immediately.
When it returns to its place, he puts on the dressing and binds tightly, and the strain is formed, and he grasps the limb at the ankle, and keeps the nerves above the heel from being too tight;
Then he leaves it for one or two days, and if the strain has subsided, he unbinds it a third or a fourth time, and the patient is allowed to walk again after three days. And if he goes before this time, it is not certain that he will not suffer further pain.
If the shoulder dislocates again after being reset, as we have mentioned elsewhere, then you must hold it still until it is healed.
If the shoulder dislocates again after being reset, as we have mentioned elsewhere, then you must hold it still until it is healed.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
If the shoulder is dislocated from the socket, if you must hold the patient sitting upright on a chair or table, and put your hand on the area around the dislocation, then press your hand firmly until it returns to its normal position.
And when they are even, and nothing appears to be open, if you put on the salve of rue marguerite a dose of three quarters of a pound, then the swelling will form, and leave it for two days, then take it off; and rest it until it is healed.
And when they are even, and nothing appears to be open, if you put on the salve of rue marguerite a dose of three quarters of a pound, then the swelling will form, and leave it for two days, then take it off; and rest it until it is healed.
And when they are even, and nothing appears to be open, if you put on the salve of rue marguerite a dose of three quarters of a pound, then the swelling will form, and leave it for two days, then take it off; and rest it until it is healed.
If you are not confident in your skill for the cure, and if you are not learned in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and prompt, do not attempt it;
If you do not use calming things at the beginning and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, if you now reset the limb, so that the abscesses remain alive;
and when the limb is set, if you administer calming things at the base of the wound, and cure the wound, as it should be, with desiccated oil;
And if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and the smaller bones break, if the bones themselves, do as we have said in simple ailments.
And take care not to enter into a state of fear, as I have said, for this will bring you suffering according to your Creator, and for the salvation of your soul and your body. Amen.
