O you, most dear sons, I have finished this book which is the latest fruit of the science of medicine, and I have completed it by its demonstrations and pronouncements. And it has come to my mind that I shall accompany this treatise with another part of the work of hands, namely surgery.
And because the work of hands is rare in our region and is strange to all, if it is not known and learned, and if only the small descriptions in the books of the ancients remain, which the hands have done And thus comes the error and the emptiness, and are closed the understandings and is aligned the science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.
Or it seems to me that I shall make it alive altogether the order of this physician in accordance with the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I shall come together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and other instruments of the work with the arrangement of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary And it is worth noting that none of the great masters of hands is found in our time; therefore the art of medicine is prolonged.
And thus says Hippocrates that we must not fear what is not, but rather what is; and in the arts also.
We are told in the opening of this book that he who is ignorant of the things to be foretold should fear nothing that is unknown, but rather what is known; for I have often seen more harm done by those who are familiar with this science than by those who depart from it and its principles.</start_of_turn>
For I have seen a foolish man who, having copped a scrophule or a woman’s neck, has cut the veins of the neck; and as much blood has issued from this as would fill a woman’s hands.
And thus another evil which treats a stone of a bladder, and the stone was great; it carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and was dead for two days.
And thus I have already been called to treat, and I saw the condition of the patient and the greatness of the stone, and I knew well if it were cut out, it would die.</start_of_turn>
And thus another evil which treats a stone of our land which had the limb broken, and with the splinter it caused an injury; and the physicians of our land are compelled by strong constraint to leave the fracture above the wound, and do not allow any bleeding, and leave it until the end; and they command that it not be loosened again; and when the limb was entirely freed and the splinter was gone, it was lost.</start_of_turn>
I beseech you to come here, and I hasten to come and loosen the limb; and when I see it dislocated, it is at peace and does not feel any pain.
But every way the corruption is already confirmed or the limb is unsound, and it cannot be healed; and it does not cease until the corruption goes away from the limb as long as the limb is completely lost
And thus another remedy which is useful for the swelling of the veins is to apply a blistering salve or poultice which is made with the malice of its lord.
For a wound that is caused by melancholy humours, it is only useful to touch it with fire if it is not in a limb where one can remove all that is corrupted.
And thus, indeed, you must know that the work of hands is become into twelve divisions: that is to say, there is peril in many positions; and I will show in each chapter where there is doubt and peril.
For you must know that your hands must always be wary, lest the fools speak badly of you.
If you take up your arms carelessly, and undertake your ailments lightly and firmly, and use the better way so that by the grace of God you may come out whole and sound; and leave the contagious diseases far behind with wholesome health; and keep your arms from that which makes you doubt, and have confidence that you will reach the other world in glory
The wicked spirits whisper to the sick: "Do not take care of your maladies, for you are not worthy of such treatment."
I have devised this treatise in two chapters
The first chapter deals with fire cautery and surgical instruments in general, from the head to the toes; and about the forms of instruments, and of the implements of cautery, and all that is necessary for the work
The second chapter deals with amputation and incision, of abscesses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and concerning the order of instruments and their forms.
The third chapter deals with restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the chief down to the feet, and from the forms of the instruments.
As we have remembered from our work, it is necessary to say what is the quality of the aid and the great care of chest complexion
I say that the quality of the aid, and the great care, is the longest word and the subtlest science and the greatest secret response; and of this they speak more of the sages, and they agree with this; and I find that their words are burdensome, for I reduce the length.
I say that the cautery helps universally to all complexion or where there is matter, for there are two complexions: that is to say a complexion hot and matter, and a complexion dry and matter.
In complexion chaude et seche, matters assembled, some declare that the cautery is a great aid; others declare that the cautery is of no avail in diseases except those caused by heat and drought.
For the nature of fire is hot, and it must not be the cure for hot diseases by heat, nor for drought; and thus those who say the opposite that the cautery does great aid in hot and dry diseases that arise from the humours of the body For when you compare the body of a man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I consent to this word. For I have never seen it happen otherwise by experience.</start_of_turn>
And in every way, I know of no other way than that which has been shown by experience, since I have known by long experience the physician of cauteries, and the diversity of humoral complexions, and the causes and dispositions of their diseases, and the results and remedies of their treatments; for other complexions we have no experience, even in cold and moist diseases.</start_of_turn And you must all acknowledge and agree to the cautery.</start_of_turn
And know this, friends, that fire cautery is more effective for certain diseases than burning medicine.
For the fire cautery is simple, and brings no excessive heat except to the part that is being treated, and does not harm any other part besides that to which it is applied.</start_of_turn>
Burning medicines come from one member to another in their course, and cause the disease of grief to the member with the greatest suffering; and by chance they bring about the harm to the patient.</start_of_turn>
Fire, on account of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not make this [pain] worse, if there is no excess.</start_of_turn
And thus I have learned through experience and the length of my service and study in this art, and I believe in its truth; for this is what philosophers have shown in demonstrating. Therefore I apologize for the length of my words, for it troubles me not that I must repeat what is secret which is hidden or fire, and the quality of work, as it banishes diseases from the body, as the philosopher has said. Or you may consider it in your thoughts.
Know then, son, when the cauteries must be made and when they should be renounced.</start_of_turn>
I say that the cautery is useful in all tensions, for the harmful things that arise are expelled by the help of the cautery; and even if the cautery is for necessary pains that are pressing and urgent and cannot wait until the greater harm has passed from the limb.
And do not think, my son, that because fools make light of this matter; for the disease which is cured by cautery has no remission; and he says so himself; but it is not so simple as that, for cautery is but a medicine which moves the complexion and dries up humors which are the cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine for its haste, and for the excellence of its work and its sovereignty.
And know that the disease never comes according to the complexion of the patient and the root of the disease and its virtue; and are gathered in him the superfluities by the acquisition of foods and similar things, if these are not administered with cautery in place or if there is much superfluity and moisture, for the cautery is of no avail for pain, and the similar things, and part of the pain does not return; but this is often the case.</start_of_turn>
And many people do not understand that because cautery is called the last of medicine, and so it seems; but they do not believe that cautery is worth more than medicine, but their understanding is false, for it is the last of medicine because when we have administered various treatments for any disease and they have not been of avail, then we administer cautery, and it is worth more.</start_of_turn> Therefore, although cautery is at the rear of medicine, it is not as the fools of this age believe.
The ancients say that gold cautery is more merciful than iron, and they do not say that fire is harmful except for the quality of the gold and the fineness of its substance; and they say that the smell of the cautery does not cause harm, but this is not true, for I have proved it, and I have seen that it is seen in many people; and gold cautery is worth as much as iron, as they say.</start_of_turn>
And indeed, whenever you burn an instrument of gold, you do not know how much it is charred by the color of the gold and how much it has cooled; and if you burn it too much, it will be ruined; and there is enough hindrance.
And for this reason we use the fire cautery, as we have learned it to be useful in our work.
Or you have commanded this chapter from the head downwards, forasmuch that the patient will be more comfortable finding them
olive oil cautery
These cauteries are useful both for moisture and for cold, and there are two kinds which are made for the cause of a disease which is called "soda", and for the cause of many humors which descend from the head as sweat, and on the ears, and for a multitude of dreams and pains of the teeth and throat, and even for all diseases which come from cold as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged with a medicinal solution modifying the head, either twice or thrice, according to what is useful and agreeable and the custom of the patient; and then restore the head of the patient.
And then set it comfortably between your hands, and put his hands over his stomach; after that put the root of your thumb on the root of his thumb between his two eyes; and there will come out his two middle fingers, if it bleeds from the base then cover the cautery which is called "olive", for this is the form:
And put out the sign of ink, and do descending and extracting your hand somewhat forward and backward; then keep your hand steadily, and renew the cautery until you see the bone somewhat; and if you do not see it, continue the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; after that take up one fourth of an inch of solder, and put in awe and soft cotton inside, and take out the bone, and leave it for two days; after that put on a soft bandage on the outside; and leave on it until the swelling is gone. Then cure the wound of the swelling which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
And they say the ancients, the more time the wound remains open, the more it purges; and for this reason we must apply pressure.
And they say none of these that we must leave the cautery on for so long that any part of the bone is scorched, and then we must rejoin what is burnt of the bone and it must be cured.</start_of_turn>
And they say another that we must leave the cautery on for so long that it is as wide as a woman’s girdle; and we must press so hard that the bone is forced out as wide as a woman’s girdle; and we must leave the wound open for a long time; and then we must cure and bandage it.</start_of_turn
And these two methods of cauterizing do not seem to me to be suitable for all bones, for in some men or when there is pain; and I seem to think that I must leave it; for the head of the shoulder is easily dislocated by continuous solutions of the body, as we have seen in other members; and even when the head of the shoulder is weak by nature, the first semblance of cautery is more salve and milder for me, and in this way I shall obtain greater health.</start_of_turn
From ancient times pain in the head.
When there is chronic pain in the head that lasts a long time, the physician should use leech herbs, pills called "cochie", and vomiting of the head, oils, and poultices; and if we do the cautery as we have said above, it is of no use.</start_of_turn>
Take care that if the patient's pain is strong and not too severe; then burn the cautery only as much as we have said above.</start_of_turn
After you have burned the cautery on the skin of the head up to the bone, as we have said, and you have burned the vein which is called "vasselz"; and that is where we put sponges; and hold your hand so that you do not see blood until the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this burn than in others, and I will speak of it later; and it is better to burn the hair close to the root than to burn the middle of the hair, and that is the form:
Dou cautere dou chief. When in a part of the shoulder there is sudden pain, and the disease is widespread, and the head of the shoulder is expelled by medicines that modify it, and other cures have been made as I have said in the division of diseases, and all this brings no benefit: then one must make cauteries according to two methods, namely with vinegar and with fire.
The vinegar cautery is as follows: if you take a spoonful of vinegar and apply it to the skin, the eschar will be loosened and the burn will be removed. If there are two bones involved, do the same with the temple where the pain is located until you can rejoin the spoonful of vinegar under the skin; and when it is rejoined, bind and stretch it well and leave it for 12 hours; then remove it and treat the burn with garlic, and leave the wound open for one or two days; then put on a bandage as much as is necessary for support.
After the treatment of the swelling while it is still sane; and if you see that you do nothing of the medicines I have written or dose them with other medicines.
The iron cautery is according to this manner. Heat the cautery so that it is of this shape:
And it is called "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a cup or it has a slight curve, and in the middle there is a small mark; and put out the painful limb, and hold your hand and slightly withdraw the fire until half of the thickness of the hair is burned; and keep your hand away from the artery, which must not be burned, and there will be plenty of blood.
After placing cotton wool over the wound, take out the limb by .iij. days; then put moist cotton wool in the wound, and then cure the limb of swelling until it is healed. And if you wish to cauterize this embolism with the cautery which is called "cultellare", at the tip, and keep the artery in this embolism which is not the ancient one.
After placing cotton wool over the wound, take out the limb by .iij. days; then put moist cotton wool in the wound, and then cure the limb of swelling until it is healed. And if you wish to cauterize this embolism with the cautery which is called "cultellare", at the tip, and keep the artery in this embolism which is not the ancient one.
When you cure an embolism as we have said before in the division of diseases, and it does no good, and you see that the cautery must precede medical treatment and that it will not suffice, then you must avoid the cautery which is called "cultellare" as long as it is blunt; and sign out the limb by drawing a line half an inch long, and hold your hand once, and strain that you do not cover the artery and that no blood vessel comes loose; and take care of the jaw that it does not move when you move it, and that it does not move more than the movement of the muscle and spasm does to the patient; and take care of the discoloration of blood from the artery when it is cut, or when it is cut there is great fear and doubt about it, and that is not studied and experienced; and leave the work half done; but I will tell you later how to retain blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book.
If you see that this cautery does not suffice for the ailment, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the surrounding area as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see that, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has a pair of scissors; and this cautery is better than the former and more helpful.
If you see that this cautery does not suffice for the ailment, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the surrounding area as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see that, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has a pair of scissors; and this cautery is better than the former and more helpful.
When in the ear comes pain from cold, and we have applied various healing medicines and other cures that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then you must apply this cautery which is called the “pinch,” for this is its form:
After pricking all around the painful ear, or around the two joints if the pain persists in both, and you have loosened a piece from the root of the ear as soon as you have signed the mark; and there are ten points around the ear; after that, cure the mark until it is healed.
After pricking all around the painful ear, or around the two joints if the pain persists in both, and you have loosened a piece from the root of the ear as soon as you have signed the mark; and there are ten points around the ear; after that, cure the mark until it is healed.
Torture which must be cured by cautery is not fierce except for those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cautery which appears to come from drying and swelling of nerves.
When you cure this semblance of torture which is made of fumes of hydras and purges of head and gargling, it is worth nothing; therefore you must cauterize the patient with two cautery irons: one at the root of the ear, and the other at the temple, and the third between the two eyebrows; and put the cautery on the part which opens well, and make the cautery under the head of the ear below a little distance from the corner of the eye, and another at the temple as long as a bean; and leave the cautery on until half of the hair is burnt; and that is the form of the cautery.
When the like of a cutlass which we have shown you before is made, but it is a more subtle and effective remedy than the knife should be a larger one; after curing like this as I have said above, as long as it is not harmful.
When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it as we have said above, and it does not profit, and the patient does not have fever, then you must make three cauteries: one on each corner of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one on the vessel which is called the «vasselz» as we have said above, and the last cauterize on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said above.
De litargie.
When lying down. The patient must be given wine in large quantities and pounded pills that temper the brain; after which the patient raises their head and places on the skull the position of mustard seeds which is written or treats plasters; and this is the manner of cautery: as I have said.</start_of_turn>
If he is sane, well and good; but if not, two cauteries are to be made on the head, scraping downwards until juice flows out, with an interval of about two fingers between each cautery. And the wound is to be treated like the others. If you see me add more, and the patient is suffering, I make another cautery in the middle; and if the patient is well, two more on the two corners, and the wound is to be treated until it is healed. And the cautery which is called the "olive" is to be made as I have said before.</start_of_turn
From the coldness of the head. From the coldness of the head, it must be that the head be loosened from the hair and from what has been said previously; after raising the patient’s head, then make the cautery immediately on the head and on the beard, that is to say behind and before the eyebrow; and if you must do more, and the limb is moist and the patient is pale, and the disease is violent, make three cauteries on the eyebrow of the back; and leave them as long as the patient can bear it, and keep your hand steady; after the cure while it is still sound, and is the cautery which is called “olivare” which has been mentioned previously.
of epilepsy
The epilentiques must only use fire cautery when the patient is feverish; and first modify the hair of the head and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and suffering from excessive medical care.
And if it is a young person who cannot endure suffering, make him gargle and chew modifying the hair of the head often with bones of meat; afterwards, raise the head slightly, and make .i. cautery as we have mentioned before, and .i. cautery on the vessels and on the abscess; and if the patient is strong and suffering, make cauteries as we have said to those who have paralysis and mollification of limbs, on the spine of the back and neck, or make the olive cautery as we have mentioned.</start_of_turn>
If the patient is young, make .i. subtle cautery as follows:
When melancholy is the cause, superabundance or corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then you must cauterize with some of the cauteries as we have said for the paralyzed patient.
And if the cause is melancholy, the declining superfluity due to melancholy, and the sick person is moist, then give him something to drink that will expel what is before the division.
After that, take the chief of the sick person; then make a circle of lint well made, as much as a circle, and put it around the chief; and hold the patient’s limbs crossed, and keep them firmly held from all sides; then present the dressing, and moisten it with old alum; and put the fire to the temper, so that it should not suffer too much; then drain the circle from within the chief, and let it cool down; do this to the sick person every week once with another good treatment, until he is healed
Or if thou seest cauterize the head in making many points at all the cautery. This manner of cautery doth diminish the cerebrum immediately; and then put upon moist cotton in burrow and in grease of geline.
Or if thou seest cauterize the head in making many points at all the cautery. This manner of cautery doth diminish the cerebrum immediately; and then put upon moist cotton in burrow and in grease of geline. When awe first comes, as eulz by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and do give the patient something to drink that will temper the head, and keep it away from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more times when fasting.
After he has been commanded to reinsert his head, and when he has made cautery at the head, and has made thirteen cauteries upon the two temples when they descend from the brow to the two eyes together, or if they descend from the brow alone; and close at the end of the cautery all the veins and arteries that are beside the ear, and that the cautery should be long in proportion to the width of the temple; and beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood isse, if it is stained with parts of blood as you have.
And I will teach you concerning the extraction of veins and incisions of the cautery how you shall support them; and never make cautery or irritate beside the two lower bones behind
except for tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or bleed the arteries that are in appearance near the brow; and it is seen that these are cold, fleumatic superfluities, then make the cautery as I have said at the beginning of this chapter, that is to say: cautery of the brow and two cauteries on the two temples and two cauteries or to ligate the two bones; and if necessary, make a further cautery below the eye at the root of the nose with a small cautery.
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or bleed the arteries that are in appearance near the brow; and it is seen that these are cold, fleumatic superfluities, then make the cautery as I have said at the beginning of this chapter, that is to say: cautery of the brow and two cauteries on the two temples and two cauteries or to ligate the two bones; and if necessary, make a further cautery below the eye at the root of the nose with a small cautery.
When you have applied the medicine as we have said in the division, and it brings no benefit, then give the patient two spoonfuls of wine; after that, raise the head and make a cautery or half of an olive cautery; and make two cauteries of the cautery called "clavilis" on the two nipples, one below the cheekbones; and be careful not to touch the artery. And this is the form of cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the moisture of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cautery of this cautery which is called "olivare" is used. And this is the form:
And if you see that you must cauterise twice on the two hairs as long as the hairs are; do not leave the hand [holding the instrument] until a third of the moisture has been burned away, as I have said
because of the hair which points the oil. Never fail that when the hairs of the oil have become converted to the beard, prick the oil, and make cautery in three ways: that is, of fire or burning medicine.
Never fail that when the hairs of the oil have become converted to the beard, prick the oil, and make cautery in three ways: that is, of fire or burning medicine. For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and are equal, then place the patient in a comfortable position; after that mark on the skin the figure that is like that of a sparrow's feather or like the beginning of a sign from the hairs; then put a moist cloth on the oil and a poultice of persillain on top, and then burn the cautery as follows:
After cauterizing on the figure that you have marked and several times, that the hair should be as dark as possible in that place; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the master retreat, and the hair is raised to the point of the oil; then take your hand away, and leave it be for two days, and put a moist cloth over the wound until the swelling has subsided; then cure it with oil until it is healed.
And if afterwards the hair comes out, and the master is softened, then repeat the cautery on the same place as before; and if the hair is plucked out, if the cautery is done so that the master returns to its natural position, and is even, and does not prick the oil.
The cautery of burning medicine is that you command the patient to leave the hair long and even, then make a parchment of the shape of the ivy leaf; then take frankincense and live charcoal, each a third, and grind them together well; and make it hot, if it does not cool down, and put on the shape that you have made like the ivy leaf, and put the master on the wound with eggs; and if the disease persists with only oil, one must open in one, and if in both; and put cotton soaked in oil on the wound.  And the head of the patient should be in its normal position and put your thumb showing on the medicine, and press it once or twice every time the patient feels the bite of the medicine, because he feels the bite as well as fire. When you have done this for a long time, if the bones of medicine are at your disposal. When the biting is passed, if you lift up the limb, and behold if the wound is raised just as high as it was raised by the contraction of fire or by incision; and if it is firm, it is well. If not, if you must repeat the medicine upon the limb or the medicine has not worked, until your works are equal, and your wounds are set to their place; then put on a wet cloth in the wound until the pulse is calm, and then cure the limb of the swelling which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if you must stay with great care so that no medicine is lost from your wound, and if the pulse becomes faint after the bite, and the hair pricks in the oil, if you must repeat the medicine upon that limb which has become softened by the pulse, just as you did before; then cure until it is healed; and that is the form of the chaste dove.</start_of_turn
And know that the ears of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to that which is your constraint; do not give the right answer to him who is studying this art.
And know that the ears of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to that which is your constraint; do not give the right answer to him who is studying this art.
And know that when you cure fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your cure does not profit, then you must burn it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to put his head in your health; and hold his ears between your hands in part that they do not move, do not let them droop; then put cotton moistened with oil of rue or in vinegar on the wound; then burn the cautery that is partly: and is shaped like a pine cone, gather that it is the cautery; if you see, if it is pierced from one ear to the other, and if you see, if it is like a tent; but whatever, what is burned is worth more for your work.
After pressing the fistula, it swells over, and with the passage of time, it becomes soft; if it closes, if the swelling subsides, and there is a discharge of pus, then immediately apply the burn cautery, and keep your hand on the cautery over the area not covered by oil, so that your hands do not tremble; put the cautery in the fat of the oil, and hold it down.
If you arrive at the beginning of the cautery treatment up to the bone, that would be good. If this does not happen, if you must repeat the cautery once more, and another time if necessary, and you leave it for two days; after that put on a moist bandage over the burn, and leave the healing of the desiccant oil until it is healed; and if forty days pass and it is not healed, put on corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and leave as the chapter dictates
And there is a method of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. With the fistula open, and the limb fenestrated; after that put in the groove one half of a barleycorn of alum, which is the form: And I make in quantity of a third of a pound; and keep your hand or forearm firmly closed, and do not move the patient in any way, until the melted wax has settled to its oil; and it is best to put it on the patient’s wound covered with a moist bandage of wool or linen: for if the wax is too soft it will be like a fistula, and too hard it will cause great marvel for cleanliness.
If the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, that is good. If not, if it is necessary, we can perform an incision on the nerve and bring the fistula back to its proper place as it should be in its own place.
from cracks in the bones Many times there occur fractures in bones that are called "hair," and sometimes in bones of children.
When you have cured these fractures as we have said in the divisions, and the cure does not help, then you must perform a small incision with a cautery as follows:
And put the patient immediately on those fractures until they are healed; after curing the limb until it is whole again.
of the abscess of the armpit.
When a boil comes up at the root of the toe or in the heel, or in the ankle or the root of the tooth, after that it becomes rotten and swollen and becomes a fistula; and you must cure it as we have said in the divisions, and it will not profit you: therefore you must cauterize it according to the size of the fistula; after the burn or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand until life returns to the front or behind it; and do it once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in the cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured once, it is good; and if this is not the case, if you must uncover the bone and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in your treatise.
When a boil comes up at the root of the toe or in the heel, or in the ankle or the root of the tooth, after that it becomes rotten and swollen and becomes a fistula; and you must cure it as we have said in the divisions, and it will not profit you: therefore you must cauterize it according to the size of the fistula; after the burn or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand until life returns to the front or behind it; and do it once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in the cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured once, it is good; and if this is not the case, if you must uncover the bone and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in your treatise.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you must cure it by medicine; this is of no use: therefore you must put the patient’s head in your hand; after that, withdraw the cautery as much as you like; and put into the cautery some hot mustard immediately, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; after that, withdraw your hand and repeat the cautery as you please; after that, fill the patient’s mouth with salt and keep it there for an hour and a quarter.
And in this way, when it is confirmed that it is moving, the head becomes soft and restrained, and the moisture corrupts and dries.
And in this way, when it is confirmed that it is moving, the head becomes soft and restrained, and the moisture corrupts and dries out the pain of the teeth.
When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or heat, and medical cures do not help, then it is necessary to cauterize in two ways: cautery of the burr and cautery of fire.
If the burr is such that you take a burr of gutta, and you put a loop at the end on a sickle or pin; after that take cotton and wrap over the tip of a cloth, and moisten the burr well, and put on the tooth that aches immediately and hold until it is cooled; and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see if there is still moisture left in the burr and cotton on the gut, and put on the tooth that aches, and put on the iron again until the fire comes to the edge of the tooth.
The fire cautery is thus: take a piece of iron or charcoal as thick as a finger, and let it burn until the fire reaches the patient’s mouth; then quench the cautery, for when it forms it will harden; place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled; do this often, for the pain will soon be forgotten. Let the patient fill his mouth with saliva in the haste of this cautery, and then draw it out; this is the form of the cautery.
When the scrofula is made of phlegm and cold moisture, and is not obedient to digestion by medicines, then evacuate the cautery from this place afterwards; and make four incisions for the fumes to escape from the cautery of the other side; and put the cautery hot upon the abscess once, or when mixing is complete, until it reaches the front of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it in place for two days; and put upon it a moist dressing until the swelling is ossified; then cure the wound of abscesses and sutures until it is healed.
When moisture prevails over the channels of the pores and is joined by a cold complexion, then it is recommended that the patient be first relieved by soluble medicines; after that perform the cautery at the root of the tongue, and hold it so that it does not go down to the throat, and do not burn more than necessary. Then perform another cautery at the joint of the collarbone and the head of the scapula, which is called the "clavicle"; and cure the wound as we have said above until it is healed
When moisture prevails over the channels of the pores and is joined by a cold complexion, then it is recommended that the patient be first relieved by soluble medicines; after that perform the cautery at the root of the tongue, and hold it so that it does not go down to the throat, and do not burn more than necessary. Then perform another cautery at the joint of the collarbone and the head of the scapula, which is called the "clavicle"; and cure the wound as we have said above until it is healed. When all fevers and diseases of the pores are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor sweating, and the disease is ancient, let him undergo four cauteries on the forcele in the veins; and another cautery between two mammary glands; and let the cautery which is called "claw" be according to the form which is before said.
When you see that, perform a cautery at the place where the cautery called "points" is formed, if the form is as it is in the ear disease; and let the points extend to .xxx., or as much as necessary. After curing according to what is before said, and let the remaining cautery be twice according to this form.
And because these cauteries are lighter, because you make two at a time.
De la dislocation de l’ajutoire. When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, support the patient on their back and chest; then grasp the thumb which is inside the armpit with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated, if necessary, withdraw the cautery which has about the size of a hazelnut
... and cauterize the thumb until it reaches the costae, and the escape of the cautery will be together three cauteries; and for this reason the cautery is made with the cautery which has two nails, because the figures of cautering are these two nails; and the nerves are according to the sensitivity of a limb and this is the form of the cautery which has two nails.
And never is the suture adjusted upon this nerve for there are six cauteries upon it.
After putting on the cautery, broil the hairs with a needle; then rest the patient, and do not hold the limb tight so that it is tense until it is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated there, whatever the cause may be, then make a cautery upon the edge of the wound or several cauteries by pricking. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is dry, and the patient is healed
of pain.
The ancient said that we must make at pleasure cauteries of the root of Aristotle, and in part: take a root of Aristotle long, the greatest that you will find, and be dry, and be as thick and as long as your thumbs; and the juice in oil, and the print at the fire, and cauterize. I. cauterize between the forefinger and the thumb, and II. a few cauteries one inch below the beard; and III. cauterize between the fifth rib and the hipbone, declining behind one inch. I. cauterize the spleen, and I. another on the stomach, and I. between two ribs, and II. have two ribs beside the spleen that push away the cautery that is between two ribs; and do not press me your hand, but make it open just as if you were smelling.
And they say no ancient man uses a fire cautery resembling a scraper, and puts the scab and puts it between the ribs, until it comes to this incision; and leaps forth the pain, as we have said in the incision of the liver. But in this work is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
From mice.
When you treat the disease of the mouse from what we have said concerning the divisions of the cures, and it does not help, then there remain two methods of cautery which are both good.
When you treat the disease of the mouse from what we have said concerning the divisions of the cures, and it does not help, then there remain two methods of cautery which are both good.
and another manner of cautery if the cautery which has three nerves is scraped off, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and hold the limb which is where the mouse is, or the wound of the patient comes from the left side, and let the elevation which you bind the limb with, according to the limb, according to the length of the bone, and the cautery be according to the breadth of the bone.
After that, if there are three hairs remaining unburned, let the fire touch them until they are perceived from the other side. Then withdraw the cautery quickly. And if you see that the hairs have been cauterized throughout, leave only two. After that, cure when the wound has undergone long tension, and this is worth as much as the other cures mentioned above.
After that, if there are three hairs remaining unburned, let the fire touch them until they are perceived from the other side. Then withdraw the cautery quickly. And if you see that the hairs have been cauterized throughout, leave only two. After that, cure when the wound has undergone long tension, and this is worth as much as the other cures mentioned above.
The cautery is not effective for dropsy; except for the method which is called "asclytes". When you treat according to the methods that we have said in the divisions, and your cure does not help, then you must make three cauteries around the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two on the back on the spine, and one on the buttock; and let the cautery be close to the hair's root.
After leaving the cautery uncovered for a while to drain the wound, do not leave the dressing on the patient after the cautery; and healing will be expedited, and the wound will be completely rejoined with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the nail that we have before you shown; and for the back it is olive-shaped, as it is shown here.</start_of_turn>
of the swelling of the parts When the parts are swollen in those who are hydro-pyic, and are filled with yellow bile, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the thumb between the thumb and the little finger; and hold your hand with the cautery towards that side. And do not enter too deeply with the point, because it would burn the yellow bile, and make the cautery in the fashion mentioned above:
After that, make two incisions in the groin of the leg at the point of the little toe; and let the incisions be long, one of them above the knee and the other below, in the leg; and leave the incisions open along their length to cure, that they may stay in place; after that, cure the other wounds that we have mentioned.
After that, make two incisions in the groin of the leg at the point of the little toe; and let the incisions be long, one of them above the knee and the other below, in the leg; and leave the incisions open along their length to cure, that they may stay in place; after that, cure the other wounds that we have mentioned.
When cold and moisture cause nausea and vomiting, and the protective and digestive functions which are the stomach and intestines are deflated, and cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and vomiting profusely, if you make a great burn on the stomach as it has been mentioned above or burn the stomach, and the burn circulates; and three burns around the spleen to all but the staple burn, and two burns on the flanks.
If you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the navel, that is, make a cautery on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the great one, for the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
If you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the navel, that is, make a cautery on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the great one, for the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
When the hemorrhoids are deeply rooted or several in number, and are old and are composed of cold and moist humors which are corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it is of no avail if you make cauteries: that is, two on the spine of the back, which is all that is sufficient for their displacement towards the buttocks, and two on the buttocks; three should suffice.
If you think the stomach is chilled, and the meat is not cooked, and you see swelling in the face, then you must make a great cautery on the stomach, as it is said above, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen throughout the entire cautery. Leave the cautery uncovered for a long time. After treatment, keep the limb until it is healed.
If you think the stomach is chilled, and the meat is not cooked, and you see swelling in the face, then you must make a great cautery on the stomach, as it is said above, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen throughout the entire cautery. Leave the cautery uncovered for a long time. After treatment, keep the limb until it is healed.
When you cope with the thelul, if the cautery seems to scratch, then take hold of the cautery and put it all around that thelul that you are coping with; and leave the hand as long as the cautery is coming to life from the vein, without restraint; do this once or twice. If there is much thelul, if you cauterize each one as we have said; after treating the wounds, use beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a great cautery on the heel, it will be of greater help.
From an unhealed wound.
When the patient cannot endure pain or opening, as we have heard, if any disease comes to pass that cannot be cured except by cautery.
When no wound comes, and is filled with pus and corruption due to decay and moisture, if the physician desires to do something subtle, and maintains that he should drain all the pus that has accumulated, he should cauterize the surrounding tissue to a small extent, and bring the cautery to the fistula as much as the attempt warrants; and continue to cauterize until the bone is stiff and corrupt, once, twice, or thrice, as much as is necessary; and take care not to burn the nerves or large veins.  If the fistula is close to the bladder or intestine, take special care of these parts, and do not perform the procedure except with extreme caution; and think that it will not be permanent.  After curing the wound until it is healed, if the parts are stiff and tough, leave them be, and if they are brittle, break them; and do as we have said concerning this matter.
De la maladie des reins. When pain in the flank comes with vomiting and great swelling, and does not abate from a woman, then it is necessary that you make cautery on the kidneys on one side and on the other alongside the cautery needle that we have mentioned before; and if we burn them in the middle, if there are two burns in a line, it will be of more help.</start_of_turn>
Of the bladder. When the bladder is full and weak of pain and moisture, and when the patient retains urine, then you must make a cautery on the lower back of the bladder, where the hair begins to grow, and on both sides; and make as many cauteries as are necessary; and make the cautery needle pierce the belly, or as many times as necessary; and make the cautery needle pierce the back, or as many times as necessary.</start_of_turn
De la marris. When the hair is long. For when the hair is cold and moist, and does not leave me to pluck it out, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are late; and when they come, if it causes great pain: then it must be done with two cautery irons over the belly, as we said or the cautery of the bladder, and two cautery irons behind the loin; or let the cautery iron be hooked, as we said.
Of the groin.
When viscous moisture descends to the groin, and for this cause if it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and is found to be very painful, if you must cauterize the patient on the groin at about the size of a circle, and mark in front of the limb around the groin if it turns, so that the groin is within the circle; and if the cautery iron is like that which we have cauterized the stomach.
If these cautery methods are not sufficient, make two large cauteries of the olive tree; and let the cautery be as strong as the others; and cure until it is healed.
If these cautery methods are not sufficient, make two large cauteries of the olive tree; and let the cautery be as strong as the others; and cure until it is healed. When pain comes into the groin, and this is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of this by what we have said in the preceding section; and the cure is not worth the pain, and the disease is ancient: therefore it is appropriate to purge the patient of the gross humors with foul pills, or other solid pills that resemble these.
After the fire cautery; and the manner of the fire cautery is two: that is to say, medicine assembled in the cautery, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is done in two ways, of which one is as follows: you cauterize upon the hip bone twice; the cautery is triangular in shape, and you do it with great depth and breadth, and between each cautery put a layer of fat equal to the thickness of a hazelnut, either olive cautery or otherwise. Never do you make the cautery in the middle of the hip bone, for there are three according to this shape.
And if you see that the circle which we have previously mentioned concerning the dislocation of the shoulder is not contained by the cautery, make part of the circle encompass the whole shoulder, and all the thickness of the arm is as before.</start_of_turn>
And this is how it is done in sciatica, when the pain is in the shoulder, and does not reach the thigh or the leg. And if it comes up to the thigh and the leg, make two cauteries there or the patient says that the pain is there, and one cautery below the ankle three times, on the left side one space; and either the cautery is blunt or the fat is thick; and if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two fingers or almost up to the elbow, make the cautery there where the pain is.</start_of_turn
If the shoulder is dislocated, and he does it again; and if the pain is sharp from the groin to the thigh, let the cautery be made with the blunt or circular cautery, and keep him well guarded in all your cauteries, that you leave neither the cautery too long nor do you burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you cause him no greater pain and contraction.
I have also seen many who have made the cautery on the ankle bone, and left it until the limb was entirely gone, and it was pierced just as much, and was pierced and corrupted throughout. After a solution of the belly from which there was death.
And if the pain is in three parts together, make the cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner. // And they say concerning the cautery of the thigh, from which this is the manner, make one such as a nail of a doctor, or less, and be at the head as thick as a hazelnut, or less, and be by interspaces and by nails, or by one nail from the other side to the extent of the quantity of a nut of pepper; and let the nails be over three parts, and be as nails, and there be one palm of iron well made; and that is the form:
And so be shaved as much as is to his redness and sensitivity, and then put on the box of the painful shoulder, and be turned on the sound side; and burn once. i.e. burn again and leave for two days; and then make an embolus of wool, and leave the wound open long enough to tighten; after the cure of the swelling when it is healed.
Albucasim says that our physicians often use this cautery because of the fear of its after-effects, and we see that many of those who use it; and all this is done to cauterized bones, which can suffer from it, and where he is careful.</start_of_turn>
of back pain.
When pain comes to the back, or by sitting or percussion or by too great an evacuation, or by similar signs of cold matter spread, of none of these symptoms is the cautery of any value, except for what comes from the infusion of cold matter.
When the patient is free from foul pills or other symptoms, we make three lines signed with a needle on the back, where the pain is, and in between these lines we make two or three cauteries, according to the virtue and the quantity that the patient can suffer; and the cautery is to be made according to the cautery called "points"; and if you see it, make two or three cauteries at the middle cautery according to this form:
Many times this disease comes as a small pulse, and signs of its beginning are when the veins are torn when they swell, and there is pain; and you find it at the lower spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes after the others.
When you see this and you see it healed, if you cauterize with the fire according to this fashion.
When you see this and you see it healed, if you cauterize with the fire according to this fashion. If the fire cautery has scorched some part of the hair, and if you see it, if you cauterize around the hair at the point where it is pricked, that is to say, about one or two lines from the root, and keep the points close together. After that, cure the hair until it is sound as we have said, and beware that you do not move the cautery over the nerves which are in the vicinity.</start_of_turn>
of the pain of the joints
When joint pain arises from moisture that has spread throughout the limb, and when pain originates from a wound, call it "podagre" indeed; and when the cause is cold and medicines fail to cure it, it is often cured by cautery in part: make the opening of the cautery around the joint that is painful, and let the cautery be of olive oil in this fashion:
When there is need to prick the face of the limb, if you do cautery of the entire area, call it "point". And when the pains come up to the knees and to other joints, and this happens often, do cautery on each knee two or three times, with olive oil for the entire cautery; and if you must do more, do more, but do not keep your hand far from the area that is being cauterized until the sensation of pain has passed.
When the pains descend to the knees and the back, administer the cautery as we have said in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, if you make pricks around the nail one and a half lines; and if there remains no pain, if you make pricks on some joint and on the edge of the hand; and if the pains come up to the hips or to the elbows, if you cauterize some part, and give good instructions to the patient and prescribe medicines. For if you give good instructions and purge phlegm, health will be restored with the help of God.
From the root of the scapula
When the scapula is dislocated, and the ball descends like nails and this is new, if you see that when you cure it, it does not mend the marrow; and that it uses things that leave the belly, so that the marrow descends from the belly; then make it sit on its back between your hands, and command that it grasp its wing until the ball is repaired, and keep it at your sides, and sign the incision on the edge of the scapula, and as a sign that it is like half of a circle below the bones; then withdraw the cautery like this.
Until it is soft and it sweats sensations. Then reattach the ball to its place; and the minister holds his hand over so that they do not return backwards; and work well the wounds of the patient, and put on him some lint and some dressing on the wounds, and some on his hands; then put the cautery on the sign at your whole hand, and keep it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not succeed the first time, if you try again until you reach the bone; and beware cautiously that the ball does not come out when you make the cautery; do not burn it; and by this the patient does not die, or any other harm.
And when you do not arrive at the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. It is necessary that the cauteries of the small people be subtle according to their measure, and those of the great people also great according to their measure; after two days the cure of the burn is sufficient as long as the eschar is bony; after that, the cure of other ailments is sufficient when they are healed, and leave the patient forty days on his back until the wound is well closed; and it must be that his movements be restful for a long time, so that the swelling does not rise when he walks into the house.
After forty days, when he wants to rise, let him be supported by a well-made cushion, and let him rest for forty days; and let him have good rest, that he work little and beware of eating too much drink and meat, and of excessive anger; and when he has done this teaching, if he is completely healed. And I will tell you afterwards about the cure of the tail in this chapter.</start_of_turn> of the route of the belly
When other vents come round and are known, and you see that they do not grow further, then you must make a new cautery of the same quantity, and either a third of the former; after which treat according to what has been said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with the cautery at two angles according to this form.
But first mark the place well and make a line along the width of the vent, and another below, and hold your hand firmly over the cautery needle. But the first cauteries are lighter and softer.</start_of_turn>
of ancient pain in any limb.</start_of_turn> When pain arises in any limb, whether from injury or from a wound, and the pain persists for a long time, the remedy of medicine is not worth it; therefore it is recommended that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called the "points," or that the cautery be performed according to the length of the limb, its thinness and weakness, its toughness and its location of twists and pain. If it is successful on the first cautery, well and good; if not, repeat the procedure. Indeed, it is customary that it should be repeated as close to the painful part as possible, for it is believed that the more cauteries are made, the sooner the patient will be healed.
When pain arises in any limb, whether from injury or from a wound, and the pain persists for a long time, the remedy of medicine is not worth it; therefore it is recommended that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called the "points," or that the cautery be performed according to the length of the limb, its thinness and weakness, its toughness and its location of twists and pain. If it is successful on the first cautery, well and good; if not, repeat the procedure. Indeed, it is customary that it should be repeated as close to the painful part as possible, for it is believed that the more cauteries are made, the sooner the patient will be healed.
The mesentery provides no aid at all by cautery with great help, and even the disease that comes from the corruption of phlegm and melancholy. Can you see it cauterized? Take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not linger, and you will doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the whole illness, then make five cauteries on the head: that is, one on the top of the head, and the other towards the front at the end of the beard; and two on each ear, and one behind on the cheek; and leave the hand as long as the cautery comes up to the bone, and as long as the edges come out strong so that the vapors of the humors can escape; and cauterize the head according to what is before.
And if there is widespread moisture everywhere, and it becomes manifest, if you command these cauteries that we have spoken of or chief, namely cauterize on the top of the thumb and index finger, and two on the elbow of the shoulder, and three on the elbow of the back, and one large on the wrist and one other below, and two on the two thumbs, and two on the scapulae, and two on the tendons of the wrist, and one on each joint of the fingers and toes, and on the recesses of the hands; take care that you do not burn the nerves that are behind the calcaneus, and do not make any cautery on the bones of the heel or the stomach or the liver.
And the more cauteries you make, the more aid you provide, and the more beneficial it is; and the patients do not feel pain from the cautery as they feel it, because the flesh is already corrupted. It is necessary that the cauteries be great and small according to the members and joints, as you do in handling various things. After treatment, cover the area with flour several times with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
of inflammation
When swelling arises in any limb and is cured by medicines, oils, and dressings, and is not completely healed, then you must perform cautery on the limb according to the greatness and smallness of the limb; and either make the cautery a little deeper than the depth of the nerve which moves the limb; then cure with ointments until it is healed. And in no case must you perform cautery on the hand, foot, or back, at the exit of the nerve which moves the limb, and if it is bony the swelling will remain. And in no way should anything interfere with it except one who is skilled in limbs and the exits of the moving nerves.
When swelling arises in any limb and is cured by medicines, oils, and dressings, and is not completely healed, then you must perform cautery on the limb according to the greatness and smallness of the limb; and either make the cautery a little deeper than the depth of the nerve which moves the limb; then cure with ointments until it is healed. And in no case must you perform cautery on the hand, foot, or back, at the exit of the nerve which moves the limb, and if it is bony the swelling will remain. And in no way should anything interfere with it except one who is skilled in limbs and the exits of the moving nerves.
When the disease called "albaras" is present, and the remedies of medicine do not help, then you must cauterize with a needle a little deeper than the depth of the nerve, according to the quantity of the tissue; until the swelling is bony and changes color; then cure with flour of times and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, with colon and almond, each part a third; mix them all together, and bind with a bandage, and keep it in place until it is healed.
The cure for carbuncles by cautery
When a carbuncle starts, and you see it stop, if you cauterize at the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the carbuncle. And all the wise men say that we should cauterize at the middle of the carbuncle; and all of them do not seem to me to be good, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already had to do it several times; and the right thing is that it be cauterized around, at the cautery which is called the "circle", as we have said concerning cauteries.</start_of_turn>
of the swelling which cannot be measured
When anyone has an ailment that is called "adubelati," and it lingers without healing or because of its excessive production or because of the weakness of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, too old) and there is much blood, or for lack of tension; and you see it haste to heal: then cauterize around the mouth of small cauteries by pricking; afterwards leave it be. For it will haste to heal.
And if you see it pierce with all the cauteries, if the cautery is too hot: this is the shape:
And put your hand in the middle of this ailment which is called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have pierced the nerve, and be such the cauteries that the patient feels relief in parts as the disease progresses. After that, cure as long as it is perfectly healthy.
The fire cautery. Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
The fire cautery. Another method for disease which is called "corrodens" is nothing other than the softening of a limb, because it makes the limb as dry as the lines of fire. If you see this disease in a limb which can suffer from whole-body cautery, then burn the small and great nails according to what is appropriate for the limb or the disease; after that cauterize all parts until you have eradicated all the corruption, and nothing remains except the bone. And then leave it for two days, and put on the cauterized limbs, let them be broiled with oil until the burnings of the fire are ossified, and all the corruption. After the cure of the oily nourishment. And if after two days the limb is well, that is good; but if not, resume the cautery on what remains soft of the limbs corrupted. This softening is never cured by medical treatment in place of fire cautery; but every time fire cautery is of greater aid, as I have already said in the division: take as much as you need.
The fire cautery. Another method for disease which is called "corrodens" is nothing other than the softening of a limb, because it makes the limb as dry as the lines of fire. If you see this disease in a limb which can suffer from whole-body cautery, then burn the small and great nails according to what is appropriate for the limb or the disease; after that cauterize all parts until you have eradicated all the corruption, and nothing remains except the bone. And then leave it for two days, and put on the cauterized limbs, let them be broiled with oil until the burnings of the fire are ossified, and all the corruption. After the cure of the oily nourishment. And if after two days the limb is well, that is good; but if not, resume the cautery on what remains soft of the limbs corrupted. This softening is never cured by medical treatment in place of fire cautery; but every time fire cautery is of greater aid, as I have already said in the division: take as much as you need.
Many times it happens that when a piece of flesh has departed from its natural place, a disease called "clos" arises, which is a great and burdensome thing that causes great suffering. And the cautery of this disease is done in two ways. That is, fire cautery and hot water cautery. For fire cautery, if you are callous, that is, if you cauterize carelessly like a quill over a piece of felt, it should be done with a piece of iron of the size that can penetrate the whole area and leave fine margins; then put all around the area over the area, and hold your hand firmly over the area until it comes to the front of the area; and leave it there for two days until it begins to swell; then make an ointment of bruised wild mallow seeds with beeswax, and leave the ointment on all night, and close the wound securely and remove the stitches from their roots. Then cure the wound cautiously.
When it is converted by bloodstains, and many times occurs in the hands and on the feet, if you must perform hot water cautery; and this is partly in the method: take a sickle of iron or steel, or a quill of felt, and put it on the area and the surrounding area, that is, to cover the nails; then put the sickle on so that it covers everything around, then put some warm oil on it, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand by turning so that the edge of the sickle comes to the root of the area, and can find the warm water way down to the root; and give the patient a mouthful of warm water for an hour; then leave it like that, and it will burst out all at its roots. Do this again until you have drained away all that is in the area, and then cure the wounds which cause swelling.
you cure the tremor.
When someone trembles from cold, or from a quarter-fever or from another, if you make for him three or four cautceries on the spine of the back, one cautery between the shoulder blades, one cautery or pinch, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery; if you leave it like that, it will cause the sickness to depart quickly.
When someone trembles from cold, or from a quarter-fever or from another, if you make for him three or four cautceries on the spine of the back, one cautery between the shoulder blades, one cautery or pinch, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery; if you leave it like that, it will cause the sickness to depart quickly.
Whenever the body is covered with boils or pus-filled abscesses, which come from corrupted matter, if you make the first one to appear undergo cautery on each head of the abscess: a subtle cautery of fir-twig of Myrtle, from which the point is grasped by the fire, or of long Aristolochia root, or the lenticular cautery. And never should you cauterize until they first appear, following this method, for it does not burn through the fat before it, but ruptures the surplus from which they come, and brings relief; but you must do this after the evacuation of blood.
When the artery is cut. Many times there are great discharges of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from the surgeon, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a mournful thing to extend it.
And whenever this happens to anyone, if you are in a hurry to put your thumb on the wound of the vein, and you strain too much without calming the pain, and no blood comes out any more; then take the olive cautery and make several small and large burns until they are all red; then touch, that is to say, great or small as it is appropriate for the wound and the limb in which the artery is obstructed, and put the cautery on that vein or hold your thumb there, and hold the cautery as long as it is necessary to stop the bleeding
And if it spurts out when you remove your thumb from the vein, and the cautery is finished, take hold of another cautery that is on the fire immediately.
And do not cease to perform this one after the other until the limb is stretched out; and beware that thou dost not tear away the nerve which is beneath, and that no other evil arise upon the patient; and keep that when without excision of the artery, one cannot well reattach the limb itself when the artery is large, except by three methods which we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not otherwise treated, or by strong ligation of thread, or by medicines placed upon it which have power to reattach blood.
Who brings about the restoration of the limb with great care is by the strict draping of cloths or the putting of things burning upon, or other similar things, if these do not profit, it is of no use.</start_of_turn>
And if there is no other remedy and there is no medicine present, if he must put his thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and keep it steady until it is rested from the wound and from the vein; and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often so that it is as cold as the air until the wound is frozen and thickened and rested; and make incisions before that which must be cauterized and medicated.</start_of_turn>
We have already said in the first chapter that every disease in which it is necessary to perform cautery of fire, or applied medicine, and the symptoms, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries; and in this chapter we shall speak of these matters from the head to the toes, for we have found it easier in this way to explain what we wish to convey.</start_of_turn>
And thus, as I begin this chapter, I must inform you, dear friend, that there is more peril and fear in this chapter than in all the previous cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake madness. For many people come to cures in this way. If they come from those who have suffered so much with their disease that they move lightly because of the force of their suffering, and from the greatness of their malice; from these things we must have fear. And from these things there are those who make you sense, and say: "Wait, I am a liar"; and the disease is desperate. It is not enough for me that you allow those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not recklessly believe me more than prudently of what you are certain, and of what you have taken and lost; and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your patients so that salvation may be either converted or obtained; and this will help you to ask for good renown, glory, and memory forever.</start_of_turn>
Very dear son, our Lords, you do well to understand and approve, and if the Holy inspiration of his hand returns to you, amen.</start_of_turn>
Or I vos ai ordonné ce chapitre en divisant par Chapitre, selon ce qu’il est devant ou Chapitre des cauteres, que j’avais devisé de celui du chef jusc’à pied, pour ce qu’ils trouvent plus légèrement ce qu’ils ont dû faire.
Or I have commanded thee this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is before or the chapter of cautery, that I had commanded thee from head to foot, forasmuch that ye shall find it more lightly what ye have to do.
The sickness often comes from the swelling of the belly of the child, and when the navel is too tightly strained, the head of the child is often thrown off.  Never does this happen for any other reason than that it does not go back into place
And I have never seen such a disease vanish except in the countryside, and with all those whom I have seen, it hastens death; therefore it seems to me that it is better to leave the work in parts for cures.
And I saw that in childhood, when the shoulder was dislocated and the head swelled up so much that it could not be supported; and I believed that there was too much moisture, and this moisture if it is gathered in the bone above the socket, between the head and the bone; and the work is such that if the moisture is between the head and the bone, and the incision is small, you must make a wide incision; and as much as .ij. we have seen, until the moisture moves.
If the moisture is greater and the incision is larger, if you make two incisions in the form of a cross, following this shape:
And if moisture is on the bone, and you see the sinuses of the cheek swell out on the outer side, and it becomes taut when you press your hand inside, and this does not go back: if you suspect that the jaw is fractured, make two incisions according to this manner.
And after the incision, drain out the moisture forcefully. After that, tighten the edges of the skin and fat, and apply wine and oil, and leave for five days; then remove the dressing, and cure the wound with stitches and ointments, and leave the jaw completely still, and give the patient dry food until the limb is comfortable and healed.
And another method of incision is that you look or open the orifice of the abscess, and the collection of pus; for it is never before; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.
When the shoulder or the armpit is open, and the injection of liquid, and you do as you please; keep away from the artery; let the vein flow blood, if the patient dies from excessive bleeding and moisture evacuation.
When there is no known disease that is called "catarrh" which has boils or swellings, and the disease is ancient, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then the last cure is to cauterize with this that we will cover the arteries.
It is not possible for me to provide a translation of the text as the provided context does not include the text itself.
If you see it, withdraw the sponge from the artery and hold it above, cutting as much as two fingers must pass through.</start_of_turn>
When the vein is cut, if you do not keep hold of it steadily, it will continue to bleed.</start_of_turn>
If the artery does not open despite feeling it, if you must measure the quantity of the space of two fingers, then mark it and keep it until the bone; and what is to be done with blood that must be put out if it is more than half full, and sometimes less or more, according to what the patient can suffer, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the point of the bone where the stitches were placed, if the wound that was closed together does not move, then strain the wound and tie it, and cure it until it is healed.
If the artery does not open despite feeling it, if you must measure the quantity of the space of two fingers, then mark it and keep it until the bone; and what is to be done with blood that must be put out if it is more than half full, and sometimes less or more, according to what the patient can suffer, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the point of the bone where the stitches were placed, if the wound that was closed together does not move, then strain the wound and tie it, and cure it until it is healed.
When the ancient secretion comes and acute catarrh, because of the tears and the choleric humours in the temples and the ancient saliva forsened and similar things, it is treated by medical cures and other things that do not benefit it, if the arteries of the temples are extracted and cauterized, as we have said
The manner of extracting them is that if the patient makes the hair of his temples grow long, and understands the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating; and is not put back violently as in certain persons who are too rough.  If it is put back, the patient tightens his collar with some bandages, then wipes the limb of any rough hair, and raises the limb of warm water until the artery resumes its normal pulsation; then take the sponge and that which is the shape of a spatula.
Then loosen the skin lightly until you see the artery, then pull it up tightly with tweezers, and remove it well from the hair that remains on the root.  And if the artery is small, if it has a head at the root, then cut off that part according to the quantity of hair that is cut. For if it is not cut off, it will not rise without pain in all probability.</start_of_turn>
Then drain blood from the groin to the navel, just over two fingers; and if the artery is large, it is prudent to ligate it with two strong threads of silk, so that no blood will remain below the support of the wound, and drain the blood; then cut away the excess that is between the two ligatures in that part, and if you see that there is still blood, cauterize with a small cautery until the hair is cut off; and that is the end of the operation, if the patient has no fever and is of warm complexion.</start_of_turn>
For the fire cautery is helpful to finish off moisture: because of this it is of more great aid for moisture. For the fire cautery is useful for extracting arteries that are filled with much cotton and are placed under well-made stitches; and when they are loosened, if there is no cure for dry medicines that cause new blood vessels to grow, and stitches, until they are healed; and if the artery is not stopped as it should be with the cautery, or if you use too much of the cautery, the hand will be scorched; and if you do not have this present, if you must withdraw the hand, you must do so until the hand is no longer numb, and raise the hand with cold water until the sensation returns, and strain as it should be strained; and what is milder and lighter in the extraction of the artery is to cauterize the vein of this cautery through a cut of about one-third of an inch, but the cut should be well thick to prevent it from burning for a longer period. For when the instrument is too tight, it holds less heat. And must have between the .ij. needles space one must have of great distance. Then when you have signed the .ij. loops, and you must let the loop burn over until it reaches the bone, and close the wound in .ij. loops; and be spaced out between the .ij. bones because it is not firmly soldered from this cautery in all. This is the form of the cautery.
And must have between the two needles space one must have of great distance. Then when you have signed the two loops, and you must let the loop burn over until it reaches the bone, and close the wound in two loops; and be spaced out between the two bones because it is not firmly soldered from this cautery in all. This is the form of the cautery.
When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are above the test of the head of the sufferer, and it brings no relief from medicine what is being done, and you see the face of the patient to be swollen, and feels heat of the body if like a flame; and if there are tensed and moist if the papers are rough, and are chafed by the tears, and scorched by the heat of the tears, if there is any hope of this cure.
And they called him the 'old contusion' because you must make at the sick man who has this disease the hairs that he has on the front, then make two incisions or front equally according to the length of the front; and let one incision be as wide as two teeth downwards towards the belly, and the other let the other two edges be bound up with papers, and keep the incision of the arteries that are bound up with papers; and align your hand from the continuation of the two mandibles, and if there is any wound, take the quantity of two teeth that are at the passage of the joints.
from the incision which is over the temple down to the second incision; and remove all the bone that is between the two incisions to the very surface of the bone, then make the other half of the wound down to the other second, and then take out this instrument.
If in the first incision the instrument which is called the “cultellaire,” which is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, does not penetrate deeply, and is smooth, that is the shape. If in the first incision the instrument which is called the “cultellaire,” which is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, does not penetrate deeply, and is smooth, that is the shape. And place the handle of the cutting instrument towards the upper edge of the joint, and the blunt end towards the bone, and grasp firmly until it reaches the middle of the incision. And cut all the blood vessels that descend from the head as long as the incision is continuous until it reaches the bone, and then finish the incision in the middle of the incision until the other edge; and then withdraw the needle equally, expressing the blood from the wound; then place in the wound a piece of cotton wool, and cover with damp cloths soaked in wine and oil and herbs, and keep that there are no afterbleeds. And after three days remove the dressing, and introduce great plant material of aquaphore, then cure with basic oil of rose, and other cures which are used for wounds, until it is healed.
because of the return of the blood vessels
When no acute cautery is done, and you see the eyes tense and small, and the pupil dilates, and the papers burn; the hair cries out, and where it breaks off, there is great pain, and the patient vomits; then the discharge from these causes is greater than from many veins, and the cure is that which is.
And command the patient to raise his head, then make a great incision from the eyebrow to the eyebrow; and another wide one. Namely. From the temple on the left to the temple on the right, and be at the incision until the bone is discovered; and take away your hand from the nerves of the temples that move to the cheek; and when the bone is discovered, if you have bled out all the blood with a sponge, then drain between the two layers of the incision and put in cotton wool, and try to pull it out; then put on soaked bandages in wine and oil, and keep it warm; when it is settled, it is good to rub the bone until it starts to grow back, then cure it with drying things that make it swell.
In part: take three parts of flower of fennel and three parts of colophony, and make a poultice; and apply it to these wounds to swell up all around.
From the swelling of the ears.
Whatever is causing the swelling of the ears is one of three things: grains of sand, pieces of metal, stones, or other such things; seeds, such as peas, beans, or barley; or pus, which is watery and foul smelling.</start_of_turn>
When there is a stone or other foreign body in the ear that does not fit into the ear, do not attempt to remove it from the ear, but place the ear under the sun. If you see the stone, if no violet oil or oil of lavender is secreted, then perform an extraction; and let the patient sneeze out any congealed blood, and wipe away the blood from the nose when he sneezes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and hold the ear down. Many times this cure will cause blood to flow; and if it does not flow, an extraction with fine needles must be performed. For this is the form:
If it bursts out with needles, that is good; if not, perform an extraction with fine needles; and if it does not burst with the needle, make a scar on the side of the ear or remove a large part of the ear, and wipe away what is around the scar with butter if it comes out without the needle; then the blood will flow, for often it comes out by itself; and if it does not come out in this way, take hold of the testicles and put on no instrument that can cause damage, and put a plug of cotton in; then press on the testicles above the stone or whatever it is, and the blood will flow. If these things do not suffice, if you are in haste to make an incision, do not hesitate to perform the incision above the earlobe as well as on the abscess. Incise the earlobe cautiously first, making the initial incision at the crown of the head; let blood escape according to its quantity. Then hold the patient between your hands and turn the ear downwards, make a small incision at the root of the earlobe, either at the fat or the cartilage. The incision should be as wide as a moon until you reach the bone, and then remove the bone as much as you are able. Exude the pus from your mouth and leave the wound until it has healed. If the grain is swollen and painful, administer extraction; if it cannot be extracted, administer a sponge tencel soaked in vinegar in this fashion:
But make no incision until you think the grain is softened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many attempts; then extract it with tweezers and soak in vinegar, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
When the ear is acute, then the patient should at once apply a compress to the ear and fill the ear with wool. And be it without or with the acute being within the ear itself; if it should burst by this, that is good. If not, take many pins according to the length of your finger should tension and support, and push them one by one into the fire; and put the patient one or two of his ears into the fire, and pull out from the other side, and fix one pin on the pin which is in the ear; and do this until the acute is entirely burst, and as soon as it bursts. If you see that it has burst, take hold of one of the bones in the ear, and burn the other until the thicker bone is as red as the junction; then do the rest of the bones until the acute is entirely burst, as we have said concerning the bone.
In the extraction of the wisdom tooth, if it is of little bone, as like a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great bone we must feel it, if it brings about the extraction of teeth; and that is the lightest thing to remove from the ear.
In the extraction of the worms in the ear, when you cure as we have said in the division and or treat with distillations, and the cure does not benefit, if you must know that the ear is exposed to the sun: if there are no worms to be seen, if the boils are small, and if they are not seen, take tweezers of this kind:
And so be careful and wide in the opening. And as for the most subtle chief of the ear according to the quantity of the patient’s suffering, then follow with all the antidote; do this often until you see it issue. And if it does not obey to issue, if I push around the cotton around the ear as I said at the stone; and if it still does not issue, if we have said, give distillations which the ancients have proved useful in the incision of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, in this way:
And so be careful and wide in the opening. And as for the most subtle chief of the ear according to the quantity of the patient’s suffering, then follow with all the antidote; do this often until you see it issue. And if it does not obey to issue, if I push around the cotton around the ear as I said at the stone; and if it still does not issue, if we have said, give distillations which the ancients have proved useful in the incision of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, in this way: Let silver or lead be split into small pieces, and above put on distillations; and pressing from these instruments, let there be a raiser and encircle the point immediately with cotton; then pour out your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the can; and let the can be in the ear; then press from the raiser all around the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or almost until the ear is emptied; and let the patient feel within, and let the distillations be neither too hot nor too cold, for the medicine will not be so good.
And so be careful and wide in the opening. And as for the most subtle chief of the ear according to the quantity of the patient’s suffering, then follow with all the antidote; do this often until you see it issue. And if it does not obey to issue, if I push around the cotton around the ear as I said at the stone; and if it still does not issue, if we have said, give distillations which the ancients have proved useful in the incision of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, in this way: Let silver or lead be split into small pieces, and above put on distillations; and pressing from these instruments, let there be a raiser and encircle the point immediately with cotton; then pour out your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the can; and let the can be in the ear; then press from the raiser all around the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or almost until the ear is emptied; and let the patient feel within, and let the distillations be neither too hot nor too cold, for the medicine will not be so good.
No child is born without some imperfection in their ears; and the same thing happens as adults with wounds or earwax that has become impacted. Such impacts never depart without leaving a mark on the ear, if we are not able to see them; and never happens without some loss of hearing, which we see well.
When such impact departs without being seen, it is a sign of serious disease in many cases, and in this case it is seen that you put the painful ear into the sunlight; look inside: if you see pus dripping, if the wound has all the pus, this is the form:
And so be attentive both front and back all around, if it does not bleed the ear; if the pus is of earwax or a piece of the ear, if you see small teeth and the lump is lighter, as much as the bone is whole.
And if swelling is found in the ear, take one fine needle and lance a small hole at the fire, then insert the earlobe. If you feel the swelling which the patient feels at the ear, pierce lightly, and keep that you do not break the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a plug according to the size of the hole, and fill in the cavity Egyptian style.
Do not do anything until the wound is healed, or take a sponge soaked in rose-water and powdered vitriol; and if you see the ear flee, it is likely that you have pulled out the plug and put in another sponge soaked in oil of rose and wax until the swelling subsides.
If there is discharge of blood, soak a sponge and cover with cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that will staunch the bleeding which are either to apply distillations.
Of paper scrolls.
Thus comes the paper from the eyes when they are moist and dry, if you extend them with thumbs and nails, and grasp with the tip of a spatula from their roots; then withdraw the vitreous body bruised
And if you do not take care, if you burn with the lenticular cautery, after the incision it is worth moving; and often it breaks, so that nothing remains of their roots; and when they are burned by fire, their roots are scorched and do not come back anymore
Of the scab.
Many times come on paper writings of blood things that seem to swell in their form and in their duration; and for this reason this disease is called "granulin", and is an assembly of great moisture in the marrow below and above; the work is like this: take hold of the limb if the granulin moves from one side to the other, and this is a light matter to know; then make a generous incision, then remove the marrow partly lightly, then take hold of the wound, and close. If you do not close it in the right direction you will not see blood in the wound; and if the wound is large, if the assembly has a cast, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do not make force, for the marrow will restore itself quickly and leave behind pus.
And if the granulin descends downwards towards the ear towards the upper part, if you reverse the limb, and extend the granulin with one grasp, and close and press from one side to the other; and if the tissue is loosened by the incision, this will cause no harm; and when the granulin is closed, if you leave the dirty oil, cure the limb of what is left behind until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the blood.
The oily exudate is enclosed in paper towels and this has happened more often to women than to men, and grief fills their eyes; they weep at dawn and dare not look at the sunlight because the tears hurry from their eyes; and because they lie with their faces down and sleep on their stomachs, and their paper towels are soaked with moisture that swells and causes them to appear covered in oily exudate. And when you press their limbs they feel the exudate between their toes.
If the patient puts his head in his sound health; then take one linen cloth and make a loop in the manner of a circle according to the quantity of oily exudate from the chest part, and put it on; and press on the thumbs from one side and the other, so that the exudate is assembled together like the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture a trench with a wide incision, and let it not be more extensive than the wound made to the vein; and make the leather tough as long as you see the exudate; and in various situations comes exudate from the incision, according to the shape of a white fatty piece.
Pull out all the fatty tissue between your thumbs at the back of your hands, and twist your hand to the right and to the left as much as possible; and keep that you do not put anything into the incision, until you have reached the oil, that you do not stain it.
And if it escapes not at the beginning of the incision, if you widen the incision slightly as much as it opens; then extract it as we have said, and moisten the bandage in oil and water, and put on the limb, and bind tightly.
And if there are such fools who break their bones and put on por to corrupt that moisture which is gone. Then cure it until it is healed. And if it comes to the limb at the abscess, if you cure abscesses that are swelling so much that they are healed.
paper hair
When paper-like substances grow hairs, adjust them other than their natural state, and are thickened, if they prick the eyes, they cause tears like customary tears and soften the papers and mucus, up to the point of destroying the eyes; the cure for this is threefold: either by entire fire cautery, or by medicine according to what is before or alongside the cautery, or it is made by incision and suture or by strings, according to what I will say.
You must put the patient’s head in your left hand, then draw the paper from its root; if it is straightened, it is good; if not, if there is a splinter at any point of the root, either cut off the margin of the paper or the hairs will be torn out; and take one thread at the base of the paper and draw it to the tip; then stretch in the lower part of the paper, remove the hairs that have been adjusted, over the whole area, from the large tear until the small; then draw out one thread and place on the paper a small patch of cotton and bandage, then mark on the paper a sign like the spur of a myrtle, and it is known that the sign should be according to the quantity you see that the paper that is destined for you has been elevated.
And if part that has to be treated has received a great quantity of paper according to what is known, then make at the whole of the area over the two lines that you have marked, and from the large tear until the small; and either the split is close to the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then take away the ointment from one of the two angles of the wound, then stretch; then gather the two layers with a suture of a needle with a thread of fine wool, and wipe off the blood, and do away with the surplus of threads on the two sockets to all things that stick to each other, as you see that it must be done; and if you do not see that it must be done, then leave the suture and the threads for two or three days; then cure the wound with a bandage of dry and constrictive things, because the paper will be healed at the bottom of the wound and the gathering of the two layers, but the suture is useless (as they say the old ones), and it is useful only in case of doubt.
And if in another way: if you mark the mark of a figure which is just like the fuelle of a myrtle, as we have recounted, then in this case you must evacuate two onchons in accordance with the shape which is like this:
Then grasp what covers it with small forces equally according to the shape which is like this:
And if you cannot hold the pins, and the thing is not even, if you take a needle or there is a thread, and you tie it to the mark; and you take another thread and tie the great loop, and the second thread you tie the little loop, and you assemble between your two the threads equally; then keep your hand equally, and keep all the skin above where you have marked, as we have recounted, then assemble the two layers of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healed; and if there is an abscess at your incision, if you apply cerate and some soft dressings to soothe.
And never has it happened that the hairs of the beard have been converted: if you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure for boils is as follows: convert the beard and hair downwards as I have said, then make three incisions by art, and three threads as long as the beard and expand with mustard seed; and put in three hairs or hold the threads. Then assemble the one and the other securely above what is covered by beard oil, and strain the three hairs of the three parts. Leave it like that for several days, and the skin which has been strained will become black and dry and will fall out, as long as it persists.
If it is late, if the wound has force, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is closed, and when the beard has fallen out, the hair will no longer prick; and this is the form of the three incisions that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The work is such that you grasp a needle with its subtle thread; and there is.i. a silken thread which is subtle; then join the heads together and do not leave one and the other subtle, and let the length of the threads be equal; then order in the chase another subtle thread of silk briefly, and do not leave the chief of the thread; then put the patient's head in its place; and let the sun go if the work is clarified, for this is a subtle and minor work; then draw out the needle throughout the chase at the root of the hair in the armpit, and make it pierce in the paper hastily as much as you can; then draw out the hair until it is at the chase, and bring back to the chase that hair, if there is.i. or .ij. or .iij. or more; then draw out your hand until the vein comes out throughout the chase in the paper with the natural movement.
If the chase is treated and the hair does not come out with it, if you draw out the chase to the end of the thread that you have ordered, until the chase vein comes out from the hole and you see it by the sight of the oil; then if you draw out the chase and the thread, close the oil and leave it closed for two days or three, until the hair has grown back in its place and the wound has healed.
From the putrefaction of the oil.
When this ailment which is called "aleacrati" or the festering comes to light, if there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural.  And it arises from a wound, or from a bite or from cautery, and from similar things.
And the way of working in this is that you make that suture, dry the layers, put in linen bands, and keep it until it is healed; and do not do anything else except for things that dry and restrain. For if you do that, if the disease comes back worse than before; but there must be softening things, like fennel; and vinegar or salt and linseed seeds boiled, and melted beeswax, and it should cover a bandage, and cure it in this way.</start_of_turn>
And the treasure of your cure is that you must keep guard that it does not heal in a different form than before; and these works that we have mentioned are not fierce but only with regard to this disease, that it does not return in a different form than before.</start_of_turn>
Of the wound that comes in oil
This ailment which is sored which truly is called 'axacrati', is natural and accidental. The accident arises from wound and cut and cautery and things similar; and the way of this work is that if you take an awl, in which there is a double thread, and the thread in the wound, and it makes split the left tear so that the thread of the vein is in two pieces; then the wound is at the bottom of all the awls, and the head is with one spatulate wide.
And if the swelling returns as it should, that is good; if not, take a scraper and put it in the wound, and rotate the swelling, and make two incisions or cut through the swelling; and if there are two incisions at the two angles of the incision that you have made, or make an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is as it is of a letter that has not 'j. grieche'; then break that bone, according to the quantity of its cost and swelling, of what teaches the swelling, then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of linen; then cure that which we have said of the mollifying medicines and bands, until it is healed.
If the disease comes from a fracture, sprain or cautery, if it is recommended that you make a full incision over the hairs of paper; and as above; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and must be made according to the form of the disease, for it is diverse in form, and the learned doctors appear to know everything from great poverty to great wealth as to how to restore the limb to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what is to be done of the work and the instruments in many situations.
If the disease comes from a fracture, sprain or cautery, if it is recommended that you make a full incision over the hairs of paper; and as above; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and must be made according to the form of the disease, for it is diverse in form, and the learned doctors appear to know everything from great poverty to great wealth as to how to restore the limb to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what is to be done of the work and the instruments in many situations.
When this swelling arises at home in a part as delicate as the nail of the thumb is soothed with oil, and cannot move or perform its natural works, if it is recommended that you should bathe the tip of a scraper over the swelling, and hold it high up; and extend as many times as necessary, until you have reached the point where the pain is neither too great nor too slight, so that the patient can endure neither too much pressure nor too little; and that your incision, which you will make to reassemble, be light, so that the nail returns to its natural shape; and all the reassembled parts must be thoroughly cleansed, and no longer bathed in salt-laden water, but in fresh water, and oil; and between the nail and the oil place a layer of linen, and cover with oiled wool in abundance; and afterwards apply poultices and other soothing things until it is healed.
De l’ungle de l’oil
The nails of the oil are two kinds: one is nervinous and seems like hard paste, and the other is not nervinous but seems like white moisture frozen; when one touches them with iron and boils them, they do not burn; both seem to commence towards the great marrow, and cross so much that they cover the whole cavity, light and movement of the oil.
And the manner of incision is that the patient puts his hand in his side, then opens the wound; and keep the hand at your side, then grasp the nail with pincers of little double curvature, and stretch it upwards; then take a needle, and put in one hair of horse, or of sheep, or of beef, and one strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and fix it in the nail, and pierce through the whole needle, and tie the nail with a thread and stretch it upwards, and wash away to the outside of the nail all the surrounding tissue that encompasses the nail and the hair to the hair, and leave the natural fat or marrow, if there are no tears usually from the incision; and in no case is the nail stretched only with the incision and the thread, as we have said; then it is washed with all the surrounding fat so that it is like this:
And keep that the spatula does not touch the fatty tissue and break it, and that the needle is not perceived; and after the incision pour in oil a little ball of bruised silk, and put on a collar of litarge, and leave it until the other side; then cure what is left until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nerveous, and you cannot push out the needle, and the thread cannot enter, many times this semblance of a nail of medicine is cured; and as I have said in the division, if you see it covered, if the patient is feverish, take the spatula slightly blunt as in this form:
And remove the nail superficially, and if you see that it has diminished point and the bone is pressed, if the liquid distills from your mouth into the oil collar of litarge and red ligature and bruised silk, and squeeze out the oil until the other side; then repeat the other work as before, until it is entirely healed.
If nothing hinders thee in the oil, as with an abscess, then milk, and first cure the abscess with fire until it is healed, and then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
And if there appears cartilage softened at night in the oil by great discomfort, if you suspend it to the bone, cut off a part and not all, that blood does not arise; then distill in the oil of colera red which is made of litharge.</start_of_turn>
of the flesh that comes from the navel.
The eyes of some men never bear any mark of shame, and cover the pupil and bind upon papers and roll towards the flame; and seem like a rosebud. And if the patient puts his head in his bosom, the eyes vanish, and behold all that colour has a reasonable unity to that which is above, and supports it with force; then grasp the first colour, and go on grasping until the end, and keep only that which is left of the oil at the work. And let the incision be as slight as possible, as we have said in the incision of the vein, and have little force to hold the bone loose, as it is shown after this chapter.
When the incision is complete and the colour has been grasped, if you use oil of poppies or you distill collyrium red and similar corrosive medicines, put on the oil a cotton swab with an egg white, so that it is well secured; and if it does not move, and the patient has a suspicion of its being burnt, if you leave the oil and treat the burn with soothing things. Then return to your work until it is healed, and do as many colours as were ejected into the oil by this appearance.
But always know that you must nourish the cure of each feeble oil of the natural way; and in the work of fire; and do not stain your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz
From the veins of the eyes
And be two veins by degrees in one limb according to this form:
And when you have done this, if there is still blood remaining, distill in the oily coliere green and red to corrupt what is remaining doubtful.
If you cannot securely hold everything in that hour, make a plaster over the oil of calming things to soothe the pain of the eyes; and leave it until the pain is calmed and is assured to be free from post-operative swelling; then resume in the manner mentioned above until it is healed; and that is the form of the forces.
If you cannot securely hold everything in that hour, make a plaster over the oil of calming things to soothe the pain of the eyes; and leave it until the pain is calmed and is assured to be free from post-operative swelling; then resume in the manner mentioned above until it is healed; and that is the form of the forces.
If you cannot securely hold everything in that hour, make a plaster over the oil of calming things to soothe the pain of the eyes; and leave it until the pain is calmed and is assured to be free from post-operative swelling; then resume in the manner mentioned above until it is healed; and that is the form of the forces.
And when the bone is fractured, and you see the corruption and blackness, if the limb has all the instruments to be thus; it is called an "aspre chief," and is made of soft bone, like a chief rent, and is pointed as with a lime as when it is in this form.
And place over the limb the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two thumbs, and press your hand until you feel that the corruption is gone; do this never, and then restore the limb of exiccative medicines.</start_of_turn>
And if the limb is swollen, and the marrow has not yet burst, and the bone of the bow is swollen, and remains so for eighty days, and does not recover and is not to be opened, and accidents happen thereby; know that it is sane; if not, if there is no other remedy than to restore the fistula to its natural position following this form: uncover the bone a second time by force, and by watery medicines, and when it is uncovered take hold of it following this form, and let the iron be at an angle of two right angles, and the bone be flattened until it is like this:
Then place your thumb on the bone below the elbow, and slip your hand away from the oil.i. immediately, then turn your palm upwards until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through what comes out from under his hand if he keeps his hand on his elbow; and then restore the dry medicine, as I have taught you, and when the thumb grows and persists, if there is matter at the elbow; if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Then place your thumb on the bone below the elbow, and slip your hand away from the oil immediately, then turn your palm upwards until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through what comes out from under his hand if he keeps his hand on his elbow; and then restore the dry medicine, as I have taught you, and when the thumb grows and persists, if there is matter at the elbow; if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the limb opens all around and there is no swelling or pain, if you suspect the patient; then grasp the limb, then apply a bandage or dressing to the wound and apply oil.i. mixed with acacia, aloe, incense and balsam, and strain the oil, and apply it over bandages and cloths; and keep the cloths in place if you take cloths that are soft enough, and double layers in three, and then put one over the other according to the quantity of wound there is between; then strain by means of a bandage stiff enough to form, and restart the dressings to suck the wound inwards; then hold the dressings and leave the oil strained out for night, and if the patient’s pain subsides, if you see the oil repair itself, that is good; if not; repeat the dressing and cloths and the limb and the dressings until it is healed.
Dou derrompement de toile uvee
When the dislocation comes in the armpit, then open, and comes out some papers like as many grains of resin; it is expected to see; then if you see it covered, the work is like biting a needle at the root of the lower part until the tip of it goes down, then put another needle there or there is double thread of the upper part; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle in its place; then grasp the double thread and bind a part of the thumb together, and strain it well, then draw out the needle and put on linseed oil soaked in abundance of egg; and leave it as long as the thread is tight with the thumb, then cure the oil of comforting things until the wound is healed; and never is the wound restricted by the thumb nail part of a circle of wax, until it is healed.
And if the wound shows great appearance, if you pierce at the soft tissue which comes from behind and comes out with oil, correct the moist vaporous substance and draw out the wound, and put it back together; then draw it out as long as it is healed.
De la bowe de l’oil
When the belly of the oil is swollen, it is not fire that causes it but the oil itself which is thick and sticky like descending water; and it is not so. The manner in which this swelling appears is as follows: if you make the patient sit upright and straight, then take hold of his head between your hands, and move it until you see the belly coming down to your eyes; then either bind it tightly or do not let the light go and see the patient do the things he used to do; and if it does not go down on its own, give it a pinch, for it is like water, and when it goes down again it does not appear as we have said. If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the sponge and put it on the corner of the wound. That is, by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corner of the wound and the crown, until the belly is gone. And when it comes out, distillate it in hot oil mixed with honey, or in vinegar or fenugreek boiled with honey, and then cure it with some other remedy until it is healed.
When the belly of the oil is swollen, it is not fire that causes it but the oil itself which is thick and sticky like descending water; and it is not so. The manner in which this swelling appears is as follows: if you make the patient sit upright and straight, then take hold of his head between your hands, and move it until you see the belly coming down to your eyes; then either bind it tightly or do not let the light go and see the patient do the things he used to do; and if it does not go down on its own, give it a pinch, for it is like water, and when it goes down again it does not appear as we have said. If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the sponge and put it on the corner of the wound. That is, by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corner of the wound and the crown, until the belly is gone. And when it comes out, distillate it in hot oil mixed with honey, or in vinegar or fenugreek boiled with honey, and then cure it with some other remedy until it is healed.
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis serre l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.
After a short rest, if the water returns to the second passage, grasp the instrument with force and when it is firmly fixed and does not rise, gently remove the almagda loop from around your hand and hand; then reintroduce the instrument into the water a little. Then pour from the vessel a little of the remaining oil. Then put on greasy cloths or toweling soaked in rose oil and a lot of eggs, and tie with the fragrant oil. Indeed, we and those who are with us will put on broiled meat with a lot of eggs on top.
And if the almagda cannot enter the oil because there are pieces of bone that have too thick a hair, it is advisable that you take the instrument which is called the «alberit», for this is its shape:
And thus cut through the conjunctiva only, and do not linger too long, but make a small incision, then insert the needle, as we have said; and when the work is finished, appears to the patient a certain slumbering, in which he sleeps on his back in a single gloomy night; and let him be without any movement, and take nourishing foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and keep him still according to his disposition until three days; then take him home to the same gloomy night, and let him look around, and let him see nothing, and then restore him to his bed until the seventh day; and do not let him do anything else except for this cure or incision which is now being made, but let him be careful, for the pain will grow very great.
And thus cut through the conjunctiva only, and do not linger too long, but make a small incision, then insert the needle, as we have said; and when the work is finished, appears to the patient a certain slumbering, in which he sleeps on his back in a single gloomy night; and let him be without any movement, and take nourishing foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and keep him still according to his disposition until three days; then take him home to the same gloomy night, and let him look around, and let him see nothing, and then restore him to his bed until the seventh day; and do not let him do anything else except for this cure or incision which is now being made, but let him be careful, for the pain will grow very great. Leave the oil in front of the seventh day and address it to what soothes abscesses; and when it is appeased, remove the dressing and put on his face a little ointment to cover any scabs, and keep it in that gloomy night. Then go out of the house and back in, and convert into his case; and his wounds that no disciple must interfere with in this case.
And one came to us from Yrach who said that in sleep he had often seen a great light appear, as if by chance, but never had anyone seen it in our land, nor had I ever read of it in the books of the ancients; and by chance it is a new thing.
And these are the signs of the forms of an almond, for he who does not know them will not know their way; and they are like peas in their pods:
And their tops are of this same subtlety, and their backs in two angles like an egg
egg of the pear from the stone.
Sometimes births or deaths of various hairs occur, for there are some that appear like scorpions with teeth; and if there are such or if there is hair entangled with blood colour, or if there is hairy swelling of bone colour. In this case of those hairs which is swelling, and is not entangled, it is to be known that you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and uncover his nose, and let the blood drain from those hairs, and draw out the nails; then press what you have put under the thumb of the subtle gut with one hand, until you are sure that that hair is entirely bony.
If nothing remains to hold it, if the vein has burst completely with delicate instruments, if nothing remains; and if without you sleeping or incisions are delayed, if support is needed as it should be; and if it is a malignant incision, hasten and cauterize as much as possible until the blood vessel is no longer stained and all the clots are gone. Then spit out or remove the blood clot easily and quickly with vinegar or wine.
If the blood does not clot, and moisture comes up to the palate, clots which are not bleeding; if moisture does not pierce as it should, clots which are in the marrow of the bone below, behold, the instruments do not come out whole: therefore it is necessary that you drink a thick thread of linen, and that you grasp our hands, and that there be no space between thumb and index finger; and put the patient’s arm in the palm of your hand at the shoulder, and press down until it comes out through the mouth; and do this smelling until it comes out through the mouth; and many times do this to the child as they have seen done; and it is a light thing for one who has seen it done; then hold the chief that comes out through the hand with one hand, and the other chief that comes out through the mouth with the other hand, and pull out the clot alternately while holding our hands together; do this until you are sure that the clot has not been corrupted; then draw out the thread, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian unguents, and put it back in place as before; do this for two days or more, until the blood has clotted throughout; and then put in or remove a cautery once or twice a day until it is healed, and if there is need of drying medicines, use them if necessary; this is the form of the instrument for purging the chief, from which we distill oils and medicines or blood.
And be it of silver or of gold, resembling an overblown lamp, if like a chain, and guide it thus; and if you see, make a closed chain, and let the instruments be flat for purging the chief; and have one hand on the chief to hold it when we burn the oil or no liquid.
From the shoulder joint to the elbow.
From the shoulder to the elbow often arises a disease called "telul," which grows and becomes very large, to the extent that it is seen as an abnormal thing; and because of this it is commanded that you should begin by applying pressure at the start, and then break the bone, then apply the cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay in applying pressure until it is large, if you do not take precautions, it swells with blood, poor sense, and great pain: for if you touch it with iron, it is an inflamed abscess. For when it is once treated, if there is no blood swelling, you can see that you can easily control it; if the abscess is of soft touch, not of blood swelling, and you see that you can control it, you must evacuate the patient and control it in a timely manner, and treat the limb with drying and restraining things.
When the shoulder is cut and bound.
When solutions of continuation come into one of these cartillages of work, it proves useful, for in some homes. It is therefore necessary that this not happen to anyone, if one sees that the wound is fresh throughout its extent; and then one should raise the two thumbs to a splint, and cure until it is healed. And if the thumbs are already detached from one side and the other, one should hold all the parts of the thumb together until they bleed, and then assemble the two thumbs to a splint, and strain, and sprinkle with dragon's blood powder; and burn incense. And put upon the powder a piece of replacement of strength or another healing patch that binds, and leave it until it bleeds by itself, and then cure it until it is healed.
The manner of the splint is that you assemble the solution: or by needles, as we have said in the belly splint; or by thread, as I have told you.
of the fractures of the thumbs
At home, in the hands of the physician, are diverse wounds that resemble grains of barley, minor and greater; thus it is commanded to grasp the wound and make incisions around each hair, and grasp them with tweezers and pull them out from their root. Then apply pressure to the wound after the incision of the vitriol broth, until the bleeding has ceased. Finally, remove the dressing and cure the wound with dry things until it is healed.
From the root of the jaw.
Many times it happens that there is an abscess on the gums that the old people call "albulus"; if you support it, grasp the root and pull out the swelling or the blood; then put out the vitriol broth or other restraining and drying powders; and if the swelling returns after the incision, and happens many times, if you grasp it a second time and cauterize: if it does not return after the cautery; this is the shape of the instruments to carry out this work.</start_of_turn>
Des sordens.
The teeth are never together at the root, between the gums, where the teeth are white and sharp; and never are the teeth black and yellow and toward, until the decay comes to the gum, and the teeth are biting; if you command that the patient sit between your hands, and their head be still, and open the teeth or the gums will burst, until nothing remains; and then you will make black and green, and yellow and other stains, as long as they remain; and if one breaks what is at the first root, that is good; if not, if you must repeat the second and third time, until you have everything back; and teeth that have had to move from various instruments to repair them, as this is what the work shows, for these teeth have other shapes than those that are between the teeth. And these shapes and others will appear to you.
It is necessary when you cure the tooth from its pain that you leave it too long without treating it, because one must not be ashamed to do so; for it is a material that is highly moist, therefore one has no excuse for neglecting it When the patient is constrained to endure, if you are certain that the tooth is loose, many times the pain will depart from the patient, and care should be taken that it is neither too loose nor too tight; for otherwise it will not depart completely while the mischief is there. And when you are well certain that the tooth is loose, you must grasp the tooth firmly with all your might to ward off the jaw from all sides; then clench your fists with your two or three fingers and thumbs at the first and last points, as long as they are well extended; and then firmly fix the thumbs. Place the tip of the tooth between your knees and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
After that, grasp the tooth straight forward with force, and if it does not budge, take no instruments and pull it out from the soft parts slightly, and move it as you did before. And if the root is perceived and broken, if you must fill it, you must cover it with bandages, either inside or outside; and if the painful tooth has been tightly held with clamps, do not break them while holding. It is necessary to moisten around the gum with sponges to extract the tooth.
And take great care that you do not break it, and leave a part of it, and return to the patient with the greatest pain of the first time. And take care that you do not make me do something like the ignorant layman, who by their haste and boldness break the harness every time, and do not bring me what we have told them; but bring me what often comes by the infection of this great disease from the roots that remain, or from the harness that they break, as we have often seen; and when the root is gone, wash the blood of wine or vinegar and salt; and if there is bleeding, as often happens, if you employ the juice of vitriol. And if that does not suffice, cauterize it.
The shapes of instruments, on which one must keep silence first, are either with long points and thick handles, that they do not double in number when you draw out the tooth; these are the shapes.
And be of large limbs if they do not bend when drawing out, and be of iron well made, and be toothed so that one may hold them.</start_of_turn>
of the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn> When the root comes loose when drawing out, if you must put out the moist cotton wool inside [i.e. gauze], as long as it is soft, then take away the clips which are called “algefri,” for in this way the head of the shoulder appears like a beak of a bird; and they must be made as with a file and this is the shape:
And if the roots do not suffice to withstand all these tensions, if you must uncover the flesh completely around the root, and place the instrument which is called «althali», namely tweezers, so that this is the form:
And if it must be forced and large so that it does not break, and if the root leaps by this means, that is good; if not, if you aid with all your instruments, so that the shapes come after:
And if you use this instrument which has teeth, so that this is the form:
And other instruments that are before the teeth, and this instrument that seems like a great clamp, whose form is like this:
And other instruments that are before the teeth, and this instrument that seems like a great clamp, whose form is like this; or that its force is such that it cannot break, and its jaws like those of instruments for teeth; and like other instruments which are not mentioned here; the master surgeon will find himself alone with his instrument, according to what his work and his illness show, for there are many diseases for which no instrument is taught in former times; and if it breaks not from bone or from any other part, or if it is necessary, if it seeks other instruments, as I have said, and helps him with gestures, for whose form is like this. And let them be large and firm to hold the bone, that it escapes not, but can hold and restrain; and then restore the limb of medicine that is convenient for this, and if there is inflammation in the bone, and it is small, if the disease has passed with all these instruments:
When teeth appear contrary to their natural course, and the shape is deformed, even among women of gentle birth, if it is suspected that the tooth is deeply lodged and cannot emerge naturally, and is not properly aligned, it cannot be soothed or comforted: therefore, extract it. And if it is close to the tooth, take hold of this instrument which is like a small beak, and which is made of iron without a sharp edge at the base:
And hold it there with the thumbs and palms of your hands for the duration of the extraction, and because of that do not move the others, and if it appears, you can limber it, if you file a piece of file like this which is the shape of it.
It is like filing nails; and while holding the tooth firmly with the thumbs and palms of your hands, slightly move the instrument to and fro, so that it does not move too much, and when you finish, leave no burr, for if the tooth is too deeply lodged and it bleeds the tongue, you must remove the sharp edges as much as possible so that it does not bleed the tongue or impair speech.
When the tooth is loose.
When the tooth is loose, or by percussion or by biting, and the patient cannot press on that which sustains it except by biting, and you must cure it with restrictive medicines, which is not of use; if you must restrict it with a golden thread, for the silver thread becomes green and is harmful, but the gum does not move at all; and whether the thread is thick or thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are aligned, take the thread and double it between the two teeth in front, then place the teeth between the other teeth, if there are one or more, as long as you see it clearly until the sound tooth on the other side; then repeat the covering until you reach the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and cautiously, until it does not move; and if the thread is loose at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then grasp the teeth with tweezers and assemble them, and put them back between the sound tooth and put it in such a way that it does not touch the tongue; and then leave it in place as tightly as it can stay, and if it comes loose or the thread breaks, if the strain of another thread. If it should remain and serve in this way, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the arrangement of the two front teeth, and of the two back teeth, as you see.
And when the tooth aches, if you put it back in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said; and let nothing interfere that is not wise and soothing, and never make the form of a tooth of a cow’s jaw, and put it back in its place or where the defect is, and strain it as we have said, and hold and serve for a long time.
De coper, lou liien de la lengue.
When the tongue hangs limp or is disordered by nature, or through an accidental wound; the work is such that you must cover the patient’s mouth with your hand and hold their tongue; then grasp the large nerve below the tongue, until the tongue is loosened from its place. If it persists or fails to yield, and this is the result of a wound, if you must uncover the wound, grasp the large vessel below; and when you have done this, if the bleeding stops easily and without difficulty, or with cold blood, then withdraw the tongue gradually, and keep the patient quiet until the bleeding stops. If blood spurts again, if necessary, withdraw the cautery and burn the vitriol at the tip; if this does not suffice, cauterize with the lentiginous cautery, which is suitable for this; then treat the wound further until it is healed.
and if you see pus of a color or black or hard, if the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a abscess; and if it is declining and there is moisture, if it spurts blood, grasp the cautery with a sponge and deliver from both parts; and if it does not stop your work, if necessary, apply a piece of vitriol to the tip until it is blackened, then return to your work until you have completed your procedure; then raise the limb easily and gently, and treat the wound further until it is healed.
Des apostemes de la gorge.
The abscesses of the throat.
The abscesses of the throat.
And if you do not have this instrument present, if you can grasp it with tweezers, know that this is its form:
And if you do not have this instrument present, if you can grasp it with tweezers, know that this is its form: grasp one claw at a time; when you have grasped one claw, grasp the other in the same way, and after the incision, gargle the patient with warm, bitter, and soothing liquid; when blood spurts out, if there are pomegranate seeds or myrtle berries or similar things in the vomit, until the stain is gone; then wash the wound until it is healed. Never again shall there be any other incisions in the throat except for the two claws, if you grasp them as they are always grasped.
And I treated a woman with a small abscess in her throat; that is to say, an abscess of little size; and I had her hold her throat very close, so that she could not breathe through the passage that was blocked, and could not eat or drink, and she died because she fainted from this. The abscess was so high that it had forced out two nails from the two holes that did not want to go in. I therefore took hold of both nails, and put one in each hole, and I pushed with great force; then I removed the other half in the other hole that did not want to go in, and I closed her mouth and pressed her tongue; after that I put back the ointment in those abscesses, and I closed one half, and only a little blood escaped; and when I had finished, I extracted the passage from the throat, and she began to drink water and then wine, and she stopped fainting from this abscess for a long time; and the abscess reappeared in its place, filling her whole body that I had evacuated of food; so I grasped it again and cauterized it inside the throat: this time it went in a straight line; and I left these parts, and only God knows what happened to her after that.
De l’uve, le feu ne doit être appliqué que quand les poils sont longs et égaux; et si l’on le pique à la racine, garder les yeux ferme jusqu’à ce qu’ils ne flottent plus.
From the navel, fire should only be applied when the hair is long and even; and if it is pricked at the root, keep the eyes closed until they cease to move
And if you have put on a bandage or something to put the medicine on, if like the hairs of a sickle, put the instrument over the medicine on the navel; and the patient must rest on his side, so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth from the medicine inwards, if it does not reach the throat, and the hiccup; then hold your hand over the medicine and press it on the navel, for the amount of half an hour, until you see it wrinkled and the medications of the medicine are appeased; and if you see that, take hold and cover with any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and remove the instrument from the wound as much as the cotton fills it; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it dry and wipe off after three or five days. And if you must renew the cautery of the medicine, if you renew it, and after the cautery wipe off the surrounding with cotton wool, and pack what is around the medicine; and rise up cold water, and be cured of hiccups until it is healed.
This treatment is more effective than incision, for it is cured by fumigation according to this manner. Take calamine and isops and origanum and rue and chamomile and avron and similar herbs. Assemble all or some of them in one pot, put in oil, and boil. Make sure the pot is well sealed with strong earth, and put in one instrument that has a handle according to this manner: This treatment is more effective than incision, for it is cured by fumigation according to this method. Take calamine and isops and origanum and rue and chamomile and avron and similar herbs. Assemble all or some of them in one pot, put in oil, and boil. Make sure the pot is well sealed with strong earth, and put in one instrument that has a handle according to this method:
Many times it has happened at the throat bone or fish spine, or nothing at all; if you therefore suspect that you see something, press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing; and what does not appear to you and remains in the throat, you must make the patient vomit the morbid; for by chance if it comes out through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or some hardened bread; and tie the sponge to one thread, and then transfix it. And when it comes back, if it is swollen, then draw it out; and if it does not come out of what we have said, take one instrument of sponge according to this shape:
If the instrument is bent at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily and the head is raised up; keep your hands away from the epiglottis, for if you touch it, you will lose consciousness; do not press too hard on the bone inwards; and move the instrument only as much as necessary, for if the patient coughs or the thing is reversed, it will be all the same.
If the instrument is bent at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily and the head is raised up; keep your hands away from the epiglottis, for if you touch it, you will lose consciousness; do not press too hard on the bone inwards; and move the instrument only as much as necessary, for if the patient coughs or the thing is reversed, it will be all the same.
If the instrument is bent at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily and the head is raised up; keep your hands away from the epiglottis, for if you touch it, you will lose consciousness; do not press too hard on the bone inwards; and move the instrument only as much as necessary, for if the patient coughs or the thing is reversed, it will be all the same.
If she does not yield as we have said, if you submerge the patient with asafoetida, using the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will have its effect. The method of fumigation is as follows: take a pot or one with charcoal inside, cover it with a gauze coverlet about a span wide, and make an opening in the middle through which the instrument will pass; then pour the fumigation onto the patient, and let the patient put their head into the can and close their mouth, so that the fumes do not escape but rise up to the nose; and the nose will now be affected, and if it does not yield, repeat the fumigation many times; and make the patient drink strong drinks, eat dirty and foul things, and refrain from drinking water; and thus it will come to pass that she will be forced by this government.
And the form of the instrument is thus that which we mentioned in treating the nose, if indeed it can be seen, resembles a pair of hooked tongs to enter the throat; and it has the shape of a beak of a rooster, and has lime-peel, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go; and thus is the form
the chapters on abscesses
The wounds of the apostemes are, as it is remembered from one to the other in this book, diverse in perforation and size; and it is in two ways that they are produced. One way is in their own likeness, and from moisture. And the second way is by the bones or by the flesh. For the apostemes of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the apostemes of the bone are different from those that occur at the joints, and it is uncertain in this work.
And if the apostemes are not to be perceived, as long as the bone is dead according to its companion; but if there are some that must be perceived when they are callous, and do not die according to their companion, as is the case with apostemes that are detached from joints. For when apostemes are detached from joints, and it is left as long as it remains fixed, by chance if they become corrupted the ligament and nerve of the joint, because of this contraction in that limb. Or the apostemes is detached from the principal limb, and if you delay the perforation until it is measured, if the wound is on the principal limb; or it is detached from the foundation, if the perforation is not immediately made, and the wound is not closed; it cannot be cured in a great amount of time.
And it must be known that you should close the wound of the apostemes that is dead according to its companion, when the pain is calmed, and the departure of fever, and the cessation of pain and redness, and the swelling and the tingling of the head of the apostemes, and other signs; and that you should make the perforation or more dependent on the apostemes, and the place where the wound appeared; and that the perforation should be long enough for the hand or foot, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and on all bones equally or there should be no swelling.
When the limb hangs down, by proportion it becomes limp. And when the abscess is in the flesh, if you leave the hole open until it is confirmed in digestion, as we have said. For if you perforate it before that, if it bursts out, it will fill the cavity with pus and be filled with filth; and it will endure with effort and dig deep. And if there is no abscess that is perceived in proportion to the size of the limb, in proportion to what the limb has to bear. And it is recommended that you bring in small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many incisions according to the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses that you must sew up the skin, and cover; when it is almost healed, if it is like a drape, and is soft, it is recommended that you do as is done with bubbles: and if there are such as are cleft in two angles, and such as are coped with the needle like a nutmeg, like abscesses of grapes; and if there are such as are made in a round size, and others of a similar kind.
When there is no head, if there is a superficial abscess, it is recommended that you pierce it completely; and it is recommended when the abscess is large, and it has gathered a great swelling, and you pierce it, if you do not drain all the swelling at once, but drain a part; then stamp the abscess until the other side, then drain nothing further; do this many times with great pressure, until the swelling is gone; even if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman in childbirth, or a young child, or an old man decrepit. For the expectation is never known with the issue of the swelling, except by chance the patient dies, and you will not know it. Therefore, leave this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, if you have drained the wound, look to see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a full-grown wound, if you bring in threads or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there is pus of perforation, if it is recommended that you swallow in each attempt so that they come against each other; and if you have pricked in the abscess a part of the skin, and you have sewn it up, if it is recommended that you fill it with fine cotton or coarse gauze of linen with moisture, and leave it until the third part; then the bone, and bandage it until it is healed.
And if there are discharges of blood in your work, if you bring in cold and easy water, and moisten with a cloth, and remove the offending dressing many times. And if the discharges of blood persist, if you bring in government and treatment, and the powders that I have said in the hands, and if it is winter, and the limb or the abscess is nervous, if it is recommended that you put on attempts and soaked bandages in wine and oil; and if it is summer, and the limb is fleshy, if it is recommended that you put on soaked bandages in water and oil, or in wine and oil rubbed, until the third part; then take out the abscess and dry and bandage it, as it is recommended, until it is healed.
And this is known throughout in the treatment of abscesses: or as I have said before concerning the precautions before treating abscesses, and thus in this chapter.
And this is known throughout in the treatment of abscesses: or as I have said before concerning the precautions before treating abscesses, and thus in this chapter.
And this is known throughout in the treatment of abscesses: or as I have said before concerning the precautions before treating abscesses, and thus in this chapter.
And the size on the pierced abscess and moisture, if it is less severe, because they are of little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or heads or if there is no moisture, and from these are those abscesses that I cauterize or heads of an old woman; and find the abscess just like a stone, rough and white, and cannot break it; and if there is no opening, we must make as good a wound as with a stone. In other abscesses coming or heads, forasmuch as these which come from the children and have roots of the ears, it overtures if it is at any time most dependent on the limb; and it cures as it should.
And the size on the pierced abscess and moisture, if it is less severe, because they are of little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or heads or if there is no moisture, and from these are those abscesses that I cauterize or heads of an old woman; and find the abscess just like a stone, rough and white, and cannot break it; and if there is no opening, we must make as good a wound as with a stone. In other abscesses coming or heads, forasmuch as these which come from the children and have roots of the ears, it overtures if it is at any time most dependent on the limb; and it cures as it should.
Many times happen these abscesses at the neck, and the assises, and the armpits, and never in any other place or limb, and are black, and are joined together. And such a scrofula is properly within its cover, as if it does not move and has an abscess at the head, as we have said; and the signs of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and if there are malignants that do not want to obey health. In those in which you see good disposition of the toucher, and is similar in color to the flesh, and dry from the front and not wet as at the neck or in the artery or vein, and is not deep; if you can cope with it by excision, and scorch the front part, and leave the two upper layers of the skin untouched, if necessary, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and the same thing, and be sure that you do not cover the nerve or the vein, and do not be too hasty, that the hands do not escape, and do not voice too loudly, that you do not cover anything that you should not.
If you cauterize the vein or artery, and this does not suffice to stop the bleeding, put in the wound a piece of vitriol broth, or some powders that remain bloodless, and tighten the wound; and leave it until the bleeding has ceased, and soften the wound, and begin to move around. And when the bleeding has ceased, if you return to your work, until you have completed it; then you must look at your index finger to see if there are any small clots remaining, if you see them, pull them out and crush them. And if there is a large clot in the root of the vein, if you do not manage to pull out the clot from its root, but only grasp it with a strong double thread, and leave it hanging by itself; then apply the wound with a piece of felt soaked in Egyptian balsam, and cure.
If you pull out the entire clot, if you can put together the four corners of the wound and suture them now, and there is no longer any excess due to the size of the clot. If you can understand to cover the root of the vein, and pull outwards, and suture as we have said. Those clots which keep excess, pierce them through or they will open and die; and pierce them just as before said, depending on the case; and mix with attempts and similar things, so that you correct what is remaining of the corruption; and when the wound is well drained, if you apply an ointment dressing that is healing, as long as it is healthy.
When the wound is well drained, if you apply an ointment dressing that is healing, as long as it is healthy.
The old men spoke of the greatness of the gorge; but I have never seen it in our land, and that is the writing of their words.
As to those who grumble, it is right that the swelling of the gorge which is called the epiglottis must be cut away; and this will not help, for all the veins and the blood vessels of the patient are at those who have placed their trust in them in the mouth, in the throat or in the ears. When the disease is in the chest of the belly, it is right to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss that comes from strangulation.
It is not possible for me to provide a translation of the given text, as the provided text is not included in the prompt.
If the veins are closed in the epiglottis section, there is no pulse, and the blood vessels are elongated.
If the master is pale, it is recommended to extend the skin of the throat to the chin, then cut the skin as far as the cheek; and avoid the blood vessels of the neck, if you do not see anything, and then cut the cartilage as we have said.
And it is shown by the section of the jawbone where the tooth leaps out from the broken bone, and by the absence of speech;
And leaves the wound wide open for a piece.</start_of_turn>
And when the hour has passed and doubt about strangulation persists, assemble the upper and lower eyelids of the wound with the thumb and index finger, and hold them together with the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause the hair to grow, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
The patient must not do this until the throat is completely healed, and the patient is deemed to be dying, and the default is to leave it alone.</start_of_turn When the epiglottis is grasped in this way, the patient cannot speak, and he breathes through the wound; thus death is held off.
And therefore the old man is commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it is passed in two or three days or thereabouts.</start_of_turn> And therefore they command him to sew up the wound and cure, until it is cured.</start_of_turn
And I will tell you what I have seen. I saw that a damsel took a knife and plunged it into her throat, and swallowed part of the windpipe with it.
I fled in fear for her cure, and found her already dead.</start_of_turn>
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and saw that it did not penetrate any vein or artery except for the throat, and that the cause of this was the wound itself.</start_of_turn
I hastened, and washed the wound, and treated it until it was healed.</start_of_turn>
And she did not yield to the damsel’s fury, for she was overcome with speechlessness, and returned afterwards at her leisure.
Therefore I say that in the trimming of the epiglottis I have no fear.</start_of_turn>
of the great gullet.
This swelling is called "hernia of the gullet", and is a large swelling the color of jaundice, and is very common in women;
And it is of two kinds: natural, and accidental; for the natural kind has no cause.
And the accidental kind is of two sorts: as when one is like grease to us, and the other sort is like an incision which comes from an artery. and there is no fear, and it cannot be known beforehand; and if you do not take it out immediately, it will grow into a large abscess and if you find it thus as not like grease, and cannot be known beforehand; and if you do not take it out immediately, it will grow into a large abscess. And encircle all around, and cure it as it should be, until it is completely healed.
And encircle all around, and cure it as it should be, until it is completely healed.
And encircle all around, and cure it as it should be, until it is completely healed.
And encircle all around, and cure it as it should be, until it is completely healed
I say that dislocation is caused by heat and fever that persist, as long as the inflammation has not passed, and is accompanied by swelling; then rest the fever and heat.
With neither pain nor heat nor fever, there is swelling, which is its own bag and is like the color of honey, and starts like fat and becomes large.</start_of_turn>
and are like grains of sand, or fat, or moisture, and the color is like I have said in the division.</start_of_turn
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the wound, that you inquire and examine first the instrument which is called the “entromissoire,” according to the shape of the wound or chapter that follows.</start_of_turn
And the method for questioning abscesses of the head is that you take more moisture than you find in the abscess, and twist your thumbs and index fingers, until you know that the instrument has grasped the root, then do it according to the size of the abscess.
Then draw out the instrument, and take care that the wound does not split open.</start_of_turn>
If moisture covers the wound, color it as I have said of other abscesses.</start_of_turn
And if after the introduction of the medicine there comes no moisture, if it is fat, if the former has gone in a cross, and takes hold as hooks, and scorches lightly from the side and holds the coat where you grasp it with the thumb;
If you do not grasp it firmly, if you tear it piecemeal, then nothing will remain.
For if nothing remains, if it returns to us many times;
And if it lingers for a moment, without causing you concern, if you apply to the wound some corrosive powders, hold the wound steady, and put upon it soothing things around the circumference; and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
If it is large, if you cut through three fingers of the wound, and treat it of that which engulfs the bone.
If the vein swells up against you or another if you are hasty and use broken vitriol, and leave it for one or two days, until the wound has healed, and rest the swelling of blood; then return to the cover that was removed when it was dislodged
See here the forms of the entromittent instruments, and there are three kinds: great, medium, and small; and there are four squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds: great, medium, and small, for enclosing fistulas.
And they are like the needles which we use to ligate wounds, and they are of citrine, or iron, or silver, and the thread is yellow, and they are better at closing black wounds for enclosing fistulas.
And there are three kinds: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the size of the perforation.
The shapes of lice are like those of seeds, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and if lice have twice the curves of two hands, they are just as numerous.
The shapes of lice are like those of seeds, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and if lice have twice the curves of two hands, they are just as numerous. And if lice have two curves and are of two hands; or if lice have one curve only and are of two hands; all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these lice is very sharp, and there are some that do not pierce but one side only, of which we must be careful, because they do not cut through flesh but the bone.
And among these interjections are the elements that are restored in sleeves, so that the patient does not lose them during the opening of the abscesses.
And there are three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you see;
One should use them only in bone fractures, such as legs, arms, arms of the shoulder, and ribs, and in similar cases.
And never make any other small instrument, resembling the nails of fists, according to this form, as we stop blood:
And put it nowhere near blood vessels or arteries, never again in the same form.
Never swell the breasts of women when they begin to decay, as they seem like breasts of a female;
and remain still, weeping and fleeing, and whoever sees them cured must believe that they must be treated in this manner from the beginning until the end of this line b until .g.: then scrape off the fat, and use the medical plaster to cover the wound, and then gather the two edges of the wound together with stitches, and cure until it is healed;
And if the breast leans forward and is eased by its greatness as when women have it, if the force be in two ribs below, by two similar fissures; or that one holds the other at the end of both, so that the greater line contains the less according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.; then scrape the skin between the two ribs, and remove the fat, and mix in what we have said of stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for the cure, as long as it is healthy;
and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not quite finished, because the patient does not want to rest, or because of the discharge of blood, if it is necessary, that you fill the wound with moist cotton in corrosive order. And leave it until it has consumed the remnant and the fat, then cure it when it is healed.
And leave it until it has consumed the remnant and the fat, then cure it when it is healed.
And leave it until it has consumed the remnant and the fat, then cure it when it is healed
And leave it until it has consumed the remnant and the fat, then cure it when it is healed. And when all the hair in the abscess is drained, if the wound is of great extent, fill the wound with fine cotton, and leave it until the other side, then extract all the cotton, and cure the swelling that arises from this until it is healed.
If the abscess looks like carbuncles, if it persists as we have said in cuts for carbuncles, and if the wound is healed, if necessary perform cautery as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
of the root of the artery
When the artery is blocked, and the skin above is swollen, if there are many abscesses there, there will also be escape of blood from the vein and abscess.
and if the wound is left open as long as the artery is blocked, if there are abscesses at the root of the vein they will grow long and burst.</start_of_turn> and when you feel it, if you feel it is a loosening; and when it is the vein, there will be running away of blood from the wound.</start_of_turn
it is foolish to close this wound, and even when it is soaked in blood the abscesses and wounds and boils and other things will grow large. It is proper therefore to abstain from the cautery treatment, and he who is in charge must abstain also; and in that which is infected with an artery that has burst through the skin for a long distance.
It is proper therefore to abstain from the cautery treatment, and he who is in charge must abstain also; and in that which is infected with an artery that has burst through the skin for a long distance. then remove the swelling as much as possible, and gently extract the artery from the flesh, until it is uncovered;
then support the limb with a needle, and pierce it through to the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread as I have taught you concerning the extraction of the veins in the temples;
then mark the place which is between the two veins of an introducer until there is no pain there, and be sure to liase the abscess;
Then apply the remedy that will soothe the pain, as long as the limb cries out. Then soothe that swelling that comes with this, as long as it is healed;
and if the swelling is as big as the belly, if you must, hold your hand over the abscess from the very beginning.</start_of_turn> Then take out the awl from the limb that you have in your hand, and pierce it, and there are two threads, so that you can carry it out from the other side; Then hold the abscess, as I have said, or ligate one of the two parts with two hairs of thread.
And if you doubt that the thread will not hold, if it breaks another needle at every thread of the abscess from the incision of the first needle, hold the thread firmly for three days.</start_of_turn>
Then tighten the abscess until the swelling subsides, then tighten the swelling of the wound and leave only what is bound;
Then put on a moist bandage of wine and oil, and bind it with stitches and compresses until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Des apostemes des ners.
The abscesses come from the nerves as well as from the veins, as from the nerves when they are cut or overworked, and similar things.
And this often happens with wounds and tumours, or with joints, and it is that there is excessive swelling, and its colour resembles that of dark yellow, and is in many cases accompanied by pain;
and when it is pressed, if it causes pain, and is not easily pierced by the point of the thumb, but is accompanied by swelling;
And he must remain still from every side, neither forward nor backward, neither to the left nor to the right, neither from above nor from below; and he who is in joints must not be covered with iron: by chance it may cause contraction;
And he who is at the head or shoulder or chest, must make the skin taut over the bone. If the swelling is small, if the limb has a tension, and you press it at its root;
If it is great, if the swelling has become soft, and it is bruised, then you must break it up and unite the wound at the suture, and keep it healed until it is well.
From the armpits hanging From the armpits hanging there is often in the belly and not elsewhere that this ailment exists, and is called "fungus" because of its resemblance to nails, and its root is subtle, and its head is large; and there are small and great ones.
and I have seen two homes where out of a hundred there were two or more bellies which appeared more like nails than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a thick root, and were split open, and cured by moisture.
I cut them out and found in one sixteen-and-a-half ounces and in the other fifteen and three-quarters, and the work in the incision is such that if you look you will see that the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist and has a thick root;
If the shoulder blade is large and prominent, and if it is in your presence, let the fire cautery be performed. For in this case, there often comes excessive bleeding, and if it does not stop, do not delay but immediately perform the cautery.
And if you see the patient groaning and pale from the incision of the wound, take a piece of well-made sponge, bind the artery as we have said, and leave it for three days.
Then the restraint, and do not stop constricting the sponge until the artery is ligated; and if the roots are large, if there is pain in the belly, but do cover half of the wound well,
Then let the cautery be performed so that it does not recoil; then cure the wound and keep only the hair that is of a coarse colour and poor sense and milk-white.
For it is an inflamed abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the abscess later.</start_of_turn>
When the abscess is full.</start_of_turn
When there appears a swelling, it comes from a burn or incision of the flesh, and is above the belly and there are some pus there, as in other ways, or blood which clots blood vessels or arteries according to what is in front, or swelling;
If by fistula or passage of the bowel, if it is the color of the abscess, it is a slight thing causing pain, and there are various discharges. If by passage of the intestine, then it is more diverse; and when it is pressed, it returns, and by chance if it is choked, and expands the mouth at the entrance of the bath and with great effort.</start_of_turn>
If by moisture, it is a slight thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand; do not constrain me; and if by blood, if it opens with these signs, the abscesses are great and hard, and are fixed according to a quantity.</start_of_turn>
If it is by excessive wind, if the patient is sweating, and if it appears that the bleeding comes from the artery or the vein, or from excessive wind. If you suspect that this is the case. For there is doubt and fear, as I have already said or as in the case of wounds caused by incisions of the artery or the vein.</start_of_turn>
And if the appearance is due to an intestine or a swelling, command the patient to hold his breath, and let it hang limp, then sign it in with your finger around the swelling.</start_of_turn> Then he instructs to grasp the limb between the hands, then grasp the limb firmly between the hands, and extend half of the limb at the base to the greatest extent;
Then towards the half of the abscess extends upon the vein, and there you must place your thumb and index finger, and grasp the intestines. if you find it caught in the vein, if you pull it out, grasp the intestines away from the belly
and if you find the bone fractured, if you grasp it at the joint, and break off the excess;
and if the artery is opposed to you, or the vein, if it goes badly in, then return to your work and take four needles, and take four threads, and pass the four needles through what you have made in crossing so that you do the work right.
Then strain the abscess for three days on the needles; if you see it, pierce the needles, and leave the wound open until it bursts, and remove the dead tissue by itself. or you can grasp it when it is subtle and soft, then cure it of what it covers, and close the abscess as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
or you can grasp it when it is subtle and soft, then cure it of what it covers, and close the abscess as we have said before.</start_of_turn> and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the wound of what it covers, and close the wound.</start_of_turn>
Then strain the abscess for three days on the needles; if you see it, pierce the needles, and leave the wound open until it bursts, and remove the dead tissue by itself.
We have already mentioned the signs of an abscess, and how it should be treated with medicine and how to shun the cautery; and we say that an abscess swells in the marrow, and has great swelling in the cure. The ancients say that when an abscess is in the flesh or can be scraped out as when an abscess is in the marrow, in the spleen, and in similar places, it must be removed as soon as possible; and when it is large and old, if it cannot be cured, do not approach it, for I know of no cure for it. No one has ever cured one before me.
And as for the work, when it is in the flesh or can be removed, as we have said, do not purge the black bile from the patient once; then make the patient healthy if there is still any swelling left; then expel the patient, i.e. give him a good drink to make the work; then draw out your needles or abscesses, and the head of all parts, and the bone of all parts without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, and expect well the limb at your hand or at nothing, and if the wound becomes infected from the incision of the artery or vein, do not cauterize too much lest it be stained; then cure with another cure until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
of dropsy. We have already spoken concerning the resemblances of hydrophobia, and that when an assembly of water is made, signs of jaundice resemble; the cure which is made by medicines and that which is cured by iron: if only the lightning is alight; and one must not touch iron in these two resemblances: that is to say, tympanites and icterus, for it is a deadly thing. Therefore when medicines are given for this semblance which is called "lightning" of medicines, and the cure does not benefit, if one observes that the patient is weak, or if there is another disease besides hydrophobia, as with all solutions of the stomach and similar things; if one does not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if one sees the patient of great strength, and there is no other disease besides hydrophobia alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, one must operate: We have already spoken concerning the resemblances of hydrophobia, and that when an assembly of water is made, signs of jaundice resemble; the cure which is made by medicines and that which is cured by iron: if only the lightning is alight; and one must not touch iron in these two resemblances: that is to say, tympanites and icterus, for it is a deadly thing. Therefore when medicines are given for this semblance which is called "lightning" of medicines, and the cure does not benefit, if one observes that the patient is weak, or if there is another disease besides hydrophobia, as with all solutions of the stomach and similar things; if one does not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if one sees the patient of great strength, and there is no other disease besides hydrophobia alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, one must operate:
We have already spoken concerning the resemblances of hydrophobia, and that when an assembly of water is made, signs of jaundice resemble; the cure which is made by medicines and that which is cured by iron: if only the lightning is alight; and one must not touch iron in these two resemblances: that is to say, tympanites and icterus, for it is a deadly thing. Therefore when medicines are given for this semblance which is called "lightning" of medicines, and the cure does not benefit, if one observes that the patient is weak, or if there is another disease besides hydrophobia, as with all solutions of the stomach and similar things; if one does not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if one sees the patient of great strength, and there is no other disease besides hydrophobia alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, one must operate:
Then pierce through the leather with the instrument, and grasp it, and keep your hand all the way up between the leather and the bone as though you were escorting the amount of an nail or something similar; then pierce the bone until the space comes up to the tip of the tooth, that is the limit of the pain, then pull out the instrument, and behold, that is the shape of this instrument: It is like a slender silver needle, and is made of steel or silver wire, and has at the bottom a small hole; or costs one, two holes; and three on one side, and one on the other. And the head of the instrument is cut off like a pen, and that is the shape of the incision which the writers make for the pen.
At the top of all this is the ailment, so that when the instruments are put to the test, if now at the same time that they are put to the test; empty out then half or a third part, for if you empty out more than that which is proper for this hour, by chance the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he will bleed profusely, or he will approach death.
but empty out according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the provisions of the virtue for the patient signify, and his pains; then draw out the instrument and retain the blood, and it is retained now by the knot which I have mentioned that stamps the perforation which is on the bone, as I have said; pierce according to this manner; then repeat the instrument the other way, if you see the patient suffering from that, and draw out a small quantity of blood.
Do nothing of the sort; keep yourself from using it until it stops hurting. And if you are in doubt about the patient, and you insert too much water, if the cure be of burying or washing with sand, with water or bathing and in the sun, and abstain from eating; and let the physician give drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and the liver and the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
Do nothing of the sort; keep yourself from using it until it stops hurting. And if you are in doubt about the patient, and you insert too much water, if the cure be of burying or washing with sand, with water or bathing and in the sun, and abstain from eating; and let the physician give drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and the liver and the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before. Never is a child born without having a hole in the belly, or the hole is small, or it is not well placed. If the physician urges too much and has not pierced at all, despite great swelling, in this form: then put or pierce with a blunt needle of lead, and tie and hold for two or three days. And when he wants to urinate, if you leave the hole closed, he will urinate, and then you will restore him; and by chance you will not be able to do anything, for the urine that comes out will not leave the hole closed. If the opening is small, if medicine be applied with lead weights, as we have said, if it dilates. Those who have not the opening in their limb are black, for none are born who have the opening at the head of the bone, for they cannot urinate before they raise their thigh; and they cannot urinate effectually for that the matter cannot reach the marrow, and this is a bad disease.
And the manner of the work is that if the patient lies recumbent on his back, then the head of the thigh and the knee are as large as a pen; if the opening is small, if it comes to a thousand, as it is convenient; and you must take care of the evacuation of blood which comes often, and if it comes, if the stain of that which stains blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the pus of the thigh. Many times come these boils to the verge, and are an unsightly sight; and in them are both malignant and non-malignant things; if you take them at their face value, with ointment of subtlety, and press and squeeze them all out, then put on a wet bandage in the Egyptian fashion; then cure with diafinicon until they are healed. If the boil is malignant, with pus-filled color and discharging, if you take it at its face value, you must bring cautery. When you have squeezed it, and if the boil is at the root of the verge, and some is inside the skin and some outside, if you must break the boil which is inside first; and when it is healed, if you cure the outside, if you do not secure the edge of the verge, blackening and corruption will come into the verge or around the wound; if you must remove all that is black and corrupted, then leave on the place of honey and flour which is made of pomegranate peel and sometimes, then cure with other cures until it is healed.
If blood comes out, if you bring lunar cautery in this form: the cautery helps with these two things: the evacuation of blood and the corruption; and if the head of the shoulder is corrupted and retracted, if you drink or cause the verge to bleed a thumb of plum, and the patient urinate; and when the hair has been burned away from the head of the shoulder which has not been circumcised, or if there is wound or incision, if you must then burn the hair with a needle, as long as the hair is loosened, and deliver the hair from all parts.
If this be a grievous matter, if you must certainly undertake it, then grasp the limb firmly without inflicting any wound to the root of the thumb and the heel; then gradually separate the skin between the two joints, and place a fine strip of moist linen over the cold water, so that it does not slip away.
If this be a grievous matter, if you must certainly undertake it, then grasp the limb firmly without inflicting any wound to the root of the thumb and the heel; then gradually separate the skin between the two joints, and place a fine strip of moist linen over the cold water, so that it does not slip away.
Circumcision is not merely a continuation of the other wounds; however, when our will commands it, and is properly undertaken, if it is necessary that our workers do the best work, and the most gentle for the patient.
I say that the old folks do not tell me of circumcision for their children, for they do not use it in their laws, and we have only what we have learned through experience.
For I have seen most of the masters and physicians who perform circumcision to make incisions around the head of the penis, and with force, and with great bleeding; so that the testicles often flee because of the two layers of skin, and by chance if one severs these below and leaves the upper one behind.
Or the wound closes again, and the pain is doubled, and there is swelling which is painful when the point of the limb is not securely held; and by swelling of the cord by chance escapes the wound, corrects the work, and many times comes out without having had to perform any swelling and I think so.
From the alteration which is made with force throughout the whole thread, I have observed the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well downwards as upwards.
For when you press your hand, if it is held equally on every side in this way, all the tension is equal; but if the thread is well twisted round the leather; and if the manner is like that of the first work, if you make the child think, if he understands, do not force him to tighten the thread too much around the limb, but rather let him join it in all the ways that you can then hold your hand straight out between your hands or from your toes that the child does not see them, neither any instruments; then take hold of your hand at the limb and breathe or cough, and pull it up as high as the head of the limb is bent; then mix well the ordure that is gathered, then tie the limb with a double thread, and tie from this to that with another thread; and hold two by the second loop at the pouch and the thumb, and push between the two threads, then leave the thumb upwards until the head of the limb is well healed and pull the chief of the limb.
then hold your hand straight out between your hands or from your toes that the child does not see them, neither any instruments; then take hold of your hand at the limb and breathe or cough, and pull it up as high as the head of the limb is bent; then mix well the ordure that is gathered, then tie the limb with a double thread, and tie from this to that with another thread; and hold two by the second loop at the pouch and the thumb, and push between the two threads, then leave the thumb upwards until the head of the limb is well healed and pull the chief of the limb. Then let the blood flow freely, and freely; for it is the physician’s wisdom; and put powder on and about the powder. i.e. a bandage that adheres with an egg-shaped lump of gum, scraped from rose oil, confirmed with rosemary oil and balsam, and leave it on until the bleeding stops. And cure it with another cure until it is healed.
When the forces are formed at the armpit, it is thus: the two arms are tense and stretched, and the arms are as great as the palm of the hand equally:
The error of the armpit is when the nerves are injured during the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend your nail, even if it causes the wound to split; and grasp it equally, and if you do not manage to hold it with your nail, if you grasp it with your teeth, hold it firmly, and then grasp it.
And if they trespass for two days, and what is below the ribcage is inflamed, if you leave it as long as the spasms cease, and the swelling is slight; if you touch it as you wish, and hold on to the lower part of the ribcage, it will do you neither good nor harm.
When you have treated the wound with powder, as we have said or mentioned, if you touch it too hard, it will go deeper; so treat it as we have said until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
When the urine is retained.
The retention of urine is frequent in the cases of stone, or of blood clot, or of bile, or of worms, or of other things mentioned previously.
If the urine does not flow freely, and you see that the stone is in the kidney or the neck of the bladder, then you must make the patient hunch over his knees; and put his feet on the back, and extend his belly from the part below his back, and restrain the patient so that he cannot move; and then constrain the neck of the bladder to the expression of the stone above, so that the urine can flow freely.
And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instruments which are called “siringues”; and this is the form: either of hammered silver slightly curved like a dove; or the caine of a long and a half palm, or subtle at the head
And thus the method of extracting urine is as follows: if you take one double thread and tie one end to a ball of wool or cotton, and pass the thread through the bladder; and drain the excess wool and stop at the top of the bladder, then join the bladder with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on one seat, and raise the bladder and the testicles with oil moist and oily with olive oil and tepid water.
Then insert the bladder gently into the vagina, until it reaches the root of the vagina; then double the vagina backwards towards the abdomen; then drain the bladder until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel it come out until it is empty; do this not otherwise than in this order, for otherwise it will conduct or go wrong; then tighten the thread at both ends, and the urine will follow the thread, and then remove the thread, and correct the urine
and restart the bladder until the bladder is empty, and align the patient.
Des maladies de la vessie.
When there are dropsy or blood in the bladder, or putrification has set in, and you see urine and medicines distilled, if you do everything that is called the «clepsedre», which is its shape:
It is closed, and if it has a hole: two parts on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and you must support the bladder so that the medicine may be as effective as possible, if we can drain the moisture, and push out as much as possible.
and when you see the medicines dripping from the bladder, put the chief of the bladder in the moisture, and push out the one that is causing the pain; if you push out the moisture from the wound, and then push back the one that is causing the pain; if the moisture enters the wound, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
And this is the form of the subtle cluster which we clusterize the bladder: if it is like this:
And this is the form of the subtle cluster which we clusterize the bladder: if it is like this:
And if you do not have a bladder, if you take a piece of parchment and make a circle, and pierce it round about; then stretch a strong thread through these holes, and assemble the circle as if you were assembling a ball, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and bind it with the instrument; and do as you would if you had made a bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
From the stone.
We have already mentioned in the previous division the methods of dealing with stones, and their extraction alongside medicines; and we have mentioned the difference between a retained stone and one that must be extracted, as well as the signs and in what case a stone must be opened; in the bladder and in the kidney; and I will tell you openly and briefly.</start_of_turn>
I say that a stone that is retained in the bladder often causes vomiting, which is a sign that the stone has burst from the bladder similar to the pain in its subtlety; and it opens gravel, and grinds the patient’s side, and causes them to urinate frequently, and then it swells; and from these vomits the foundation is loosened; and the healing of these vomiting spells is light up until the age of three years, and is more grievous in the elderly, and is like that in those who are between youth and old age; and the cure for these who have a large stone is lighter than for those who have a small one.</start_of_turn
And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with a catharsis, to drive out all the worms that are in the intestines. For they obstruct no time the opening of the stone.
Then take the patient by the limbs, and loosen and move to the outside, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and does not ever go too high up; then make him sit between your hands visible, and his hands are at his sides, so that the bladder is all the way down swallowing; then query and touch it then.</start_of_turn>
If you feel the stone in the space, if you hurry now to cut on the stone. And if it does not bleed on touching with the whole hand, if the patient is fat, take your left index finger, if the patient is young and robust; and press on its foundation, and query the stone, and when you feel it with your thumb, if the bladder is inflamed; then press on your thumb, and the stone will come out whether you see it cut.</start_of_turn
And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his thumb on his right hand and his little finger on his left hand the skin that is between the thumb and little finger in the part where the measure is taken; then insert the sponge, which is shaped like this.
And put between what is between the thumb and the little finger and the foundation, do not pierce through but along the left nail; and be straight on the stone, and your two thumbs either together or on the foundation, and be the measure through if it is wide by excess, and narrow within, according to the quantity of the stone, do not pierce too deeply.</start_of_turn>
By chance the press if two thumbs which are or support, that it leaps forward in work; and the sponges that are in the part of the stone or where there are angles, and margins: if they are grasped to tighten; and if there is anything that is swollen, like a gland, and rounded, from which issue is slight.</start_of_turn
If there are angles or margins, make the size greater; and if it does not slip, know that you must strain above the tenailles which are just like a file at the head, for must strain the stone if it does not escape; or you may use a curved instrument at the head. If you do not know how to handle it, it is wide; if it is blunt, it is a fracture of the glass.
If there are more than one stone, grasp the largest at the belly of the bladder first, then hold above, and pull out, and the smaller afterwards if there are more. And if it is large, cover it with silk, and make a greater wound. For in this matter, two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out badly because his testicles cannot support; but whatever you do, try to drain, or remove the stones from the tenailles, until you remove them in pieces.
When you have completed your work, apply incense, aloe and dragon’s blood and hold, and put on above a bandage soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the cautery; then raise the patient up on his heel and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen it, if there is much moisture in the limb from oil and water, then treat with the astringents diafinicon and basilicon until it is healed.
And if pus comes out of the wound and corrosion, and blood clots in the bladder, and either by this the urine is retained, which is known in part as without a jump with the urine: then do you drain the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and bring about its destruction.
Then lift the wound with water and ease and care, and support it in all the ways you can, until it is healed; and cover that all the parts that you cure are bound with sutures, and gather the medicines on the limb.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the channel of the kidney, and it is grasped firmly, and the urine cannot pass; if the doctor who performs this treatment does not listen to me many times, he will hear of the size of this treatment. I have already proved this.
Take hold of the iron according to this form and make two angles grasped firmly in one space:
Then take one thread and bind it around the root of the kidney, if it cannot come back into the bladder; then press the iron lightly into the root until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron back and forth in the stone until you can pierce the stone from the other side; if the urine comes out, then press your hand over what remains of the stone that is in the root. If it is broken, and urine spurts out, and the patient is injured;
If you cannot do this for any reason, take hold of the limb above and below, then push the bone sideways between the two joints, and then extract it with force, loosen the ligament, and congeal the blood that is in the wound; then cure as before.
If you cannot do this for any reason, take hold of the limb above and below, then push the bone sideways between the two joints, and then extract it with force, loosen the ligament, and congeal the blood that is in the wound; then cure as before.
When the bone is dislocated in a woman, and this does not happen often, it is a grievous cure, and is defended by two things: the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; the second is that one cannot find a woman who is truly virtuous, even among the most chaste.
And the third method is if by chance one cannot find a woman who is well-versed in this art of hands; and the fourth method is if the woman's stone is more blunt than the man's, for in that case one can make a deeper size, and greater fear has it.
And if you need this, if you take a woman who is very well-versed, and prick the root with a needle, and if you do not find it, not even a slight tremor; and present a woman who is wise in life, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her to do what you command with the inquiry of the stone.
and look well if the woman is a virgin: then you must push her shoulder or foundation and inquire the stone; and if she finds it, if you constrain her outside her shoulder, and command her to keep her left hand on her belly and press.
If it is true, when you move the navel from the entrance of the bladder to the knee, as far as it reaches the hip; then grasp on the thigh at the hip joint and find the middle of the bone, where it appears; and feel the thigh in that part. Do not move your hand above the thigh or below, and take the measure at first small.
Then tighten the measure around the thigh, if you feel the thigh so wide that the wound can hardly close; and that many times in treating wounds are: that is to say, small, large, rough, soft, long and round, and which have veins. If the veins resemble that, you know it is an issue.
And if it does not go away, if you put on a piece of rough glass, and hold it for an hour until it is stained; then return to your work, until the wound is closed, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the stone are at home to help you in your work
If it does not move of itself, and it is the artery that is cut, put the powder on the wound and bind with threads and bandages; do not attempt to move it again, leave the wound open and do not touch it, but by chance the patient dies, then cure the wound.
When the blood flow of blood is calmed and the limb is relaxed, if you return to your work, as long as the wound is open.
of hernia of the abdomen.
Ramice aquouse is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white fat, which is like lead when cold, that contains the egg; and it is called "syfac," and never is it truly in the yolk of the egg, if we take care that this is not the case; and it is the skin of the coion between the white fat that we have mentioned.
And the generation of this ramiculus is weak and comes from the coions, and the matter is spread out
And never does it come from percussion on the coions, and this moisture has many colors: or it is pale yellow, or it is without redness, or black, or pale blue, and this is more.
And these are the signs of a dislocation of this limb, for if it is white or bluish like we have said, if the abscess is round like a ball and does not open, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the flesh itself, if the abscess is round with a part of the egg, and for this reason people think it is another egg;
And if the moisture is between the skin of the limb and the bluish layer, if you feel well; then when you see the color of the moisture, if it appears throughout the inside as before. According to this, following the introduction, judge what is within.
According to this, following the introduction, judge what is within. When we bind the wound with iron, if it is deemed that the patient is safe according to the sum total of their poverty and the swelling of their body; then we should lift them up onto their buttocks, onto something rather high, and put cloths beneath them.
Then we should sit on their left side, and command the minister to sit to their right, and extend the limb to one of the two ribs as close as possible to the ribs;
Then take the leather sponge, and grasp the skin of the ribs among the ribs as far as the tip of the nipple, and make a straight incision dividing the skin of the ribs up to the white line, and eschew it skillfully according to the sum total of their poverty;
Then pierce the face with a large hole, drain all the fluid, and then put on your gloves; extend the face upwards; do not touch the corners of the eyes, but only the face itself; cut straight through or in pieces whatever is underneath, for if you do not cut it carefully, the fluid will come back.
If the eye socket swells up during the operation, hold the eye in its place until you have finished the procedure; then join the two corners of the eye socket together with a suture, and cure it like any other wound until it has healed.</start_of_turn>
If you find the eye corrupted by another disease, you must tie down the blood vessels that are suspended, doubting the discharge of blood; then cut the eyeball out completely, drain the eye, and cure it as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And if it is acute and assembled in twelve parts, stakes that are twelve roots; if you cut the other part as you did the first one equally, then wipe the blood, and put in the wound wool soaked in rose oil.
and put on the other wool soaked in wine and oil, and put on the twelve joints, and put under doubled cloths, and bind above all the surrounding parts in this fashion:
Then take twelve cloths, and use coarse wool like this, and assemble them by stitching in the neck of the sleeve, and one of the arms grasps on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the armpit; and the other two chief on the twelve angles, and be all assembled in such a way that the restriction in the loop of the sleeve is firm.
And never is this cautery branch suitable for the size of iron; take instead a cautery of the cutting type, and cut the leather of the joints, and if necessary, eschew as we have said, until the white substance that contains the liquid is discovered.
If you take the cautery as we have described, and pierce that membrane as we have mentioned, and eschew with this subtle cautery, it will burn:
And cut in all ways as you wish, until you have stripped away everything; and keep that fire away from the egg; and eschew that this work is more liquid; and keep from excessive bleeding, and more than enough have bled already;
And if nothing else hinders you, or an abscess bursts or discharge of blood, or anything else, if it hinders you, remedy that which hinders you, as it is said above.
If the patient is weak and does not wish to endure this work because of its horror, if you suspect perforation, as I have said, and you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that the liquid is pure,
then sit the patient down on a comfortable seat; then puncture the abscess at the lower part with all the surrounding tissue wide open, and put the perforation through to the bone; and if the perforation is large, so that all the pain is expelled immediately.
Then put cotton on the limb and bind it, and leave only the remainder of the pain to flow out; then cure it until the wound is healed.
If the white cloth does not prevent the pain from draining from the wound, if you must, drink a penny or the instrument used for treating the hydrophobia; for in this way the wound is formed as before; and it is large, that is to say, wide. The wound must be enlarged, that is to say, the abscess must be drained, and it must be sutured after about twenty days or when the pain has subsided, and when it is sutured as before, the patient will be well again.</start_of_turn>
of the incision of the hip bone
Hair that is in the vicinity of this branch has doubt and fear in many places, for it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
I will tell you about the work and the appearance of the abscess.
Therefore, I say that abscesses come from boils or carbuncles, and sometimes from wounds; and this is by chance.
It is known by excessive and sudden heat, which expands and bursts boils or carbuncles.
And it is the colour of the abscess according to the colour of urine; and there is no pain, and it is an abscess of grief.
And thus an abscess is grieved with fear and tears, of foul colour, and never comes from a vein or swelling of a vein.</start_of_turn>
When it is not from a vein, if it is known by the position of the abscess burn, when you press it on your shoulder; you must not touch it.</start_of_turn>
Whoever has made an incision in a vein is known by the way his fingers tremble at the touch of two.
and can make the size of this kind and of others like it well enough; and that you take care of the nails like nails of coions, then put the egghead in the air, and put out the yolk with white salve, and deliver the yolk from all its parts of the egg.
If the egg is already cooked with these things, if you must, then only treat the egg and the nails.
If it is high up on the surface of the bone, or in the blood vessels, it is necessary to deliver all that is taut, and to round off the edges.
If the bone is high or behind the joint, if you must grasp it entirely, and draw out the head, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
When your work is done, if you are using wool yarn, soak it in rose oil and wine, then bandage it with other bandages until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
of the abscess of the bones
This is an abscess enveloped in a covering resembling a bladder, with the softening of the joints. and the patient groans in pain when he moves.</start_of_turn>
and the treatment of this disease is as perilous as this one before mentioned.</start_of_turn
and we will tell you all this in detail as the ancient writers did.</start_of_turn>
You must make the patient sit upright on a chair, then support the arms under the armpits at your sides. Holding all the blood vessels that proceed from the armpit, grasp them firmly with your hands, and extend them forward;
then clamp the bleeding vessel widely through the opening, until it is uncovered,
and then withdraw the blood vessel part, as we said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
Then I insert a needle or if there is double thread, I tie it to the first limb or the head of the nail has come loose, and I tie it at the other end. Then I grasp firmly in the middle directly, according to the length of the bone, and I remove the corrupted moisture.
Then I treat the wound as usual or I bandage it, so that no vessel is cut that could contaminate the wound;
for in this way there is no harm, and if all the vessels come together, if you can, remove the bones from all the vessels. If the oesophagus does not lose its nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and dries and does not swell, it will not be aided.
of the root of the throat</start_of_turn> These events of this root are if it is by the section that comes or the extension above the belly in the part of the flanks, because the intestines descend from that route to one of the hips;  </start_of_turn
and these events of this root are if it is by the section that comes or the extension above the belly in the part of the flanks, because the intestines descend from that route to one of the hips;  and these events can be caused in various ways: by percussion, or jumping, or pressure, or by lifting a burden, and in various other things;  </start_of_turn
And the signs when it is a swelling of the face, if there are some and some, in long tension, and does not come immediately; and the swelling extends equal to the jaw, because the face presses the intestines.</start_of_turn>
And the sign is when the face is sectioned, that it makes sudden pain appear at the edge, and the swelling is diverse in appearance, from the splitting of the skin to the bursting of the bowels, because of the evacuation of the intestine and the displacement of the bone from the face.</start_of_turn>
And never should the bones be closed with the intestine, and is retained when it is held, and causes great suffering to the patient, even when it is pressed.</start_of_turn
And in these cures of fire with fear, for it is known to escape.
And thus, if you command or patient that he hold the intestines to his hand within the wound, if he can enter again. Then either keep your hands above his collarbone, between your hands, and hold the buttocks;
Then extend the arm at the shoulder, and grasp all the skin of the buttocks long; Then withdraw from the wound to the size of an uncorned bean according to what you have learned by opening the wound, and do it as quickly as possible; lest they come out spontaneously.
Then withdraw from the wound to the size of an uncorned bean according to what you have learned by opening the wound, and do it as quickly as possible; lest they come out spontaneously.
Then withdraw from the wound to the size of an uncorned bean according to what you have learned by opening the wound, and do it as quickly as possible; lest they come out spontaneously.
Then withdraw from the wound to the size of an uncorned bean according to what you have learned by opening the wound, and do it as quickly as possible; lest they come out spontaneously. And instruct the minister to extend the arm upwards, and release whatever is behind the limb.
And look carefully if there is any intestine or white fatty substance wrapped around the limb, and if you find nothing, if the belly of the limb is swollen;
Then take a needle or, if there is, thick thread made of thread, and pass it through the back part of the fatty substance, which is after the leather of the buttocks; then measure, and cut off the ends that appear from the thread, until there are three threads left; Then assemble one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and bind the fatty substance, which we have said is behind the leather of the buttocks, with a strong thread of two threads. Then cover the head of the shoulder with cloth, and bind it firmly in three places, so that no blood vessel except the ones that nourish it can enter there, only with an incision above. Then straighten the limb according to the first limb, which is one and a half inches from this one. And after these one and a half inches, leave space sufficient to accommodate the fat that is between the bones like the nails of a nail
And after all that, according to the roundness of the joint. Then tighten in the part that is between the fat of the nails, so that it is firm and does not move, as we have said before.
Then apply a soft wool bandage soaked in oil, and put on the wound, and I apply the thread that we have mentioned. And never shall the flesh be cauterized save in the manner that we have mentioned after the incision, in doubt of bloodletting.</start_of_turn>
For this often happens, and the limb remains painful even after it has recovered; and if it is delayed in recovering, if it be from a hot bath, put on what we have mentioned above until it recovers;
And if the time has come, it is good to keep it warm and moist with a gentle unguent, and to massage it gently.
Of hernias of the groin.
In this chapter, I have never seen anyone cure it with iron.</start_of_turn>
And the old folks say that it is made just like the hernia of the vis, partly in the manner that you bind up blood vessels, after the size has been somewhat diminished at the lower part.</start_of_turn
Then put in the middle, and cure the abscess of that which causes it; as long as the blood vessels groan; and cure it as we have said, as long as it is sound.</start_of_turn
Never comes routine with anger, as we have said, and open the doors; and do not see any intestines as companions, and if any are seen, it is because of that, and repair them at all hours.
and all the blood if it stays too long in that place, if you believe the wound or swelling, as long as the intestines are seen;
and this happens by the extension of the sinew which is angry, as we have said, because it is extended, then is softened and relaxed the doors are opened;
and the treatment is by cautery, as we have previously said; and never is cured by iron in this manner:
And it is that the patient lies supine on his back between your hands, then grasp the limb of the route inflamed with a large hand according to the quantity of two thumbs.
Then pull out the callous which is under the skin that covers it, then take the pliers and take out the limb appearing from the callous.
And press on the front of the belly, then cut the two thumbs appearing from the callous on the top of the pliers, and cut one and the other;
Then pull out the head of the pliers, and do not cover anything from the callous neither extend the gut or anything else, as I told you in the treatment of the hernia of the intestines;
Then treat the wound. And when you remove the hair, if the wound bleeds and heals the wound, as long as it is healed.
The swelling is constrained and does not appear on the surface, and the cautery is muffled in this limb, and more proximate to safety.
of the softening of the skin of the nails.
Many times the nails of the thumbs are softened in water-soaked homes, because the nails that are inside are softened, and it is seen; and it is necessary, when you see it being cured, to make the patient lie on his back, and to scrape off the softened skin from the natural skin; then join the layers together with a suture, and if you see that, close the superfluous softened skin with two or three sutures firmly; then scrape between the sutures, and cure as the other wounds, until it is healed, and pull out the hair.
Dou chastrement,
When the shoulder is dislocated by moisture, and is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Hermaphrodites are beings that possess both male and female sexual organs.
Hermofrodie est selonc deux manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les deux coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine. Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et deux coions. Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.
Hermaphroditism is in two ways like that of women: one if between the two testicles is opened as with the nature of a woman, or if there are hairs, and sometimes in the urine they are emitted. And the other way if in women, and there is upon the navel like a beard and two testicles. And the cure of the swelling and the fame is if you cut out all the seminal vesicles, and the cure is like for other wounds; in the second way, of men whose urine leaps through the skin of the testicles, if there is no cure.
Tentigene is a seminal vesicle above the natural part, as long as it is too heavy to see; and many women have it as much as a hand. And the cure is to hold it lightly with the hand or fingers, and do not move it too much, for there is danger of bleeding, and then the cure for other diseases is to be made as soon as possible; and there is another ailment that comes from the root of the kidney, and the pain, and by chance it leaps out, and is like the semblance of a cow, and for this reason it is called the ancient “sickly disease”. If you can remove it, as we have said concerning the tentigene, and cure it when it is well.
De erratique.
When the natural position of the woman is not clearly perceived, or if the passage has been too slight; or if it is by birth, or by disease that has come to pass; or if it is by an injury of the arm or a swelling or stiffness of the limb, and if it is caused by an infection of the armpits, or by worms or ulcers, or any other cause; and if the bruise or swelling is painful, and if the joint is inflamed, or if the limb is stiff, then it must be reset. If the swelling is slight and is close to the armpit, grasp the two thumbs and place the woman on her back, spread out her legs; then stretch out the two thumbs as much as the swelling of the armpit allows, and as long as the stiffness of the limb persists; then take hold of the limb, anoint it with oil, and place it on the limb, and keep the woman still for a moment, as if she were dead; if the swelling is hard and stiff, it must be forced out like a hazel leaf. If the swelling comes from a wound, if it is necessary to support the wound, grasp the heel of the wound with your thumb and index finger; and place the woman on her side, extend her legs; then the wound will stretch out as much as the swelling of the limb allows, and as long as the stiffness persists. Then take hold of the limb, anoint it with oil, and place it on the limb, and keep the woman still for a moment, as if she were dead. If the swelling is from a nail, if it must be grasped, support the swelling as described above. For in the armpit infection arises from the swelling of the armpit, do not touch it with fire.
des emorroides.
Emorroids are openings of veins which, without treatment, are usually fatal. When emorroids are old, they become toughened. We have already mentioned the signs and symptoms; here I will tell you of those which are most useful for curing. I say that emoroids and the toughened vein, when they are inflamed in the belly, are not felt unless they are treated by iron. Those which are at the root of the belly can be felt; these can be cured. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then draw the belly tight, grasp the root and sprinkle on restraining medicines such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then remove the pieces an hour later, and put them in cold water. If there is still pain, give her a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and barley and similar things, and then give her barley meal with honey and assails, and make her drink it. And if it stops bleeding, that is good. If not, make her breathe vinegar at her back and give her lead. Then give her lint, and soak it in the juice of plantain or in the juice of elderberry with old wine, and make her breathe. And when the incision is healed, if it is a bleeding vein, it will stop bleeding as long as it is healthy; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a rough chief, as I have already said of the toughened vein; and then it will stop bleeding as long as it is healthy.
Emorroids are openings of veins which, without treatment, are usually fatal. When emorroids are old, they become toughened. We have already mentioned the signs and symptoms; here I will tell you of those which are most useful for curing. I say that emoroids and the toughened vein, when they are inflamed in the belly, are not felt unless they are treated by iron. Those which are at the root of the belly can be felt; these can be cured. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then draw the belly tight, grasp the root and sprinkle on restraining medicines such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then remove the pieces an hour later, and put them in cold water. If there is still pain, give her a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and barley and similar things, and then give her barley meal with honey and assails, and make her drink it. And if it stops bleeding, that is good. If not, make her breathe vinegar at her back and give her lead. Then give her lint, and soak it in the juice of plantain or in the juice of elderberry with old wine, and make her breathe. And when the incision is healed, if it is a bleeding vein, it will stop bleeding as long as it is healthy; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a rough chief, as I have already said of the toughened vein; and then it will stop bleeding as long as it is healthy. As for bleeding from the belly, this must be treated by an opening at the root.
Emorroids are openings of veins which, without treatment, are usually fatal. When emorroids are old, they become toughened. We have already mentioned the signs and symptoms; here I will tell you of those which are most useful for curing. I say that emoroids and the toughened vein, when they are inflamed in the belly, are not felt unless they are treated by iron. Those which are at the root of the belly can be felt; these can be cured. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then draw the belly tight, grasp the root and sprinkle on restraining medicines such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then remove the pieces an hour later, and put them in cold water. If there is still pain, give her a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and barley and similar things, and then give her barley meal with honey and assails, and make her drink it. And if it stops bleeding, that is good. If not, make her breathe vinegar at her back and give her lead. Then give her lint, and soak it in the juice of plantain or in the juice of elderberry with old wine, and make her breathe. And when the incision is healed, if it is a bleeding vein, it will stop bleeding as long as it is healthy; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a rough chief, as I have already said of the toughened vein; and then it will stop bleeding as long as it is healthy. As for bleeding from the belly, this must be treated by an opening at the root of the belly. Many methods of stemming the bleeding of the belly have been mentioned; such as carbuncles, perforated abscesses, herpes, stomach ulcers, fistulas and emoroids, and infected wounds of the belly. It is therefore necessary that you keep the woman in a cold house, then draw the belly tight, grasp the root and sprinkle on restraining medicines such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then remove the pieces an hour later, and put them in cold water. If there is still pain, give her a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and barley and similar things, and then give her barley meal with honey and assails, and make her drink it. And if it stops bleeding, that is good. If not, make her breathe vinegar at her back and give her lead. Then give her lint, and soak it in the juice of plantain or in the juice of elderberry with old wine, and make her breathe. And when the incision is healed, if it is a bleeding vein, it will stop bleeding as long as it is healthy; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a rough chief, as I have already said of the toughened vein; and then it will stop bleeding as long as it is healthy.
From infancy.
From infancy. The midwife first of all must know the figure of the natural birth, and the signs are when you see the woman press down on the jaw, and desire to smell the head: then the child is eager to be born; then the afterbirth follows which is according to the natural figure, and comes out with the head, and is supported by her; and when you see these signs, if you press lightly on her belly, if the child comes out head first, he will be supported by her; for when he comes down on his head, he is supported by her, and is delivered of his superfluities by a natural movement; and this is not otherwise. For it does not come at any time from his feet, or from the hips or arms, or from his belly or buttocks, but is turned by an accident from his collar, and by other harmful figures; if the midwife is skilled in the art, she will be wise and discreet in these matters, and will avoid error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures that we must use to aid her.
If the child comes out head first by natural birth, and the woman is groaning, and her strength is weak, if you make her sit on a chair, or the women hold her; and when she has given birth of the oile or fenugreek seed, then lie between her legs the little cushion which is its form: And split the second finger, and bind its nail until the moisture which is in its core flees; and press the woman’s belly until the fetus descends, and if it does not descend, if you must, clench the woman with muscle of fennel with oil of sesame; then make her vomit and evacuate feces, and keep her mouth and nose covered for an hour: if the fetus is now gone. And if both hands go out violently, if you must, that you hold them gently and cautiously; and if they do not enter, if you put the woman on her seat, and keep her feet high; then withdraw the seat from the earth, and hold her, that she does not move; and if the hands do not enter, and the fetus is dead, if you bind the hands at the wrist which is before mentioned, and pull out the fetus, and calm her equally.
From the issue of the fetus on his feet. When the fetus comes on his feet, if you can push upwards; And then the head of the shoulder must be turned back and forth, until it is even;
and then grasp its pieces and extend back and forth.
Can it jump up until the joints are crooked, if the command is to grasp it, and make it vomit from discomfort? if it jumps up, God helps.
If not so fierce as we have said, if the limb hangs loose and limp, as long as it follows the natural figure. For in such a case it is easily done.</start_of_turn>
If not so fierce as we have said, if the limb hangs loose and limp, as long as it follows the natural figure.  For in such a case it is easily done. And if not so fierce as we have said, if the limb hangs loose and limp, as long as it follows the natural figure, take an upper muscle, oil of lavender, gum masticatory, and broth in. and put over the limb the woman's face and drive out this swelling. Then let him sit upright in water up to the ribs;
When it is moist there, let him drink one mouthful of mirrah, and let him drink, and leave him for an hour. Then let him sit on a chair, then make him spit and strain his mouth and nose, and gently grasp his belly, for he will now cough up. because of the issue of the child on his knees. When the child comes in this form, if he puts his hands and feet together,
And thus the boy cried out twice; and command the woman to take care of the children until the boys are gone. And thus the boy cried out twice; and command the woman to take care of the children until the boys are gone. And thus the boy cried out twice; and command the woman to take care of the children until the boys are gone.
If it does not recover, if you make it manage over its lip, and the legs burst out,
then restore the muscle I mentioned earlier.
and if it does not yield, if you make it sit on its seat, then look back to rejoin the limb; and keep it stable according to its natural shape, and make it expel, and command it to bend until it is firm again.
From the issue of the child on his neck, and he has spread out his hands, and his face turned towards his mother's back. I believe that the boy is grasping his hand, then turning his head back and forth, and leaning lightly;
When he is equal, if you put on the muscular substance of elevation and oil, as we have said, then you command that it move back and forth;
When you have done this, if you make her sit on the chair, and command her to grasp; and she will sneeze. From this same measure at all the second time.
From this same measure at all the second time. When it comes from this measure at all the second time, if the second time comes to your nail, as long as the moisture is evacuated;
and if the nail leans forward on its face and neck, if the head of the nail leans forward, that it does not remain fixed, and the patient dies.
then take out the child, as you have put it, and command the woman not to move at all:
is slight. is slight; for often blood flows out when a vein is opened, or when an abscess is opened, or in the treatment of wounds, or in extracting arrows, or in cutting into stones; and such things are not strange, and often happen. Therefore if the dislocation is slight.
I know this, for they are multiplied, and are severed by the lip which divides them, which is bound to the bud.
and never comes out so naturally as all at once, as we have said.
and if it comes out abruptly, if the treatment is as we have said, and the limb is grasped tightly, make the limb limp and gently do what it does; and do what is necessary to preserve health. Moreover.
Moreover. There are often formed in the marrow, that is to say, in the number of one, two, three, four, five, six, or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measure of the ruler of glory.
and it must be known that the Savior has saved all these things, for by chance similar things happen; if you do as it is commanded.
Of the dead child.
When you cure the woman of the dead child or belly, if as I have said in the division, and he does not flee, and you are constrained by the work of your hands; you must know that she is of sound health, and has no accident or is about to die.
you must know that the woman is lying on her back, her arms are crossed over her chest, and her legs are lifted up;
And the minister grasps the thumb of the hand, or she should be bound to the bed if she is not treated at the descent of the child.
Then wipe the mouth of the mare with moist oils mixed with acacia gum and fenugreek seeds and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these gums Then hold her limbs lightly, then give her one or two lukewarm drinks or the nourishing unguents that are convenient for this case,
Take care that the child does not rise up on his head. If the hair in the armpits, on the neck or in the mouth or on the eyebrows or on the beard or in the forcele or near the ribs,
if the hair on the armpits, on the neck or in the mouth or on the eyebrows or on the beard or in the forcele or near the ribs has descended to the toes, if it is grasped or pulled and the ribs are soft;
then you must grasp the hair with your right hand, and place your elbow between your left hand, and hold it firmly, and grasp the hair firmly in none of these places that we have mentioned, until it is freed from the matter
Then the limb finds another anchor, or the third part intervenes, so that the extraction is even;
and then it is extended equally by moving forward and backward, because it is necessary, and that the bones do not slip, and that the teeth of the bones hold together as follows.</start_of_turn>
And if it remains fixed, if one part breaks, if any limb hangs loose of its oil, and the bones are bound in that part, and the other part is treated;
and if there is no fracture, if one puts this anchor or higher up, and does so until it is completely healed.
If one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned due to tension, If one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned due to tension,
then you must apply pressure at the joint of the limb or at the root, and you must make the other hand firm, and have two thumbs.</start_of_turn>
and if the limb of the child is large and it is twisted in the issue, or if there is or chief pain assembled, If it is certain that you have dislocated the spinous process between your two vertebrae, and you hold the head and stretch the pain; or you hold it with the instrument called the «almidach», which comes with the instruments or bandage which is after this.</start_of_turn>
and in the meantime make it swell with a great natural chief; and then treat for the bones as tenacious.</start_of_turn>
And if the shoulder joint suddenly jumps out and is forced out by force, if either the moisture which is still there is driven out or has already jumped out;
and if it cannot be reduced, if the limb is fractured by pieces at the muscle where you push;
and if the bone is fractured in the belly or breaks the ribs, if you must pierce through as much as the moisture corrects.
and if the limb is hanging in pieces, if the attraction is slight, and the patient’s mouth is lighter.
If it is strained in the belly or the wrist, it is proper that you pull it out with the hand covering the part. If it is strained in the belly or the wrist, as long as the moisture that is in it is corrected.</start_of_turn>
and if another limb is fractured and the limb is dislocated, if the limb hangs limp and blood spurts from the wound.</start_of_turn> Then indeed, one should anoint or grease and warm the area;
and if the moisture of the marrow is withdrawn by the hot cautery, if it does not suffice to pass, then one must add moist and greasy things. and apply poultices, soak in soft water and moisten.
If the shoulder hangs down on its side, and you put it straight, if you accompany what we said about the living child;
If it does not yield, if its limb is torn away piece by piece, and you leave nothing of the second thing.
And when you have done this, if you accompany what we have said about the apostemes that come with the mares;
and if blood comes out, if there is any restraining water, and if you accompany other cures.
And I saw a woman with a child in her womb who had a miscarriage, then consulted with another concerning it, and refuted the miscarriage of the other. After a long time, there came an abscess in the belly, which grew so large that it burst, and began to cause great swelling.</start_of_turn>
I went for help to the doctor, and I thought for a long time, and could not stop the bleeding.</start_of_turn
I put on a strong dressing, and out came a bone, and after that a few days another.</start_of_turn> I marvel at you, for your belly has no bone.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I wish for the wound, and to have bones in my hands, as long as the woman is in a better state; and saw the woman long tense, and that was already a sign of a wound.
And I have never seen this chapter except for the time when the master found a strange thing that he had to help with.
in order to put the head of the shoulder back in its place
Then comes the form of pressure, which is what we have learned from books; and two returns as two thumbs of two hands. However, the corners are more subtle of restraint, and are made of ebony or boxwood;
And let the mouth be wide open, with teeth widely spaced, and long enough to reach a palm and a half. And in the midst let the two lips be doubled to the jaw, which are firm one against the other, half a palm in length or more.</start_of_turn>
And these two lips are held doubled over the edge of the mouth by the turning of the two corners.</start_of_turn>
Another form, more subtle and lighter, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of the teeth; And thus there are often six joints that are loosened, as you see, from a palm of length, and two of width;
And when you see the marrow open with all the instruments, if you make the woman sit down a little, hold the pieces still and the legs over then hold the six joints together in the marrow, and keep the instrument handle between her thighs; then grasp your hand with all the instruments, as if you have made the halters equally, according to the quantity you see the marrow opening, until it has finished doing what it wants to do.
These instruments are all very formidable, and their resemblance is multiplied; and when one beholds them appear, the work hastens, and the higher one's home is for their quantity.
If one does not desire the instrument unless it has appeared, for its necessity is not easily excused
When the second is retained in infancy, if you command the patient to retain its flank, and then make it cough up voluntarily, and you strain your hands to the mouth and nose; and if it leaps through that, well is it.
If not, take one pot and make a hole or cut, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the mare, like chamomile, rue, anis, camomile, cassia and centaury.
All these herbs, or some of them, whether cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put in a caustic or cut at the bottom of the pot, and the other at the mouth of the mare.
leave the mark until the vapor comes out of the mare; then make her cough, as we have said. If the second joint is sprained, If it remains after this treatment and is not better, as the physician orders, she should moisten her left hand with oil of sesame or almond oil, and then restore it to its natural position.
and grasp it firmly and extend it forward and backward, so that the mark does not bleed during extraction; but must move gently forward and backward, and then treat the wound. If it comes out and is dried up.
And if the mouth of the marrow is infected, as we have mentioned, for the cure we have said, fumigation of herbs.
and if it is not from all that we have said, if you keep using it for treatment;
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marrow, you bind to the hip of the woman, and then plunge it with oil tetrafarmaçon;
if the pain persists and comes back, and there comes a bad smell from the stomach and head, and vomiting of the patient.
If it is necessary, then the fumigations that are useful for these: neither the former nor we have experienced fumigation with thyme and dried figs.
The form of the instrument is such that we fumigate the woman with the chest held to the chest and the secondine if it is this:
And it is like a cat, and we put on the head cover in the manner of a hare, and the large hair over the fire;
So that it cannot move and cannot move of its own movements.  And let the fumigations be on the charcoal, and the pitch as long as it is consumed, and start another one.
To pierce the foundation
When children are born who do not have their foundation firmly established, they are stamped with a subtle scab. Therefore you must drive the heel of the scab towards its root without causing further damage, and keep the opening closed so that it does not touch;
Then put on soft linen soaked in wine and oil, and then the ointment until it is healed.
If you doubt that it will not stay in place, if you put in or pull out a sponge of lead, and you leave your hands joined, and be still as when the beast has seen enough in the chamber.
Under no circumstances does this stupid thing come from the treatment of wounds or incisions; if you cover this up, if you do not cure it, as we have said with regard to the sponge of lead.</start_of_turn>
from the fistula at its root. those which arise from the foundation are nodular, and greater than those which arise from below the foundation, or between the two parts,
If there is a fistula or several; and when the swelling is ancient, if it is behind, and there is moisture with white or yellowish pus,
And never are these fistulas closed; and they are known by the one who makes them or by the discharge or swelling, when the patient makes discharge, and by chance when one jumps up.
And if there are fistulas that go up to the bladder, and up to half of the thigh; and they reach up to the hip joint, and up to the navel.
And thus one knows if the fistula is closed at its base, and does not go deeper: And it is that you bite your thumb or foundation, and insert a fine needle of spider or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if there is twisting, if you insert a blunt attempt of sponge, or hair of a horse, as long as you feel the attempt or the hair on your thumb;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no bleeding, no vomiting, no wind, as we have said: The bandages must not be too tight; if you hurry to cure.
When the fistula persists up to the bladder or the urine tube, if in leaping the urine escapes and cannot be retained by medicine.
If it is perceived up to the hip joint, if there is a vein there that has burst open; if there is no twisting and the pain is not violent, if there is any swelling at all, neither medicine nor treatment by fomentation is of any use.
and in these persistent fistulas there is no other cure than toil, and the folly of the fools who interfere with them
In that one which is neither new nor old, there is hope of health by fire, as I have seen.
and that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and the legs are stretched up to his thighs, and his thighs are inclined towards his belly. then attempt to stretch, or plunge if there is discomfort, until you feel the joints or the attempt comes.
if the patient feels it at the root, if you can, bite your thumb with your index finger,
He feels that it has been perceived; and whether it is discovered or you feel between your shoulder blade and your shoulder, then the limb that is painful is that which is affected. if it does not slip away immediately, it cannot be healed.</start_of_turn>
We can do everything we like, but this is difficult to bear.</start_of_turn
and if we do this, if we remove the cautery as we are told when the fistula is large, as it has been said before; And the rest of the fire surrounds the fistula, until it comes down from the foundation; do this once or twice, until you know that these hairs must be burnt, which are like a quill of oil.
Then the doctor applies soft sponges to burn away the hair, until the hairs are loosened, and then he closes the wound with stitches.</start_of_turn>
If it is well, that is good. But if not, it will not be well otherwise;
if he tries between, and does not reach the bottom which is or the foundation, and between his toe and the attempt there is a thick covering of hair or bandage, and you see the fistula at this which sustains the covering as before. If the head of the fistula comes loose at the start, and persists before the burn, and the burn is done afterwards, as long as it reaches the head of the attempt;
If the head of the fistula comes loose at the start, and persists before the burn, and the burn is done afterwards, as long as it reaches the head of the attempt;  it will be delivered from the attempt, and will be cured.  Then command those who carry the burdens that seem like a sparrow's droppings, and leave nothing behind.</start_of_turn>
And if it does not go well for you, and if there is a break between you and the work, if the burn is done by fire or medicine is applied.</start_of_turn
For the burn of fire brings together two things: namely, the burning of these bones together, and the inflammation of blood and the drying of moisture;
Then the cure for soft swellings filled with pus, either in burn or in broiled chaff, as long as the liquid flows downwards, and is seen to push out the char of fire downwards;
Then the cure for the wound of the suppurating abscesses with hard char, and the dry medicines are sufficient.</start_of_turn>
For when it is restored, if it is healed and does not return.</start_of_turn>
And if a fistula comes up to the foundation, and is expelled from the flesh, if the bone or foundation is fractured, inquire about this.</start_of_turn>
If you feel the urge, and between sleep and waking is the thread or the spit or the hair, or if it is near to bursting, if there is no other way but flight and hope, by the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you bind it tightly until it bursts, or if you must, if you put your hand to it and cure it as before.
and do not go too quickly, for you must not cover the tenant who holds the foundation, and bring out the discharge in the natural order of things.</start_of_turn> Then the cure, as we have said;
Then the cure, as we have said; Then the cure, as we have said; by chance if it is well, or you loosen that covering and the mucus then when it is cut from its root, or by hook or by other pointed instrument. Then defend this wound which is in the wound, as you wish;
Then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the lower part of the root: if there is anything more delicate for the patient.
And never are fistulas like this: when you bite the lump in the fistula, and it is either cost with a wound at the bottom of the skin under, ...if it takes hold with a wound at the head according to this fashion. And always break the thread twice, and hold the lump throughout the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
...and if it has pierced the bottom or foundation, then draw out the thread of that which has pierced, as you bite your thumb or foundation.
And draw out the head of the arm, and reunite the two bones together, and strain one against the other, and leave it hanging there for a while.
And do not restrict it at any time, until the limb has overcome these pains that are between two bones, and is straightened.
Then cure the wound until it is healed and healthy.
If the fistula does not break through, if you make it break through in every way you can, it will not be too thick.
For it is not worth making the dressing too tight if they are inflamed, and then the cure must be as we have said, until they are healed.
The shape of the spiny bladder from which the fistula is made is moist and one part is split and trenchant.</start_of_turn> and on the other hand not, for if you see this you must not tighten it.</start_of_turn
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc. Injuries are of two kinds: when they are deep-seated, like grains of resin, and are small or large; or when they are close to the surface of the skin. And when there is one or more of them, they break the foundation and the top of the foundation; but those which are broken have much moisture.
and are accompanied by an abscess or a yellowish fluid or blood, and have a yellow color.
And the treatment for these things that are inside the foundation, if you command the patient to rise up to leave the bed, as long as the foundations are firm, and it appears clear; then if you hurry, and you hold them with your nails, or you hold them by your finger, then you must pull them out at the roots.</start_of_turn>
and if the wound does not hold by its moisture, if you take hold of it with a bandage, or a cloth, or a piece of chamote.</start_of_turn and you must pull out the wound, then you must cauterize it, and powder over it warm powders that are in lieu of cautery.</start_of_turn> ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;
or you cauterize them as it is said or according to the master of cautery, and then cure them of other cures while they are well;
you cannot make the patients suffer, and if their threads are for the foundation, if it is a slight cure; or you grasp them with your finger or tweezers, and hold them, and then cure them as we have said, while they are well, and that you avoid the incision with fire.
If you are certain that you have brought the suture according to this manner: take one thread, pierce it with a needle, and then pass the thread under and through the eye of the needle, and twist the two ends of the thread together at the base of the needle. if it is large; and strain the thread firmly, then knot the thread, remove the needle, and secure all the others, and leave one to correct the excess blood;
then put upon the foundation one moist bandage of rose oil or cerate, and put upon the foundation, and command the patient to rest;
And then you leave them until they snap; and when they snap, if the treatment of ointment and other remedies, while they are still healthy.
until the fire has consumed the hair or root.</start_of_turn> Many times there is the loosening of the bowels by the intestines, and by the constricting of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is of no avail.</start_of_turn
If you are aware that you have reached the point of a hair or to the nail of the nail of the skin, which does not allow it to moisten; Then heal him as long as he is sore, if it is necessary;
and if he cannot be calmed, if you must repeat the burn more strongly than before, until he is quiet and still, be guided. Then heal him as long as he is sore.
when he is calm. Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont.
Formice is a small appearance that appears before the body, and goes out from within; and never does its true nature grieve, and is perceived as if dead, and comes into all the limbs, and more on the hands than any other part.
And the cure for it is if you take a leech of a hen’s foot, or a large leech of a vulture, and put that leech on the wound, as long as the wound circles round the limb entirely; then twist your hand all the way around until you can cover the wound all around, and put it out from within, and pull out the wound from its roots.
And if you see that it is done with a spider or iron in this fashion, and be quiet and attentive beneath:
And if you see that it is done with a spider or iron in this fashion, and be quiet and attentive beneath, do not move, for it must be held firmly and pressed. And if you see that the fire cautery has arrived, if it is before or alongside the cautery book.
of this fashion. Never is silver or gold wire, or molten spider or enamel made; and never are these small and great instruments made in this fashion, as they are brought.
Those who suffer from ailments that are feeble and painful are small.
Their form is small and great if they are soft, or the belly is tight according to this manner:
and there is swelling or the belly is pressed, as you see, and the limb is either pierced or broken; and there is a break on one side or the other.
and either the belly or the physician puts medicines inside a bladder or parchment, or breaks all around the wound
And there must be between each perforation an interval of space, then pass through these perforations a strong thread of strong thread twisted in a cross or entangled, and assemble the belly as if it were a nail. And when the medicine is inside, if the thread has in front of it a strong thread, then twist; and this is the form of a circle:
And let the medicine neither too hot nor too cold, and join the head of the clamp with oil or balm of egg, or a similar thing, then tighten it lightly;
Then grasp the patient with his two hands assembled, until he is quite visible, then withdraw the clamp, and let the patient rest his legs at leisure,
If the physician sees that the limb is better, if the pain is less severe; and if he has slept all night without any pain, it is a greater aid.
If he does it in the morning when the patient is suffering from the discharge of the belly, and the physician arrives quickly, if he can do so while he is still sane.</start_of_turn>
And if there is bruising or swelling, or an abscess, if he can do the cathing as subtly as a child.</start_of_turn
and this is the form of the subtle cathing above which the skin is not strained.</start_of_turn
wounds
We have already mentioned in the previous chapter the treatment of wounds; or rather the treatment of hands and surgery, according to the accomplishment.
I say that wounds are various depending on how they are made, and depending on the parts or wounds that are made, and how they are made
The things by which wounds are made are by the bite of a stone, and the size of a spear or nail, or of a lance or fist or spit or something similar;
When the cause of the wound is known, as when a wound occurs on the neck, or the head, or the arm, or the belly, or the liver, or similar parts of the body;
When the cause of the wound is known, as when a wound occurs on the neck, or the head, or the arm, or the belly, or the liver, or similar parts of the body, I shall tell you of the cure for a simple wound and begin with wounds of the head alone, for the memory will return in its chapter.</start_of_turn>
I say that when a simple wound comes or the head, and the bone is not broken, if you take care that there is no cracking of bone or anything of the kind, and the skin is completely ruptured and the wound is large,  </start_of_turn And you doubt the wound above: if you do it too soon after the injury, even if blood comes from the wound itself, or if the blood comes from the opposite side of the wound;
and listen carefully to the patient's swelling of wine and meat.
And if he does not see an improvement, if he is to faint meat, and does not drink wine, does not eat bread;
and take out the wound, if it is infected, cover the abscess with a soft cloth soaked in rose oil only, or in styptic wine.
If there is no surrounding tissue around the wound, place it directly on the wound while it is still fresh with all its blood; it is not moved by air, dust, or anything else.
If it has already moved, place over it some soft materials until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if the wound is large like a nail and similar, and the flesh does not naturally reunite, if you reunite it with stitches, as I will say for wounds in the belly, with sutures.</start_of_turn>
If the wound is exposed to bone, and is split open, and only hangs by a thread, if it is grasped; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore flesh in place of leather.</start_of_turn And command the patient to eat plenty of solid foods, such as testicles and bread, also poultry, and similar things.
And if you find or see corruption of the flesh, and it is not on the bone, if you grasp it firmly and pull it out, then cure it.</start_of_turn>
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stayed by medicine, if you see the artery, and if you find it dislocated, grasp it with a thread.</start_of_turn And if this does not help, if you must, cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, if it is a mild cure: then you shall apply this powder which makes them adhere as soon as they have moved.
And the manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon’s blood three parts; quicklime two parts, and mix the powder thoroughly apply the powder to the wound, and hold it firmly, until it is well aired and reunited with all its blood.
then bind it firmly, and leave it to heal, if it does not swell; for we do not renew the medicine until it is healed.
And never do we do this charcoal burn only, when there is no incense nor blood of a dragon, but that the wound has not moved.
And if the wound has moved itself, even in this state, if you do not put on this powder immediately;
but put on some medicinal unguents or poultices made of oatmeal flour and honey, until it oozes blood; then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
And if a fracture occurs with the wound, and it is small, if you extract the foreign body cautiously;
Then I will tell you later about fractures of the skull.
of the neck wound.
The wound comes from the neck and is simple, if there is no difference between it and the fracture of the skull, but if the artery is severed or the neck is fractured
If this is the cause, if there is no other remedy except to leave the wound open, do not put anything restrictive, for it will worsen the wound and cause it to shrink; Do not put anything rough on the wound, for the nature of the wound is cold, and the continuation of its pain is with the marrow, which is the hardest substance in the body.
but if there is any medicine, such as molten chalice bathed in sweet water, mixed with rose oil, and rue washed in sweet water, and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moist ointments.
If the wound is large, if the edges are torn and bent, then the cure must be prolonged until it is healed.
If the wound is deep and swollen, if there is swelling or pus below the surface; if the hole is wide or deeper than low
If an artery is severed, and blood flows out, if the swelling, the tissue, and the cautery mix together;
if the shoulder blade is dislocated, or the arm is fractured, and the limb is kept still, so that the meat is not damaged, If the thumb touches the skin of the throat at the base of the jaw, and do not touch the throat itself but only restore it to its natural position. And then the strain will follow immediately, and leave them hanging for some days, and then cure them of itching pains as long as they are healed;
And if the wound has made an imprint in the bone, if that be the case; and if there are pieces of bone, if the broken parts are too large to be removed, and if you do not remove them, they will remain as long as the wound persists. And let the dislocation be freed and aligned at the source.
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle with powder as I have said before.</start_of_turn> And if there is bone in the wound and there is fistula, cut as I have said in this chapter.</start_of_turn>
of a wound from a lance or knife.</start_of_turn
If it is a wound from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, look if there is any wind blowing; if the patient cannot remain alive: remove the arrows then, for the wound is mortal.
If it is not deep and is fresh throughout its extent, if you do not put in at the first hour the powder, do not bind it up for the sake of the wound that does not hurt more by being left open. and return to the body, and keep the patient still; but I put an absorbent dressing, and bind it once;
And if you do not have any ointment, put into the wound a great quantity of cotton to soak up the moisture.
And keep the patient quiet over the wound for two or three days, or more.</start_of_turn> if there is no spasm, do not move the limb or cause any shivering; and when you see the bones in their place, if the wound is saved.</start_of_turn Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;
Heal the swelling of boils and other cures, as long as it is healthy;
And if the wound is from an incision of a spear or knife, and it is simple or deep, frontally or backwards, if the treatment of this one is before;
and if it is great, it is sutured; and if it is small, it is powdered, and if it is pressed against the bone, and if there is any break in the bone, if you want the wound to heal, and the surrounding tissues if they are loosened; And if they are not evacuated, if he leaves them unhealed, if he allows the extraction;
And otherwise, as for other wounds as for other limbs, it is the judge’s decision as we have said.</start_of_turn>
But about the loosening of the belly...
The loosening of the belly is great and middle-sized and small;
From great wound comes no time for the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, because of the introduction of worms.
and the costure is more painful, and never is worth more than a little wound than a great one,
because of this, one must reinsert the intestines more than once if they are not to be reintroduced bit by bit; because the intestines swell so much that they feel the pain, if they are reintroduced too quickly,
And for this reason, the spleen is worth more than all wounds, for in this case we must keep the intestines in their place as before.
And the swelling that appears in the belly is in three ways:
the three common causes are in the costure of the belly,
and the costure of other wounds of bone and other costures specific are common to other wounds;
And all these things are better with a stitch in the belly, and I shall say a word and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestines is pressing, and the parts are drawn together by one of these methods: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, Or for that the intestine is swollen by the fruit.
And when it is cold, evacuate its contents in a piecemeal fashion.</start_of_turn> wet a sponge or, if you wish, a towel dipped in cold water only, or you will cook in boiling water stinging and spiky, And thus the intestine came out as far as the belly was bony;
And never did this wine restrict it [the intestine], and was mute as if it were under pressure to cause it to expand.</start_of_turn>
And when you see the belly swelling, if the water of the intestine is too cold or the meat is cooked and bad, because by this is the entrance to many things;
If it cannot enter, if one makes a hole in the wound with the instrument, we hold the clots together.
The first treatment is mute, that is to say, as small as possible, as one should not make great incision without necessity;
and that is the instrument for cutting:
If the shoulder hangs in the armpit and will not come out, and when this is the case, it must be known.
And when the wound is swollen, and the intestines protrude, if it is reset according to its natural form in its own place, but if this fails, for this is worth nothing.
When the wound is large and is in the lower part of the belly, if you can manage to make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly,
and thus if the shoulder is dislocated downwards in one of the two parts.</start_of_turn> then let the upper part of the limb be higher than the lower.</start_of_turn>
and thus I command you to do in wounds large and deep.</start_of_turn>
Small wounds cause this that thou seest appearing.
Then keep between your hands, pity the poor thing that holds all the way through its hand, and gather the limbs. that is the common method of stitching together.
that is the common method of stitching together. And take an awl or more, according to the quantity of the wound's size. then leave some space around the wound, i.e. about the width of a thumb, and insert an awl or if there is a lot of flesh, a needle with strong thread; and pierce the two layers of skin with the two layers of fat,
then the strain of a doubled thread around the hook of three parts, then assemble the three bones of the wound successively,
and then leave one space, and insert another hook; Then the thread should be as fine as the first needle, and do not stop doing that until you have done as many needles as you have been told. until all the wounds are restrained;
and the needles be moderate, between soft and hard, For the subtle needles pierce all the flesh, and the too large ones if they do not enter well: therefore it is necessary that they be blunt.
and must not be forced too deeply into the flesh and skin,
causing them to penetrate and open the wound before the suture;
Then hold the head of the pins of the needles, so that they do not hurt the patient while he sleeps. and I put tents or cloths over the head of the pins of the needles to hold them, and leave them until the wound is healed.
and this way of stitching is more convenient for small wounds, For there is often an awl or something sharp.
The second costure is common. and that you assemble the awls of leather and the awls of bone together with an awl or there is a strong thread between them; when you have pierced these things through all together,
when you have pierced these things through all together, If you remember the needle at the part where you began, in the way that we commenced, it will cost you dearly.
and put an interval between the stitches the thickness of a nut of a minor kind.</start_of_turn>
this stitch will hold the flesh.</start_of_turn
and I sew a wound like this which has a hump or belly,
Who was the owner of the knife? and the wound was more than a palm wide and the intestines were very well filled with great things,
and the wound was in the belly. I will restore the intestines when they have been out for .xxiiij. hours.
The wound was sutured for .xv. days, and the patient recovered well.</start_of_turn>
And the madman thought he would die, and this was a miracle;
and did not cure him of the wound, for I am in a place where there is no medicine, neither any remedies; And the method more effective for the wound is to put mustard plaster on nine times the size of the wound, and to bathe with a honey-infused liquid until it heals.
Or thus I shall tell you the nine proper methods of stitching:
take the needle and pass it from the underside up to this depth;
when it has pierced the knot on the right side, if you let go of the needle, it will slip or wrinkle or you will have pushed the needle through,
And the fire burns from the inside outwards until it escapes;
And understanding of this chapter is that if you do as a leatherworker does with the skin, and leaves once the hair from one side, and takes it back from the other, until the hair has grown completely.
The second method of treatment is that of Galiens, which is done properly,
If it is so that no one does it, who can reassemble the injured parts naturally. and join one of the ends to the other end, in a moderate way:
insert a needle or hook nearby, and pierce that part only, and leave the ends of the bone in place; Then draw the needle and make it pierce from the lower part until it reaches the cavity, as indeed done with the scapula.</start_of_turn>
then pierce the other from the lower part until it reaches the cavity, through other bones of the shoulder blade that are on the opposite side;
and this is the common method of treatment and the most common.</start_of_turn>
Foreign tongues are silent, and no witness bears,
we must suture the belly with needles, or there is thread in the flesh;
and we must push one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds;
the fire must only be ignited as much as is necessary, and we must not keep it lit for longer than necessary. If the stitch is more painful than any other on the belly.
The wound is judged as being as severe as any other wound.</start_of_turn>
and that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even if it has moved, if you stop the intestine and the gut; then put on the powder that stops bleeding.</start_of_turn>
if you stop the intestine and the gut; then put on the powder that stops bleeding.</start_of_turn> And if it has moved, if you put on no dressing that is present, until the wound has healed; and the thread will go, and be bound to the silk, and the mark will remain. then cure the wound like the others, until it is healed;
and if you have no medicines, if you put on, as long as it starts to heal well, cotton wool, And the limb will move again once the joint is healed.
For you need no other medicine in addition to these arrangements when the wounds are simple.
and if you doubt that the wound does not make common cause with the principal limb, if you must moisten linen cloth in warm oil, or in rose oil, And put the thumbs inside the armpits, and loosen the buttocks.
And if he feels pain or swelling in the belly, and many times it happens, if the clisterize of black wine are tough, and the swelling comes right up to the intestines;
and the belly is pierced, and the intestines like when the large intestines are greater;
The intestines which are called "jeuns" cannot heal when they are swollen. It is because of the swelling of the veins and the brittleness of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
And if the gut leaps out of the wound, if it is reset backwards just as the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is yellow or black, if you can see that you should bind the black part, that there is no evacuation of blood, For there are veins and arteries;
and between them are the bones. and put the joints loose from the part below the wound until they are aligned when the bones are cut, and the wound is bound.</start_of_turn>
except for the root of the boil.</start_of_turn
When the intestine is round and the wound is small, if one can restore it easily in its place.
because I see that one has been struck by a stone or a spear;
and the wound was at the side of the stomach, And was filled up and became fistula, and in this there was the egestion and the swelling.
And I made the cure accordingly, and did not cease until it was healed, and the patient rejoiced.</start_of_turn>
And when I saw it healed, I doubted whether the patient had suffered any damage in his belly.</start_of_turn and there was no more harm, but remained in better condition, eating and drinking.</start_of_turn
And they say that whenever there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be ligated in a timely manner. Then take tweezers from the great testicles, and gather the lips of the wound, and when the tweezers have opened the mouth, if it has gone over the two lips,
Then he grasps the head once more, afterwards in the same way as before, until the wound is fully healed;
and he grasps the wound If the head of the intestine is split, and there is no further nuisance to the patient,
And if one can bind the intestine with a fine thread which is cut from the intestine of a beast,
it must be done carefully. cut the top of this thread of intestine so that it is free, and then tie the top of this thread to a fine thread of linen, Then draw the thread through the eye of the needle, and in knot the intestine, and keep it in the groove;
And this manner of stitching of flesh is not fierce except according to the way of the fiance and of hope;
And if the wound is great and wide, even if it is in one of the great intestines, if there is no other remedy, except for subtility.
or that it should be cut out. Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule». Sores that are upon any wound or incision, when they break, if it be called universally a fistula,
and fistula is according to truth a necessary hardening and blanching, or one does not feel pain, and is just as chewed as the quill of a bird;
And never in clear water did it bow, and sometimes it was wide open. Never in shallow water did it bend, and sometimes it was widely open.
and as I have already mentioned concerning wounds, that every wound that is not cleansed will fester, and there is pus, it is only cured by eight things:
It is known that by slight pressure of blood or flesh; or by its malice; or because there is hardness within and upon the limbs, that does not allow them to grow. or because there is too much bowe; When the limb is put in, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment.</start_of_turn> or because corruption is rampant like pestilence.</start_of_turn> or because the properties of the region are late in digestion, and late in health, and flee by nature.</start_of_turn Or if there are veins or bones:
Or if there are veins or bones, I have already mentioned these causes, their signs, and the cures of medicines in this division.
Or you should know that I will tell you the cure for fistula, which is made by the work of hands.
There are wounds of fistula in all limbed with pain; For there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves. or at the spleen, or the intestine, or the bladder, or at some of the ribs, or at the scapula of the shoulder, or at any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is no remedy except toil and ignorance.
and if there is no fistula that does not arise except just as I have said, and you have promised remedy, and you see that it persists, if you take an attempt to drain or burn it, if the fistula is straight, if it is so;
and if the fistula is tortuous, if the root of a subtle attempts to sink, For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
and if they burst through the skin and you cannot well close them with stitches, if the limb is dislocated by one of the holes,
for moisture is very strong from one hole to another, and softens it.
Then when the wound is open, know if there are bones or nerves, and if it is closed with a staple,
Then when the wound is open, know if there are bones or nerves, and if it is closed with a staple, ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press your hand, and where he feels it;
then you will truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or a vein, or in other parts that I have mentioned, if the wound agrees with what I have said.
or in other parts that I have mentioned, if the wound agrees with what I have said. And bones for fractures and corrupted carts that are within. And then the treatment until it is healed,
and if the fistula is well deep in the right place, if you must cope with it, as you must, then I put soft stitches in medicine again, and I keep them in place until the fistula is healed to the top of the fistula,
then I put soft stitches in medicine again, and I keep them in place until the fistula is healed to the top of the fistula, As long as the medicine removes the superfluous that is dissolved at the root.
and then it puts ointment in oily substance, as long as it is sound;
and if it is not sound by this, if we must cauterize as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted by fistula, we must amputate it. If the vein or artery or main members do not grieve or swell, as we have said;
and if the bone is broken, and there is corruption and blackness, if the limb remains as long as the corruption is complete, then the physician must do things that are useful until the limb is healed;
if it does not heal, and returns as before, Saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:
Soaked towels that you do not wish to remove until they are soft. restore the limb entirely, and then reset the dislocation.
And if it is thus well, that is good. If not, take note that if corruption is too great in their parts, you will not be able to do anything further. if there is no other remedy except to leave it to nature;
and if there is even a slight fracture, and you try to treat it with forceps, if the instrument is not suitable for this,
If there be any bone that remains fractured, if the bones are bruised, do not leave it untouched;
if moisture opposes you, and there is no fault or fear, if bone and moisture and swelling are present, and deliver the bones.
and if you do not remove them at an opportune moment, if there is something foreign in the wound causing decay, And let them remain until the bones are well positioned around them.
And thus if they are moved more easily, the bones will be better placed;
and if it is a large bone, as an arm or a thigh, if the wound is so slight that the marrow is all bony, Then restore the wound;
and if there is a great part of corruption, and comes up to the marrow of the bone. if you can cover it with a bandage and cover all until the corruption is gone, and then treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you of a fistula that had a hair in its leg, If you take example and help in your work.
There once was a young man who was about .xxx. years old, who had pain in his leg due to something that came from within his body.
as long as the matter came to the leg, and was driven out by a great abscess, and there was no apparent cause to open;
but they did much damage to the abscess on opening And in corrupting matter, it becomes a fistula, and there comes out matter that fills the bowel and moisture of pus;
And remains there for a year, and there is no wise man in the art of healing.</start_of_turn>
until I recall it, and I see the limb and the medicines which were used to treat it.</start_of_turn and that which came out through the wounds has great pain; And became red the body of the youth, and had the color of citrine.
I made an attempt in one of these holes, and then encircled all the holes,
and found that one found the other throughout the limb.
I hurried then, and cut in one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, And the wound was corrupted and smelled, and it went up to the very bone inside;
I saw that which appeared to me from the corrupt bone, and I believed that there was no other corruption except for that which I had seen
and I began to restore the wound with long tension of medicines so that I could not suture it.
and I found the bone just as before,
And I found the corruption continuing in the bone, the marrow, and then the bone itself, and I thought of soldering the limb.
but I could not do anything except that I saw a tremor in the bone, and the marrow burst out whole, then I restored it with medicine; and it was healed and soldered immediately.
and did not order to continue the work for the weakness of the patient, who was unable to endure it, And for fear of death that I shun from him. For in the evacuation of blood often occurs, but he remained whole and sound,
For in the evacuation of blood often occurs, but he remained whole and sound, and the bones became firm, and were in good position and not painful or harmful in any way, neither to the patient nor to the physician.
and stretch the head, so that you can remove the corrupt cartilage below, And uncover the sleeve over the limb or where you see silk, so that the silk does not stain the sleeve. And put one sponge or a bowl soaked in vinegar on the bone to cover the corrupted flesh And cover so much silk as one can see and feel the corruption, and cover it again.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, If the limb is uncovered completely; then put one thumbstone inside.
If the limb is uncovered completely; then put one thumbstone inside.
and if the swelling is in the joint, if you break the corrupted joint, and bind the bone that contains the other part;
and if the swelling is in the continuation of the two joints, if there is no other vessel but that of cover;
If the dislocation is caused by a corruption of the hand or by a wound on the foot, if either is very severe, But in all these cases you must inquire about the origin of the corruption, how it appeared to you. and confirm the state of all the veins and nerves, but that they do not impede you;
and that the incisions and sutures surrounding the bones are many, in accordance with the position of the bones and the appearance of swelling. And their greatness and their delicacy, and their magnitude and their smallness, and their hardness; And therefore it is prudent to appear with some semblance of work to deceive it.
and the stitches which the work will show you are the instruments you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and their power and their counsel; If you think the instrument is appropriate for the case, then use it as you deem fit.
If you think the instrument is appropriate for the case, then use it as you deem fit. The head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, or by force, or by a wound.
and when you have treated the wound with medicines, it does no good If it is necessary to cover that limb up to the root or if the decay comes, If the patient escapes by this means of death, or by the malice, which is greater, the defect of the limb.
If the patient escapes by this means of death, or by the malice, which is greater, the defect of the limb. and the limb becomes black, as if burnt by fire, and afterwards the blackness, then comes the corruption of the limb part by part, And take hold of the whole body; if you are in a hurry,
and if there is percussion from venomous beasts, like scorpions of the sea and vipers and the like.
if the bite is on the head, do not give it any space to come until the hand arrives.
and if it comes as far as the hand, if the bite has reached the joint, so that the dislocation does not reach the arm;
And if it comes to the arm, if the hook grasps the shoulder; and if the shoulder slips past the hook, that is death. And it is worth nothing but the quantity of its virtue;
and all that one does when the corrosion comes or the bone: if it comes to the first joint, if the hook afterwards the other joint;
and if it comes to bone or marrow, if the hook grasps all the marrow; And if it (the hair) mounts on the leg, if it touches the knee joint;
and if it comes from under the knee, if there is no other injury except that the patient is left dead.
and the limb is thus bound up with thread or cloth so that it is held in place.</start_of_turn> and extend one hand towards the navel and the other towards the head, And you shall dissect the bone that is between the two joints at a broad space, until the bone is revealed.
Then you shall grasp or hold the bone, and put a cushion part of a linen cloth, so that the bone does not touch the sound flesh. and come to the patient other lesions and incisions.
and if blood comes out when you work, if you cauterize the tissue sufficiently, or thou dost put upon some restraining powders; then return to thy medicine until it be accompanied.
then keep the limb steady with a firm bandage, and treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you about a home remedy for it:
there was a black mark that seemed to burn with fire,
And that corrosion first begins in the marrow of bone, as soon as it possesses the whole bone.
And when the bone has seen the corrosion, if it covers the bone and is sound;
and long after the corrosion or hand has returned, it comes back to me,
and I put upon it things that impede the corrosion after the excision of the ulcer, and I cannot stop the corrosion.
And he said to me, "I will hold your hand, and I will not fear, for I hope to recover the matter." And indeed I also doubt that if I cut off your hand, he will not die, because the strength of the man is weak; and he awakens all, and returns to his land, and he covered his hand, and was healed.
And I have not heard of this fire treatment for anything other than that which is necessary.
Never has an abscess burst in my presence without causing great swelling of the tissue and then breaks and bursts, and in its bursting it tears the skin, and swells the surrounding flesh, as if it were blood vessels; and the pain and fear of the patient are great, for he can no longer move his limb. And do not move further than the bone, neither to the nerve, for such ailments are called "sain".
but if it is so prolonged that it reaches the bone and bursts through, it is called "fistula".
and if you cover that skin thoroughly, and even when it is subtle, like a piece of cloth; And it does not matter to me for its corruption.
And if you are certain that the leather has spoiled, and the corruption is not in its depth, and the leather is thick of hair, if the cure of blisters is enough for it:
look if there are any large veins, and if there is any swelling that smells of decay, Then the plaster of Egyptian medicine which is thus made: Take beeswax, oil, and beeswax, equally, and melt them together in a vessel over the fire. Until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take as much as you need, and make it with water and honey, And in clipping the skin, and straining the opening; and leave the medicine in place for an hour and a half, then withdraw it while squeezing.</start_of_turn>
do this several times, until the skin is loosened and the bone is loosened.</start_of_turn
never use water from the well. When this remedy is not present, and you take remnants of must of grapes, and drink water cold,
then let it flow, and gargle, until you feel that the pain has gone;
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the must of grapes will help. if you gargle with water and honey or there is a little bit of broth; Or thou shalt anoint it with honey and wine mixed, that the honey hath the property of softening and cleansing. and the wine doth dry the flesh;
and when thou hast done this, and hast bound that the flesh is well softened, then thou shalt anoint it with oil of lilies or with vinegar of violets or with other things that may cause it to swell; and thou shalt leave it on for half an hour or more, until it is soft and pliable to the touch.
And it is that you take plaster of Paris, and make it with rose oil and wine. Or you can mix it with certain medicines and unguents, of which I have spoken, or treat with unguents;
and if there is pus within is small, and the opening of the plaster will not enter, if there is swelling from a wound, and puts in an attempt of Egyptian unguent, Or when the hair at the base is pricked, as much as it is elongated;
Or when the hair at the base is pricked, as much as it is elongated; and if the wound is too large, if the eye and the corner leave too much space, the clot or the pus can enter.
Or when the hair at the base is pricked, as much as it is elongated; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. For when the hair at the base is pricked, as much as it is elongated; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. And if you do not cover your wounds as you see, it will protrude downwards to the lowest point.
and if you do not cover your wounds as you see, If the limb appears limp: let it bend gently backward, and do not leave any hair; and take consolidating medicines to bring down the swelling.</start_of_turn>
and cover the area with a linen drape that covers the entire area.</start_of_turn then tighten the area around the opening of the wound a little wider than before, After that, the swelling is soft upon one side, and the other hangs limply according to the quantity of blood that has been lost. and he puts it upon the wound to align the limb, and does not remove the great swelling until after one has once;
and that which is outside the wound often helps to restore the limb, and these things which are rotten or putrid from the limb, if it is poison or putrefaction, or digestion, or indigestion;
And take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not.
and when your medicine has reached its limit and you see the nature of the leap over the opening of the body. if the veins of the breasts have already burst, and approach the sanctuary;
then loosen it in the morning, or the third day, and when you have loosened the wound, If the limb is changed for another drapeil, and renewed its order.
And if it feels sick with a sudden vomiting after eating, its saliva that it does not taste sweet.</start_of_turn> And if subtle poisons come after a long tension, if it does not stir me from the sickness,
because there are some people who linger in their ailments, and those who make them worse;
And if he lies still, his bowels grow dull and sluggish after eating, his urine is dark; it is clear that his body suffers.
And if he lies still, his bowels grow dull and sluggish after eating, and are swollen, if he has taken too many medicines that are moist in substance and dry in effect if there is too much of this diaphoresis, because there is a great amount of vitriol in it, and that is the last medicine.
take diaphoresis, and make it with rose oil, and the rose of one vine is equal in substance;
Then the ointment and use; and this very thing makes honey better adhere to the wound, when there is no swelling present,
or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them, and sprinkle them over the honey when it is taken off the fire; and then apply one bandage, and take it out of the wound, and never give an ointment for a long time. And the root of heavenly lilies, which is as fine as flour sometimes and a hundredth part;
And the root of heavenly lilies, which is as fine as flour sometimes and a hundredth part; and in the use of simples or compounds: grind them and make powder, and put honey on it that I have said, and use it.</start_of_turn> and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure,
and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, then the wounds grow corrupt and leave marks on the bone, or cause stiffness, or looseness; If the surgeon performs the fistula cure, as we mentioned earlier.
from the opening of the vein.
Panarice is an abscess that arises from the swelling of the hand pouch or sometimes from an injury.
And when it is urgent, and we take no heed, if it comes to an abscess at the root of the hair, then hold the abscess steady and grasp the hair as close to the root as possible; by chance you will grasp the hair entirely.</start_of_turn>
and comes the pain right up to the bone, so that there is great pain; the limb is pale and swollen.</start_of_turn>
when you have treated it as we have said before, and the cure does not help, If you must cope with it, do all that is superfluous which is removed from the bone. Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is a great aid when the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy;
then the nail presses the marrow toward the bone, and begins to prick, and the blood boils, If you think that I command you to hold the hair at its root, do not prick it with your finger. and hold the eye firmly and steadily, and grasp this hair gently and lightly.</start_of_turn> and apply the remaining hair medicines that are burning and corrosive to remove all;
And if the decay is in the bone, if it is brittle and breaks easily, for as much as the corrupted bone is, it cannot be healed.
If you see the bone decaying, if it breaks in this place as it is before said, then you must cure it as much as possible;
and if it is feverish, swollen, and causes great pain, you must consider healing it first; Then pierce the spleen with a sharp needle through and through,
and guard that the wound does not go deeper than the rib which is below the spleen, for the patient would feel too much pain;
and if there is [further] bleeding, put something above which will soothe.
Two thumbs are born in the hands of some men by chance, and are always fleshy. and by chance they have a part where there is bone, and never a nail.</start_of_turn>
and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in the bones of us two thumbs.</start_of_turn> they never move again. And thus that which is born at the shoulder joint, by chance changes its position.
its size is slight, in part only noticeable: its size is like that of the root of a large spindle.
That which is born at the root of the shoulder joint is grief to cure: if you keep it covered.
When he is born or must in the rear not, if you must copy first the round bone until the bone, When he is born or must at the rear not, if you must copy first the round bone until the bone, then copy the bone to a suitable breadth at this point, then cure it until it is sound.
The wounds that come from birth, or from a wound, or from the burn of fire, or from similar things.
If you must copy that wound, if it must repair according to its natural forms; Then put between two bands or cloths soaked in rose oil, which do not stick. Or you put between two pieces of soft lead, as long as the bones are soldered, if it is necessary.</start_of_turn>
When it comes to the bones of the forearm, with the palm, if they are soldered, if they are not soldered, they will break.
Villages
The veins are large blood vessels covered in greasy melancholy humours, which come with many painful swellings of the limbs.
and more are found in the legs of those who walk and work and bear burdens, than in others.
It is therefore necessary that you do not give them any purgatives of bile, and then the remainder of the nourishment.
Iron is cured in two ways: one is with vinegar and the other with soot; And thus, if you bind up the vein and press firmly,
Then, if you bind up the vein and press firmly, then strain the limb of the patient from the buttock down to the knee joint; then bind up the vein in one, two, or three places, of a large size,
Then believe and apply force for the black blood to your hand, from the thumb to the little finger, as much as there is without causing harm to the patient who can suffer;
And then hold it [the blood vessel] steady, and instruct that he grasp flesh encompassing the black vein.</start_of_turn>
Repeat the evacuation and bleeding until the veins are full, and do no harm to the patient.</start_of_turn>
The nourishment of this kind is as follows: renew the limb of the patient if there is hair, Then he puts it in the bath, and he raises the limb of hot water until it turns red, and swells the veins.
If there is no bath, if he throws a burn on the fire, and then puts a compress on the vein from the loin to the knee or in the part below the ankle.
Then he covers the skin with ointment, and tightens the vein from the armpit downwards, until it bursts when you feel it;
and you see it red and black, and when it comes out it looks like a white thread.
Then stretch the limb outward, until it is free from the skin, and then close with a slight pressure,
Then stretch the limb outward, until it is free from the skin, and then close with a slight pressure; then support the skin over the wound until it is closed.</start_of_turn> Then stretch the limb outward, until it is free from the skin, and then close with a slight pressure; then support the limb at the root, as you have done before, and close with another bandage, as you did before.</start_of_turn>
Then stretch the limb outward, until it is free from the skin, and then close with a slight pressure; then support the limb at the root, and close with another bandage; then stretch the limb again, and close with a bandage at the end.</start_of_turn
Then the trace and hold until the second size; then the extraction of size by size, until it is all gone, then the closing.
and if you do not trace and lift it, if there remains an awl at every thread, and hold the thread and trace, and if there are drops .i. rain, keep your hand from one side and the other, until it is gone. and do not let it close, for if it closes, if we cannot trace or lift it, there will be damage to the patient.
When you have finished treating it, if you take out the limb from the wound covered with soft wool in wine and rose oil; and cure it until it is healed.
When the limb is stiff and twisted and bound together, and it is not straight, as we have said, If you must bend it forcefully, but do not bind it; and treat it as we have mentioned before.
If you must bend it forcefully, but do not bind it; and treat it as we have mentioned before. The shape of the iron from which the limb is bound is curved, and do not break it, only bind the vessel;
And it is of great concern, for if it were slight, it would close the vein, but if it be great as we have said, thus is its form:
Henceforth from the civil vein.
This vein is enclosed in the limb, in hot places where there are neither herbs nor trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture;
and sometimes from the decay that comes from the softening of the skin,
If he comes from the belly of a serpent towards you, grasp between skin and bone.
If there is a sign of great swelling in the limb, as when a large inflammation comes into the limb, Then the limb must be bound, and the swelling must be reduced like the root of a plant
When the limb is open, if it is necessary, cover with a piece of sponge about the size of three and a half fists, and the thumb,
And let the limb hang down, and whenever it comes close to slipping out, if the covering encloses the limb and the new growth. And if it is too long, if in its course a part breaks off, and covers the remainder, and do not cover it at its root, until it is entirely expelled. for if you cover it, if it returns into the flesh, and causes swelling and pus or death, and makes the disease worse.
because of that one must treat it promptly and promptly until it is completely gone or destroyed;
And never is this vein when treated with five palms of length, or ten, and one hand comes out to me, from ten palms of length, and when you hold it, if there are one or two wounds or breaks, and you pierce it through to the marrow.
if it is all the same; and either empty the matter that is inside, and bring in medicines that will cause no further damage, then cure it as with abscesses.
And never is this vein like the hands of rain, and even when it breaks in the elbow or in the wrist, And thus comes moisture from a wound, and from a sudden leap; cure the same as we have said before.
From wounds that arise between skin and flesh.
This ailment is called in our land "buffalo disease," because it often causes swelling of the belly
and goes up and down throughout the body, And he feels well aware of the limb from one end to the other, as soon as it breaks the skin or moves, and jumps fiercely.
and is plagued by the discharge of various humors, as blood, semen, bile, urine, or worms or pus;
and there is doubt of its malice, for when it goes through the chest and ascends to the head, and comes out at the oil, it sometimes returns, and destroys the oil; and this has happened many times.
When you see it healing and treating, if it cannot be forced until it goes:
when you must hold the limb firmly below and above with a strong, tight tie,
it will remain fixed without further displacement, and you will not be able to force it again. if the fire cautery is applied, as long as it is burning;
And the greatest harm it makes is when it breaks the oil, as we have said.
And if you see it coming or close to the oil, immediately restrain its beard with your thumb and index finger, and grasp above and below, and pull forcefully.
and command the patient to use warm compresses of soothing herbs to eliminate bad humors from the body,
and advise the consumption of nourishing foods.
From the pain that comes of wind-gusts This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes in the limbs, and because it moves from limb to limb; and I have seen this which I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and found her arm swollen, and saw a small swelling in the armpit of her arm;
And thus afterwards, the patient will rise up like a worm on the shoulder. more stiff than anything, like living silver when it breaks from its bone to another.
the pain departs from that limb and settles in the shoulder,
and then afterwards corrected by all the bones, so that it comes to the other arm;
Then he told me that it twisted back towards the body, just as I saw it.
I was amazed at how it twisted back and forth between the limbs, for I had never seen such a disease in this way before.</start_of_turn> However, I must maintain that even though I do not wish to move the limb in pain, it still moves with great discomfort.</start_of_turn> but I do not wish to do so, as I have seen her do this to many women;
And I thought that this was the reason why the woman had dry skin and uncovered veins. and because of this appeared that cold air was confined.</start_of_turn>
and did not perceive me according to this reason those who are merry, and who have moist skin and veins that are filled again.</start_of_turn>
And when you see the cure for this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, If the shoulder bone above and below is affected, and then the shoulder is suddenly constrained as this wind opposes it, then cauterize the limb; and if you do not see it at your eyes,
if the wind that comes out of it, like foul pills and pills of serpin, and similar things.
From sponges.
The bandages are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the nature of the pain or the reason for their use.
There are various types of bandages, some with large points, small ones, feathered, and smooth. some with angles, some with lengths, and some with pieces of cloth attached or in the main joint it pricks, or in the forearm it pricks, or in the leg it pricks, or in the foot it pricks, or in the armpit it pricks, or in the groin it pricks, or in the chest it pricks, or in the belly it pricks.
If the brain, head, liver, spleen, heart, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When they are cut, then in no limb of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, will teach you: you must know that to extract this arrow is dangerous, for death often follows in various ways; and when the wound is bad, it does not tell you anything, and the arrow is not yet out of its wound, if the treatment is delayed, and the cure is made for the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and jumps the scab which is above the brain, is when cutting and soiling and vomiting and redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes without any wound, or without ears; and sometimes loses speech and voice; and sometimes spurts forth white moisture resembling pus, and sometimes like burnt hair;
If this sign shows you, if you persist in your cure, draw out the arrow if it is not ensnared.
When the arrow pierces or curves, the sign is that it is close to the left breast, and feels as though it were fixed in something hard, do not be empty-handed; And sometimes the arrow moves like a pulse, and causes black spots of blood, and comes with cold sweat and chills, and fainting. There is doubt that the patient will survive.
And the sign of an infected wound is that it never swells without pus leaking from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, and breathes high and cries out in pain.
And if the arrow comes out through the covering of the wound, if it is small, spit out great pain and great swelling and cries out; and moves all the limbs stiffly.</start_of_turn>
And if the arrow comes out or through the stomach, by chance there is no undigested meat from the wound.</start_of_turn>
And if the arrow comes out or through the belly, and there is no sign of stool in the intestines, if there is no hope for the cure, do not attempt to extract the arrow.</start_of_turn
If the bladder stone breaks in the bladder, and the urine spurts out and comes out forcefully, the patient feels great pain: such pain as the wound is mortal.
As for the other members, if the face, the neck, the chest, the armpits, the groin, the thighs, the arms, and the legs are affected, and the rest of the body, they are all subject to various conditions. When the bladder stone is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I have said before, because of this I do not know what to say.</start_of_turn>
There once was a bladder stone that slipped or dripped at the root of the nerves.</start_of_turn I grasped it, and the traitor on the other side scorched the fat of the ear, and it was cured without any harm.
And the traitor brought a sliver that fell into the fat of the ear from the marrow through the opening, the sliver was returned, and did not touch anything except the point towards the bottom was struck and the sliver was as long as a Turkish arch, almost as long as an ear; the game was cured, and there was no further mishap.
And draw out a splinter from the throat to a crest, and the Arabian sponge was at the ear:
And I saw the bristles [of the sponge], and I pulled it out as long as I could, and it was healed the crests.
And I drew out a splinter from my cheek or belly, and I thought it was dying;
and then after a few days, if it did not recover its normal state. I cut across the arrow, and the bone, and the flesh, without any mishap.
And if thus be the case that a wound has been caused by an arrow that has fallen out or is lodged behind, and the wound is deep;
leave the arrow in its place, and do not alter its natural position, nor will you find any discomfort in any of its natural works.
And thus another man, who had an arrow stuck in his face, was wounded;
and immediately suffered great pain; and there were other symptoms.
The king’s prince had an arrow stuck in his thigh, which was causing him no small discomfort. and there was a decline on the outer side; and the arrow was completely withdrawn
I flee called to the care after it had been closed for two days. If I find the wound much swollen.
I would attempt to treat it with all my might, and I do not feel it myself; and there was no longer any pain or tingling in her ear. I thought that this was due to the point of the arrow.
I place upon the limb a plaster that is both absorbent and digestive, so that the limb does not swell. and I notice the limb is relieved of the arrow
and I notice the limb is relieved of the arrow I put on the dressing with my hands, and closed the wound, and reassured the patient for a long time
until he felt the arrow was gone from his flesh; and he told me so. I apply the corrosive medicine to the wound with my hands for as long as necessary, until it is sufficiently open.
and I grasp the tissue, and I feel the head of the splinter that is protruding from the wound; then I apply the medicine to the wound opening by means of that corrosive agent, until the splinter is visibly expelled from the wound;
and I will keep it covered for about three months,
Then he widens the wound so that I can insert the nails, and I grasp it from both sides, and I cannot do otherwise.
Therefore, I will continue to struggle and devise cunning methods like an expert, until I have secured the nails firmly in place.</start_of_turn> As for what is seen at the end of this chapter, when I have finished, I will return the wound to its original state.</start_of_turn>
And they judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was healed entirely.
Or tell me what is the quality of the extraction of some arrows, if you put your remedy on what I do not understand, for I cannot understand your book;
but you know your masters well enough to know about great things, and about what is present and lacking, Trueve neuf couver, et neuf instrument, au dessendement des choses estraanges qui arrivent en ce art.
True nine cover, and nine instruments, at the descending of strange things that happen in this art. or by loosen from the limb or they are fiched by force of other things;
and that which leaps forward by itself or is forced by the flesh, is the sacket which has penetrated into the marrow, and it leaps nevermore.
If it does not jump now, leave it until the chariot is carried around the turn, and rejoice at the issue.
If it is firmly stuck in the bone and will not come loose, leave it be for a few days, and move it little by little each day.</start_of_turn>
When it finally jumps, and if it still does not jump, if you pierce around at everything around here, as long as the limb is swollen, and then withdraw it.</start_of_turn>
And if the scab is firmly stuck in the flesh and cannot be seen, if the pain is severe; and if you feel it, if the limb has no visible fracture;
and if you do not perceive any displacement of the wound, and for the depth of the wound, And there is no bone, nerve, or vein, if the wound is large; and if there is an ear in the wound, hold it so that it does not move.
and if there is an ear in the wound, hold it so that it does not move. if the bone that is stuck at the root of the limb moves when you touch it, break or crush the ears of the dressing, as long as you can pull it out.
break or crush the ears of the dressing, as long as you can pull it out. And subtilize well that you do not break the splinter, but that you carry it more firmly.
And if you do not do it at once, if the limb remains limp at its entrance, then carry it out, for the extraction is joyful.</start_of_turn> And if the evacuation of blood hinders you, do what we have said concerning the treatment in this chapter.</start_of_turn>
and take care of the incision of the vein and the vein, and put something in between as you are about to pull out the splinter,
or burn, or twist, or firmly or loosely; and set the patient according to the shape he was when the arrow flew in. for this is the greatest help that there is, and if you do not know how, if you do not understand what it shows you, do as it signs
The arrow that comes from elsewhere, or it opens nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in that place if one sees it or feels it at once.
Take hold of it thus, until the nails can take hold, and then remove the arrow: if it now spurts out.
And if it is held in the bone, if you round your hand around it until it enters the bone, widen the bone, then draw it out.
And if it cannot be extruded, if you leave it hooked, and then resume the extraction until it comes out forcefully;
and if there is a splinter of bone, if you break it off, if the limb has been fractured all the way through
and if there is a chip, and you see immediately, if it has been fractured all the way through If the point of the arrow enters the groove of the instrument; and then hold firm,
If the arrowhead gets caught in the groove of the instrument; and then hold it firmly, because if the arrow is pulled out too soon, the instrument’s point entering the flesh will ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is entangled, if you must, cover all the surrounding tissue or withdraw the poison quickly, if you must, Then cure the wound as it should be.
And if the splinter comes out of the eye or the cheek or the belly or the bladder or the side, and it is close, and you must cover over it, if you cover it.
and cover the wound and the nerve, then take out the splinter, and then stitch the wound shut if necessary. and keep it clean until it is healed.
The shape of the nails with which we treat the saiettes is like the beak of an osprey, and thus is the form:
And there are many methods: great, moderate, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
From veins of common cause From veins of common origin
namely: the jugular veins which are behind the ears, which are closed by the hair. and the two temporal arteries which are in the temples appear; And thus veins which are in the armpits of the armpits, which are called "aspirations", and the vein that is under the chin; and the vein that is at the base of the nose. and the two cords which are under the collarbone; and the veins that are under the chin, and these are the veins that are called "augierich". And thus with veins that are soft and limp.
And thus with veins that are soft and limp. The veins which we commonly touch are two in each arm:
The one is the cephalic, and is towards the left side of the breast, and they call it the great vein. and the other is called the “fast,” and is composed of the cephalic and axillary veins. And they call it the vein of the head; and if it is or is torn at the cost, and they call it the vein of the head; and if it is or is torn at the cost. and it is that one which is commonly seen to open visibly on the belly.
And the savior is the vein which is between the elbow and the wrist, and if there is rain.
And in the limb or the heel are two veins: one if it is on the outer side of the corbicula towards the left costal cartilage. and the second one is at the ankle towards the right costal cartilage; and the vein which is called "nesse", which is in the ankle of the other costal cartilage.
and in the other limb are two veins like those.
The blood of the veins that are behind the ears helps to cause old catarrh and emigration; And the quality of the patient, as I have said, is that you must rejoice in the chief of the patient.
And the quality of the patient, as I have said, is that you must rejoice in the chief of the patient. and wipe the skin or veins are rough; then tighten the patient’s collar with a knot. until the veins open behind the ears depend from the chief: then if you feel the pulse of your heart, if it signifies an embolism;
Then take the lancet and pierce the vein downwards to the bone, then hold your hand over the entire upper arm. and hold the skin and the vein well together. It should be almost certain that the blood will spurt out, and do it until you see blood;
then strain and bind it, until it is healed;
and I have already said the incision and the cautery or the first book.
The blood of the two temples, if it is like an ancient emigration, is thick, sticky, and usually causes swelling, and in the midst of tears there are pus-filled boils.
and the quality of the blood is like that which I have mentioned. and the patient strains his neck, while the two veins open widely; And he feels the pulse throbbing in his hand, and then he signs himself with his thumb.
then he holds his hand high above his wrist on his thumb, and he grasps the lancet in his hand. and he seizes the vein high up, and he limps it, just as you have done with other veins, and does the evacuation of blood as needed.
then he unhooks the patient, and places his thumb on the vein, and then places a bandage;
And then the thread comes out whole, and you leave it as long as it remains intact; and we have already spoken of its coming out and its extraction, or its beginning from the book.
The blood from the front vein is worth as much as that from the cephalic vein, for there are diseases of the face from ancient times, and migraine, and redness.
When the patient strains his neck by twisting, until the vein bursts open. Then take the instrument which is called the “forceps,” which is like this:
And place the point above the vein, and hold it firm with your hand, or with something else, and leave the blood flow as much as you see fit; Then loosen the patient’s collar and bind the vein until it is firm and never leave the work with a wide flame.</start_of_turn>
However, it is not fitting that the flames be too great; and the same with the vessel, for the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flames when it is subtle.</start_of_turn
The blood of the two veins which are about the size of almonds helps to relieve pain, swelling, tension, redness, and inflammation of the face; and has diseases of the face;
And if the patient pulls out his tongue by twisting from side to side, as before;
Then withdraw the tongue, and let the blood flow freely, a long distance with a broad flame, for there is no char.</start_of_turn>
And if the flame is subtle, by chance if it breaks; then make evacuation of blood, as much as you are able, and then bind up the wound, and bind it firmly.</start_of_turn>
The blood of the vein does not flow if it is cold, and in fever, and in sickness of the face, If there is swelling and redness that comes to the face, and even if it is old;
if there is also bleeding of the same kind that if the patient bites his collar, then strain his jaw to your left hand.</start_of_turn> and take the burning flame long, and hold it in the space between the nostrils, for the blood vessel must not be burnt more than two palm-widths; and when it is on the fire, it must not move at all.
And do not delay too long in making the incision, and do it as much as necessary; then bind it for one night, for it is often restored by morning.
The fire cautery is useful for the treatment of swelling, bruising, infection, inflammation, and various diseases, such as herpes and stomach ulcers.
If the patient pulls out his hair at the root, as we have mentioned before. And let the master be above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on his seat.
Then hold the vein long and widely open, and prick the blood gently, or as much as necessary;
then do the same in the other vein, and loosen the thread, and hold the blood vessels moderately tight, so that the patient is not strangled; and leave it until morning, when the wound is healed.
Of the blood of the veins The blood of the veins from the arms above helps to clot in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and wounds of the arms, and swelling and pain.</start_of_turn>
And the quality of the blood is to make the patient sit before you, and strain his neck as I have said; then open the vein, and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the limb and the other on the left side, And one knows them by this, that they are black, and by this, that they have small veins running black inside them. So do the one with the other, and if you do not know them, and if you are in doubt,
So do the one with the other, and if you do not know them, and if you are in doubt, if the greatest part of the armpit is black, and also do the veins beneath and above, because this is the same method.
From the veins of the armpit the tongue is black. The blood of the veins that are beside the tongue is of aid after the blood of the cephalic; and this is at the widening of the throat, and has diseases of the eye, and has diseases of the mouth.
and when the quality of the blood is that the patient sees between his hands before the sun, and he holds the tongue, and looks towards each rib, he sees a black vein.
The blood therefore goes up and down, and do not go too far apart, for these are the arteries.
The veins which we commonly use are healthy in two ways:
or in any sudden violent flame, such as a torch or olive oil if with cuts like trenches, and is called "anesil"; and are wide and subtle according to the size and distance of the veins. The form of the violent flame is known, and is wide as you see:
and has to open the veins filled with visible large blood, containing great blood and trouble; And this is the form of the olive flame:
And is more subtly pointed, and is for healthier the veins subtly, or there is subtle blood.
The blood of the basilisk, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases such as hiccups, or boils, or pains, or the belly;
and is useful for saving health, and that it is warmed by the artery which is near. And if it grasps the bone, and blood flows, if it is necessary to keep it, as I have said. and must not make the flame flicker, but keep it alight as with an anise
and if the ointment does not appear promptly, if you must remove it, and bind another; or you wish no rain to fall, or you keep the wound covered in the arm: it will appear promptly; And the poultice of the flame is diminished, as we have said.
And if you see the blood vessel burst, if you must immediately grasp the limb, that you touch the vessel until you know the pulse; then sign the bursting, and then bind the limb, and seize the vein from the flame
and beware that you do not injure the artery when you see the limb swell, for that is the artery: stop it immediately.
And if you see it swell up like the urine of a child, and it is neither red nor pale, know that it is without an artery. Then hasten, and place your hand on its length, and hold your hand steady if it does not bleed, for it often happens.</start_of_turn>
Keep your arm still, and leave it alone; do not move the patient unless necessary. Be wary and do not move until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If it is not bleeding, and it is painful, and the physician is not present, if the artery has burst, for the limb will shrink; staunch it without delay.</start_of_turn
And take a bandage of fleece, and lay it on, and take one half and bind it well up to the other end.
And if it does not hold, it is good; but if that is not enough, if the physician desires, as we have said, powders that will staunch blood
and will not stain in many situations due to the small size of the wound, and the ability to move the limb.
The blood in the vein is helpful in treating the wound like that of the chief of the shoulder and the ribs. Forasmuch it is composed of the basilic and cephalic bones, as we have said.
and it is necessary for the patient to move with the nerve which is below, and if it is held too tightly, it will tear the nerve.</start_of_turn> and it swells and the sensation is either diminished or lost; in fact it cannot be cured.</start_of_turn
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some people because of its subtlety, it is necessary to know that it must be cauterized with an anesthetic instrument; and withdraw the nerve from your hand.</start_of_turn>
And if there is a vein between the armpits, if the blood flows long.
The blood of the cephalic vein helps, that it attracts blood towards the head, and helps the eyes.</start_of_turn>
and it is better to cauterize with the olive or the myrtle flame, because it is the most effective of all veins, for it has neither nerves nor arteries.</start_of_turn>
However, it is necessary to ask more gently at first, and do not grieve if it is the first time, and we start again; And by chance the limb swells up at some homes, which cannot be forced out the first time, but it causes no grief. The quality of the blood is as you think.</start_of_turn>
The first thing you must know about health is that blood must only be drawn for the purpose of preserving health.</start_of_turn
and to prevent diseases from coming; And let the blood be drawn from one of the two veins which are or can be used: that is to say, the cephalic, facial, and basilar. And let the bleeding be stopped at the beginning of the procedure, and in self-sufficiency and in eating afterwards, when the sign of repletion appears;
And let the first part or the third be bandaged after one or two hours or two thirds of an hour.
The blood which is administered for diseases has no definite dose, but only as much as is necessary for the juice or the nut, in all hours and at all times;
And it is not permitted for the physician to treat children under twelve and a half years of age, nor women who are nursing for more than four months up to seven. It is not permitted for the physician to treat those who have passed sixteen years.</start_of_turn>
And when anyone is seen by the physician, in whatever way, if it is commanded that he be bled to relieve a fever, if he has a toothache, if the veins do not draw out the superabundant humors that are in the principal members;
Neither those who are too fat on meats, nor those who are pallid, nor those who are forced by hunger, nor dropsy influence them.
If one has eaten too much meat, or is pallid, or is compelled by hunger, or dropsy, these things do not affect him
then subtilize the humors, if they are not great, by meats and by drinks and by medicines, if you have little power;
then enter or bathe, so that nothing hinders you, for to subtilize the blood,
And keep your head still for a third of the time, as we have said.
And keep your head still for work, pricking, luxury, and similar things.
And keep your head still and relaxed, and let the patient raise their arms once or twice
Then strain the limb gently without force, because if it is too tight or loose, it cannot be corrected without;
Then he wipes the limb with his hands, until the veins swell and one feels them.
Then he moistens the area with a little oil, and puts his left thumb on that vein below the limb a little or where he sees it is healthier, so that the vein does not tear. and if some are full of windiness. If when one puts on the flame, and then takes it away, and cannot open the vein, then one must know of these things.
If the vein swells up when the flame is applied, and the wound is too large, then one must know that the veins must be alerted in these matters.</start_of_turn>
If the vein swells up for the first time, that is good; but if this does not happen, one must repeat the process several times, until the swelling subsides.</start_of_turn>
If the limb is swollen, and the patient groans, let him rest for a while, and do not bind the arm.</start_of_turn> By chance it will come loose from its place; do not enter or bathe, then resume the bleeding if it stops.
If it comes loose slightly, or if you doubt that there is not enough blood to stop the bleeding as much as you see, if you are confident in the loosening itself at the root of the matter, do it directly with all your might
Do the work with great care, even though the wound is small, for this often happens when the wound is slight.
If you see that the wound is bleeding, do not resume the bleeding, but apply a little oil to the wound, for it stops blood well and dries up the wound;
And so administer the oil bandage over the wound to staunch the flow of blood.
And thus causes itching and swelling when placed on the limb; if too thick it tears when it is too large.</start_of_turn>
And if there comes a large abscess which has often happened, even though it is not very sore when the vein is small, if you hurry, and put on the limb a soaked sponge and a little charcoal, and hold it for an hour.
And it must be known that you must do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after a few days, no black or green discoloration, if there is no other cause. And if you see, do not put anything foreign or oily on it, such as aloes or ointment, mustard, or the like.</start_of_turn>
And often there is swelling and appearance of blood in the armpit: put your hand there and if you find the limb soft under the compression of the hand, if that is the bad appearance.</start_of_turn Listen then that you do not put anything of what we have said on it, for by chance in court without an artery; but make an embolus dry to harden the limb, then treat it with another treatment, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
For if it is black, leave it be as long as it is red; and if you see it thick, leave it as long as it is subtle; and if it is too thick, leave it cool down.</start_of_turn>
And it is expedient for the one who is pale and strong, and has the ability to extract blood, to make the wound larger, and to set the flame wide.</start_of_turn
and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and keep it healthy somewhat, and you must keep it healthy by cutting across, not by pricking.</start_of_turn
And this method of bleeding is useful to prevent excessive bleeding and nerve damage, and is worth more than blood that flows for a long time without spreading wide.
And to him who has thirst for blood, it is recommended to give soft bread soaked in the juice of pomegranates; if he is choked, if there is too much blood, two or three times.</start_of_turn>
And if he has a cold complexion, mix beforehand before the bleeding soft bread in mustard or aromatic honey with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant vinegar.</start_of_turn
And if he sweats during the bleeding, after the discharge of blood, it is recommended that he drink broth of barley and fragrant vinegar.
And use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of the bladder.
And if he sees his arm fainting, and recovers again, if it is swollen with great blood, it must be bound up and bound up continuously according to the amount of its continuous virtue.</start_of_turn>
And whoever sees his arm fainting after the first bleeding, and has severe pain, if he recovers after nine or twelve hours after the first bleeding.</start_of_turn
And whoever sees himself fainting from another side, if he must recover later from thirst or hunger.</start_of_turn>
For there is much blood in the body that has already been consumed, and causes fever; if you can drain away a great quantity, and expand the opening as much as it bleeds in pieces. Then you must restore all the blood conditions, and put your hand over the pulse when it is well, so that no blood comes in place of the pieces. and this often happens when the surgeon is negligent;
and you must not hesitate when you see the limb slipping, and do not let blood flow a second time after the opening is closed, but press firmly above. If the arm is crooked, extend your hand widely, for this would be bad.
leave it as long as it remains whole the second time; or you touch the tip of the flame, until the one which is frozen at the root of the vein has burst through the vessel itself. and put upon it a little piece of cloth which has been soaked in water, and press lightly
And if the vein has burst, if you leave it and do not tighten it too much, until the swelling is reduced.
And if necessary, the blood must be drawn again the second time, if the same one is in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is filled with blood instead of the one in the shoulder because it is composed of it
And the colour of the blood is that of the patient’s hand when it is put in hot water, until the flesh is red;
Then it must be bound firmly, if the vein opens well, then the patient must be bled through once more, not too wide and not too long;
And either the opening is large, or it is close to the wrist joint; if it cannot be grasped, if you return the hand with warmth, leave the blood to clot in the wound until you have enough.
If it is thus, if you do not push back the hand with warm water, for there is more danger in doing so than in the state;
The blood of this vein is more precious than all others, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The saliva from the right hand is worth for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
Strain the hand, and keep it in hot water, until the vein escapes if seen. and if the blood escapes through the hole, and if you hold it firmly in all directions, if nothing is damaged;
do not advance too far, for the nerves are all exposed without cover,
then put the hand back in hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and do not move it.
When you have treated the blood as much as you can, if you put oil on the wound and bandage it securely, and then make each wound.
The blood in the left hand is worth to the disease of the mouse, and do the same as I have said before about the right side.
The blood of the armpit is worth for all the diseases that are among the bones, such as the disease of the marigold, retention of flowers, the disease of the reins, and of the knees and the old legs, and similar diseases.
And if the patient is suffering from acute pain in the belly, and is vomiting profusely, Then the belly becomes swollen like a barleycorn, and from under the joint pain shoots out like rain
Then the belly becomes swollen like a barleycorn, and from under the joint pain shoots out like rain, either blood or something like blood, at the ankle or further down, causing great pain.
And if you see blood on the hand, if you are wary of the nerves that are sore, and if the limb has been cut as if by a sword; or the flame is near.
And if it cannot be cured, if you reset the bone in water, and leave the vein wide open.
If it must be done again, do it for the first time, and if you do it again later, because the limb is stiff; do not doubt, as we have said, and take an equal amount of soothing from the other limb.
The limb of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of the buttock, and its blood is worth as much as the pain of the groin, when it is for blood that comes out.
And if the patient is between the urine and the bowels, and is straining below the ankle for three times in bending,
otherwise it does not open the belly; and if it does open, if the patient is in any way unable, or if he travels.</start_of_turn> it is better to keep it closed, because the belly is soft and easily restored by hand.</start_of_turn>
it is better to keep it closed, because the belly is soft and easily restored by hand.</start_of_turn> and if you do not find it, if some other wound opens or does burst, and towards the little toe, and take care of the nerves;
And do so diligently with blood that you see, and then loosen the tie, put on a bandage and hold it; it is now healed.
And do so diligently with blood that you see, and then loosen the tie, put on a bandage and hold it; it is now healed.
And do so diligently with blood that you see, and then loosen the tie, put on a bandage and hold it; it is now healed
And do so diligently with blood that you see, and then loosen the tie, put on a bandage and hold it; it is now healed.
And twelve other in twelve costs of the neck; and the head is filled with wind; And the chest is filled with wind; and the chest above the ribs; And the bumps swell up both arms; and the bumps swell up both legs. And the bumps swell up both wrists; and the swelling does not affect blood, except for the great veins that are scattered in the flesh,
because of this it does not make a man bleed, as when we make a vein bleed and it does not cause him to bleed, neither with great heat nor without, in any disease that comes from congestion, as long as all the swellings are drained.
And if necessity or custom dictates, if the attendants must stay awake for some hours at the beginning or at the end, and during every tension;
because there are those who, when they must stay awake, suffer from a heavy head.</start_of_turn>
and if at such times they find swelling and redness in their face, and in their head and neck, and darkness in their eyes.</start_of_turn>
and those who find blood dripping from their mouth, and have lost their tongue, and vomit blood.</start_of_turn And if he has such ones who think, and sees by nut blood and navrates and blood and similar things.
When we see these signs, and the patient is in a state of great fear and distress, we command him to fast for two hours.</start_of_turn>
The patient’s blood if it helps with the chief … that comes from the eruptions of the eyes, and we must not do anything until after the evacuation of all the humors.</start_of_turn
if it is in place of the cephalic blood,
And it is not suitable for me to perform this treatment on someone who has a cold complexion or who has a rash, because this causes them great discomfort.
And for this reason I am not suitable for this treatment except for the old who have or suffer from cold diseases.</start_of_turn>
And if those who are well-versed in the matter disagree, and for this reason it is necessary to place the ventouse somewhat lower due to the doubt of compliance.</start_of_turn
The suctions on the collar are in lieu of blood and bile, and for this reason they are worth more than gold.</start_of_turn> And at a fissure of the channel below the ear, and at all points, and at repletion;
And it is certain to press there, for if it holds too tightly, if in vain it resists or causes swelling or pain.
The winds blow cold as cold as the collar of a coat if worth the pain of the head, and pain in the temples, and swelling, and strangulation, and toothache.
And it is in lieu of the blood of the basilisk; and command the patient to express his hand to put it in, that he does not cut the artery, and does not withdraw blood unnecessarily.
The winds of the south blow over the mouth if it is sick with mouth disease, and with corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and is in the cause of the health of the teeth.
The winds of the south blow over the teeth if it is sick from heat and swelling
The winds of the south blow over the tongue if it is sick as much as two veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins;
And instruct the patient not to fear too much pain, for his blood is of charcoal, and he knows bones and arteries.
The swelling that is on the buttocks is worth having haemorrhoids from the foundation, and has diseases of bones and arteries; and it is recommended that the swelling be large and of hair, that it has much to do with well-treating; and by chance, if it should be ruptured, there will be great wounds
The swellings of the legs are apt to open widely, because they attract blood from all over the body, and cause old pains of the veins, and of the marrow, and of the bladder, and reinforce the flowers; and are in place of the spleen, and the kidneys, and all of them cause the body to swell up later on, and cause vomiting of blood in various situations.
The manner of applying the suction cup is as follows: if you apply it at first glance, and do so promptly, and put it on firmly, and move it evenly, and do not cease doing so until you see the blood flow red and swelling, and open the wound; then withdraw, and take care of the patient’s condition, for there are some who have a tender scar, and clear pores: if you must cut once alone, and you must make large wounds, and a deep wound; and do so cautiously.
If it is not large, if you must cut once: the first time to staunch the flow of blood from the large vessel.
If it is very thick, if you must cut three times; and when our wings grow weary of blood, if we only suffer once.
And if our veins burst with blood, if we recommence too often; and if without hope we are pierced in the heart, if we finish when the pain is perceived without delay.
And it befits the one who has thick skin and tough hair, and who has numerous boils, that you order the loosening of the veins with an aperitif and dissolving oil if that is in this state, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil of pumpkin seed;
or if it is in ivy, with horseradish oil, or lavender, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the superfluous moisture is great and cold, take olive oil of marigold, or balsamite, or olive oil of anet, and the like.
And if the skin is tightly stretched and has large pores, do not put oil on it,
but you must wash it afterwards with rosewater, or cold water, or elderberry water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or something similar.</start_of_turn>
And if there is moisture in the mouth, if it easily rises, or of mistletoe, and sumac, and the like.
And those who have excessive superficial sweating rise from wine strong, or from seawater, or from decoction of elderflower or chamomile, or from other similar things.
and do not feel safe with the suction cup before the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the suctioning.
and must be warned when it is necessary to suction and when it is suctioned. And take care that those who are being suctioned are not too cold or too hot and inflamed; If it is suspected that he has taken cold things, like pomegranates, grapes, turnips and lettuce at ease, and similar things;
and meat juices, fat and moist meats.</start_of_turn>
And he who has a cold complexion, if he takes honey syrup, and fragrant wine medium, which is between summer and autumn, and broth, and meat juices and small oils and herbs.</start_of_turn>
and when the air is cold, he must drink more than eat;
And it is fitting to give some comfort to the principal members once the wound has been dressed, neither before nor afterwards, by the blowing air; for this will soothe the limbs. Or let it be simply taken away, but it is not fitting for me to do anything except for those who are in charge of the wound.</start_of_turn>
The patches that are applied to the wound are those that are put on the liver, and on the mouse, and under the heel, and on the belly and the butt and the groin and the hip, for these members do not suffer from wounds elsewhere.</start_of_turn
and one should not do it except to draw blood from limb to limb, If we place our thumbs on the limb when it does not bleed; to remove the viscosity which is in the limb, if we place compresses on the belly and the buttocks to calm the limb.
and soothe the pain, when there is swelling or a stone, if it comes by its natural attraction by an adventure of the swelling, or discharge the stone from its place
and make it swell when we place it on the liver and the spleen when there is retained moisture.
and these compresses are administered empty in order to soak as little as possible; and never are they administered together with fire, and never completely filled with liquid.
If there are diseases of the chest or the belly, and in such a way that the wounder fills the ventouse with hot water or with water itself, or where there are herbs covering that.
The form of the ventouse administered to fire is like this:
And has two large and half palms of diameter, and has or costs almost half an inch in the middle, as to push out an arrow,
or be of linen, soft before so that it does not hurt the patient when putting it on the limb.
And there was in the middle a stick of iron or thorn, to hold a bandage firmly in place.
and there were great and small ones according to the ailments and the severity of those who took them;
for the wounds of the sick are different from those of the healthy, and the leanings are different from the fats.
and must one place this bandage upon the limb:
Grasp the handle of the circular saw or line it, and put it into the ventouse through the hole which is in the ventouse. If it sticks at the bottom of the ventouse, it does not burn the patient;
then put it on the limb, and two must be on the hole we mentioned above, if when you look, if it goes up, take away the ventouse.
and grasp the lining like before, and start again, if you are able.
In the ventouse where it is administered in the disease of pleuresin, at all sharpness, there is no bulge or perforation, and is administered only when it is plain of sharpness, and is placed on the limb only slightly.
and thus is its form:
They are not administered for other members or where we cannot place ventouses because of their small size, as with livers and gums, and similar things. and in the like of them stripped of hair, as with dogs or nails, and others like these;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;
and the quality of the patient is such that when you find hairs that are in soft, smooth waves without any curvature, if you pluck them out; then immediately take hold of the limb and make it pale, and rub the limb until it is red, and put on the hairs;
and when they are smooth and gentle, and chirpy, if it is possible to put on a suction cup, put it on, for this is worth more later.
If not, if you lift the limb easily, and then with some force, moisten well, and then expel it.
and if the limb remains too long after the evacuation of the foreign body, moisten it with cold water, and put on, until the swelling is reduced;
and if the swelling persists, put on broken glass or pieces of crucible, and similar things, until the swelling is reduced.
or you take out half of the black beans and leave them until they are burned on the limb, if you stop it now;
And if you are in doubt, take other signs.
Or if the signs do not suffice, rub the limb with fresh blood, or pierce it with a needle until the sign is seen. Then place them back, and as soon as they feel blood returning;
and when you see that they are healed, if you powder over a wound of aloe and sow, or charcoal, if they will now be cured.
Ci comence li livre des brisures.
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and displacement.</start_of_turn>
Listen well, dear son, for this chapter deals with a matter that is not mentioned in any of the former books, and is not found in any letter.</start_of_turn
Therefore, in our land, this science is strange, for I have never found anything like it.</start_of_turn
And I know nothing of it, except by the wisdom of the ancient books, or because I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experience, and by the custom of my life.
I have described it in this chapter what is contained in it, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have made it clear the forms of the instruments which are mentioned, as I have done in the previous chapters
It is therefore necessary that we say or write in the prologue of this book the sum of the word and the chapters or the knowledge that it contains, and that we remain true, so that those who are learned and who learn this noble art may learn from it and teach others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or sprain occurs, if you must hasten the patient's recovery, do not neglect anything that does not harm him, even if he is weak of body, a child, or an old man.
or if he is too tense or too cold; and eat cold broth, that is to say cold juices, broth of barley and eggs, and do not drink wine, do not eat any fatty foods, and do not eat too much meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have certainty that the patient will recover.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, if you must nourish the patient with foods that cause great nourishment, or if he has viscosity, as with wheat flour in water, rye, peas, almonds, cheese, fish, and large wine, and similar things. For at a part nourishment returns muscle and more tension the break.
And know that bones broken from marrow and decrepit do not mend well together according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too brittle, like bones of small intestines;
but there is no remedy, remain upon the broken bone, that is, great tensions that hold and unite the limb together, as much as it forces it if it had been before; and do not remove any part of it, for by this means it is expedient to nourish large amounts of flesh, as we have said.
And know that fractures are of various kinds in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the limb, or of the foot, and I shall tell you in this chapter all the ways of fracture. For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others by bending, as with the size of a pen to write.</start_of_turn>
For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others by bending, as with the size of a pen to write.</start_of_turn> And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small fissure.</start_of_turn
And there is a certain cunning that has its own instrument and restoration, as he remembers when he comes to it.
And it is known that a break of a bone is when its limb is twisted, and it opens well by pushing, and sometimes by the pressure of the hand.
And when there is no twisting or touch, and the patient does not feel much pain, there is no break;
but it can well have twisting, or fracture, or a small break. If you do not know whether it is moving or not, but put on medicines that come later, and then strain it now subtly.
And so it is said that when the bladder bursts and goes down into the bowels, and is made up of these two parts of the joint, it is necessary to put them together evenly, even as if it were a postumous bruise.
and if the bruise comes again, if you leave it alone, until the bruise is appeased; then put it into its place as gently and steadily as you can, and so that the bladder is restored more easily than by restoring the limb or parts of it; and then tighten it, as you would afterward
and if there are broken pieces of bone, if they are two parts of the hand or foot, or at the wrist or two fingers, or an artery, or a vein and the hand;
And set the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the limb break, remember by all means the adjuncts in their place at the muscle as you wish, and keep that by your work no damage comes to the patient from lesion or pain.
And adjust well the joints of the bones according to the best forms
And feel well with the hand if you think it is not well: if it is swelling well, and it is not straining too much, do not press as those who do who make it come by their work excessive heat and contraction in the limb, as we have often seen
And when the limb is fixed in place, if the patient is very sick and does not move it, neither watching nor sleeping, neither turning nor in any other way; and keep it firmly secured that he feels no pain at all. For when he feels no pain, if it is not at the point [of dislocation], and you must put it in partial control that he feels no pain;
For when he feels no pain, if it is not at the point [of dislocation], and you must put it in partial control that he feels no pain; and keep it correctly positioned, that there be no displacement when you restore it;
And the quality of a broken limb is as I have said.
The quality of a broken limb is diverse in small, medium, and large sizes and shapes
For there are small limbs, such as bones of the arm and forearm and similar: if you can cover them with soft cloths and blankets;
and for those that are large, such as thighs and legs: if you can cover them with a broad and hard cloth, because the large cloths embrace the whole great limb, and constrain it equally from all sides, so that there is no slack.
Then lie down comfortably, with legs slightly flexed, two or three according to the limb, and hold your hand one inch from the tip, then go under the break and strain less, than the break, then remove one inch of the break.
and soften the limb somewhat, so that you can grasp a great part of the limb, then retake one inch of the limb, and turn back slightly from the break;
then go under the break at the lower part, and strain moderately, not too strong or too weak, as we said before;
Then put between the layers of cloth or bandages, as many as are even, and bind them securely with thread; and put your stakes well made above, if there is no puncture or swelling.
And if there is swelling or puncture, put above something soothing the puncture, and which breaks the swelling, and leave it for several days.
Then strain above your stakes, and let them be half of a broad sickle in length, or of staff from which you make nails, or of barley straws, and let them be as follows:
But it is necessary that the one who sets the fracture put something on the break that is greater and wider than the others.
and is also as long as it is necessary for the limb, whether small or large;
then it is strained upon the bones just as you did at first, and then you tie under a thread immediately, as you did on the break;
more is tight under the thread, the less; and it is necessary that the thread be medium, not too thick nor too thin, and be of linen cloth.
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their braids from twisted linen thread, this is a great error, for the braid cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it will not hold together unless there is at least a cubit of space between the knots.
And if the patient is numbed by the blows of the needles after the stretching, if you put on stockings of linen or coarse cloth, they will not bleed
When the wound is with a bruise, and the nerve is severed, I will tell the cure of that later.
And as regards those who do not wish to endure this discomfort, they must immediately break the limbs the first moment. For when the limb is large, it is not permissible for me to apply the stars except after five or seven days, or more as seems suitable; otherwise, the wound will burst forth.
And concerning the management of ancient compresses to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: take flour that is held in the mill’s walls, and mix it with abundant eggs, and make this confection, neither too fine nor too thick, and use it. This is the common method of restoring fracture at various stages, and even among women and young children, for there is neither too much pressure nor too much cold.
Another method of restoring fracture and dislocation and torsion: take three barley grains and linseed and alum and saffron and Arabic gum and mugwort, all in the amount of eight; mirrace and aloes, in the amount of five; chamomile, in the amount of seven; and grind them together, and mix them with abundant eggs; for if the complexion of the patient is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition and restores the broken bones quickly, and is worth more than many homes.
Other means of support that are worth considering are: mugat and vismalve, with .x. grains; mirre and aloes, with .viiij. grains; acaice vi. grains; and arnica root powder .x. grains, and grind thoroughly, and mix with water or a great deal of egg, and administer.
Other means of support that are worth considering are: mugat and vismalve, with x grains; mirre and aloes, with viiij grains; acaice vi grains; and arnica root powder x grains, and grind thoroughly, and mix with water or a great deal of egg, and administer. Such plasters do not restore health, but they are good for soothing post-burn pain, and for strengthening bones that are out of place.</start_of_turn>
Other means of support that are worth considering are: dried fig tree leaves and terrestrial poppy leaves, ground together, and make a plaster.
Autre méthode d’emplaustre à la restauration de la brisure de l’os et pour amenuisier le reste de l’apostème. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, fleurs de violettes, farine de fois, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se le membre est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.
Another method of support for the restoration of a broken bone and to diminish the rest of the abscess. Take root of vismalve, chamomile, violets, wheat flour, and from chescune one part; grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, mix with moist coriander water or with water alone, and use.
Ypocras writes in his book that there is no need to put anything on the broken limb to restore its force except for a little wax and oil, and nothing else, and that it should be between soft and firm.
And it seems Galen would have us put on the warm parts of the member broken, to restore things dry a little warm, as for example, myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of dressing that is worth for pain and swelling: take mugwort and chopped almonds, or pine needles, and gum, and mix them evenly, and crush them, and make a dressing of them and bind it.</start_of_turn>
Then loosen a little later, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, that the bone is not fractured; if not, loosen by hand at first.</start_of_turn>
If pain comes to the limb, or if it swells, sense repose or inflammation, if you are hasty, loosen it and place the limb in its proper position now; take a light bandage, a sponge soaked in salt, and immerse in water, and raise the limb until the swelling ceases and the pain is relieved. Then leave the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry lint, soaked in water or rose oil, and bind up with a nut, until you are certain that the swelling has gone down
Then rest the inflamed limb, and if there is pain, then rejoin the bandage, and a little displacement, do not bind too tightly; and be careful until you are healed.</start_of_turn>
And if you see swelling, redness, pain, and swelling about the bone, it is necessary to support and bind, if it recurs, as you did at first.
And if nothing happens to the limb after what we have said, if it does not swell within two, three, five, or seven days; do not leave it for twenty days, as we have seen, until the swelling subsides, and approach the closing of the wound cautiously.</start_of_turn>
Therefore the more restraint you put on it than before, and the more you grease the flesh, as I have said before; and if you see that the limb is drying out more than usual, do not expect that the wounds will heal. Arise, then, with hot water steaming, whenever you loosen it, and every time that you touch it, and cut a little bit of the cord;
Rise then, with hot water steaming, every time you loosen it, and every time you touch it, and cut a little bit of the cord; for in this work, the limb is often loosened from the bone, and the patient must immediately mend what the fools make, lest it remain twisted: that is wrong, and if there is great fear, I see no other thing but to leave it alone and cut directly.</start_of_turn>
various ways of breaking.</start_of_turn> Many are the ways of fractures, and various figures, and the causes are diverse.
For there are fractures caused by percussion of a spear, and the collar of bone throughout the bone until the cartilage which is between the bones, as if made by a chisel or a fist; and for this reason it is called this kind of fracture "haichure".
Or the spear pierces the bone in a transverse direction, and is called this kind of fracture "absolue"; and is the wound of these large or small fractures.
And if there is an embedded percussion, or fracture or dislocation of the bone, or fracture of the bone, or other similar things.
And if there is a fracture that approaches the socket which is below the bone, or it is on the bone, then this wound is great or small.
And if there is a wound that is embedded in the bone just under the skin, and the break is small, it is called a “capillary” fracture.
And if a wound is made or pierced by a stone, or by a thorn, or by something similar, and it causes a fragment of the bone to protrude, and if the limb is bent as when people make a stew over a cauldron; if between the bone fragments.
And this often happens to people who have or suffer from moist bones, like children;
And there are many other ways of fracture when small pieces are detached from them as in these; and I will speak of them later.
And there are many other ways of fracture when small pieces are detached from them as in these; and I will speak of them later.
The capillary resemblance is known by this that when one has discovered the bone, and has wiped around it, if one finds a black fracture.
In the treatment of the fracture, take care of the patient’s accidents and if you see no other bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, emission of urine, extension, paleness, fever, and swelling, and other similar things, if it does not recover sense immediately.
If you suspect no imminent danger, and hope for recovery, begin the treatment.
When the limb comes forward first, and it is in swelling, if you can remove the bone before the fourth part of the muscle that you must do so.</start_of_turn>
If it is in this state, if you hurry to remove the bone before the seventh part of the muscle, so that the tissue of the bone is corrupted, there will come the accident that we have said.</start_of_turn
If the bone breaks through to the tissue that covers the brain, if you can manage to split the fractured part, and take hold of the limb of the patient, and uncover the bone in every way that you can, and on the figure of the wound more strongly than you can.</start_of_turn
And if blood flows from a vein when uncovering the bone, or from an abscess, let him hold fast what he can; and fill the wound with soft cloths moistened with oil of roses. And keep the abscess quiet until the swelling subsides; then, when the bone is well supported, do the work in two ways: the one way is if you grasp the narrow end of the wound in front, and this is the form:
And then do another incision more extensive than the first.
And thus if you have various sizes of testicles, some large and others small, and they are pointed and made of iron, and in their lighter work, do not bleed the head.
And if the bone is thick and hard, if you must pierce through it, even though you administer testicles with tarres, do not pierce beyond the test bone. And you must leave above the point a margin or circle, that does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have several of them, so that if the testicles come out in place of the thickness of the bone, if you have several tarres on the test; and this is the form of the two methods of tarring.
The quality for piercing through the brittle bone is that you put one tarret on the bone, and turn your two hands until you feel that the bone is pierced; then put the tarret back in another place a little later, and do the same thing to the surrounding area, and cut between the perforations, and do it more skillfully than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you have brought the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have if you have them, pincers; and keep your hands away from the brain and the jawbone.
And when you have grasped the bone firmly, and treated, if it is possible, restore the fragment that has separated from the bone to all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more rigid and flexible than the other incisor.
And if nothing of the small bones remains, no teeth, if the bones are slightly loose with instruments; then cure the wound with sutures and bandages as we have said
And another way of working is like the Galenicians say, which is more certain; and the lord is very strong, and that is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, either by fracture or by opening the muscle, so that when you have uncovered that part, you put back the head of this lenticular incisor, for this is its shape:
Do not split into two parts, and is the part that is tough in the marrow, if the cutting is towards the bone; then hold with a small mallet above, so that you press lightly the bone all around, and take care of the membrane that is below.
if it is torn from the bone, if the bone is lightly fractured, for we must fracture it well steadily, and without fear.
If the bone breaks through the skin, do not pierce it further with a needle; cut it off just below the fracture, and there will be small pieces left. If you suspect infection, remove the surrounding tissue with a scraper or file of various sizes, in order to prevent infection in each place, according to the nature of the fracture.
If the fracture is great and after more scraping, and does not cease, do it until it is well healed.</start_of_turn>
In some other capillary and fracture of a subtle kind, it is necessary to bring about the cause according to its location; and this is something that is not easily learned by anyone who has not put his study into this art.</start_of_turn>
And if the swelling is discovered, it is best that you take one and a half draping of linen, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in oil rose, and put it upon the wound. Then take another drape of doubled linen, or two, and moisten it in wine and oil rose, and put it on the first drape; and do this more gently than you think, that you do not aggravate the swelling, then administer further linen, and do not keep it bound more tightly than is necessary to hold the wound in place only.
and leave it thus for one or two hours, until the swelling subsides, then remove it, and administer medicines such as root of licorice, flour of sometimes, and incense dust, and an astringent; mix these things together, and put them on the wound, and administer adequate medicines all around the wound area.
And beware that the wound is properly closed, that you do not leave it open, neither do you leave it partially assembled, for when it is assembled over the brain, if it is crooked or taut, it causes great harm to the patient; for when one puts on the teeth of biting things, if they do not desist from below.
Beware then, if any evil event comes to the patient, as we have said, if there is any doubt, it is doubtful sense.</start_of_turn>
And if the evil does not come forth only by the medicine that we have put on, that some virtue has, if you can take a part of honey, and two parts of rose oil and glue one with the other, and put it on the wound; Then follow the treatment in the way that is useful, as long as it is safe.
Then follow the treatment in the way that is useful, as long as it is safe.
And if one of the two parts is fractured, if you must bite your little finger or pierce the area of the wound, and put the break back into its natural position at the index finger and at the wrist, until it returns to its natural shape. and do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain during your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the arm, and cannot go down to the root, if you can, put an even support under the arm at the height of a large rib.
And if the break is three parts, if you do it again, and hurry to restore the limb first if you can;
otherwise after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling of the wound has subsided, then you should bind the limb at the height of the break and attempt to cover it with linen, if the break is in a limb.
Or you must bind it once more on another side if the break is there; and be the attempt as strong as to fill the hole in the limb.
And they say no restorer must soak the tents in water, and leave each one to itself. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is fitting that they be soaked in preparation of an egg-aubun and powdered meal; then leave the tent until the bone is firm and the cartilage is hardened.
And never do they put goose feathers in place of tents, and if there is sulfur powder draped around, and it is held in place, and blows the patient among them; or do as you see fit.</start_of_turn>
And if they come to rest while you are working, if you put some butter or cotton soaked in rose oil or some such salve on it.</start_of_turn
And if after that the swelling does not subside, if you put on a compress of hempseed meal, fine flour, and incense powder, confirmed with a raw egg yolk, then put on soft bandages, and do not bind too tightly;
And if the swelling does not go down after that, if you put on a compress of hempseed meal, fine flour, and incense powder, confirmed with a raw egg yolk, then put on soft bandages, and do not bind too tightly;
and if there is no other wound, if you can cure with stitches, and put on bandages, as long as it is safe.
Of the root of the mandible
When the mandible is fractured without any wound, and the break is only slight, and is not broken through, except for the teeth inside, if one knows it slightly.
It is advisable, if the break is on the outer part, to bite down on the thumb of the affected hand towards the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left mandible, if you hold the thumb of the right hand, and gently hold the break inwards, and hold the other hand outwards, and make them even.
And if the break of the mandible is displaced, that is to say, if it is displaced by .ij., it is advisable that you administer an extension of .ij. parts, as long as they are even.
If movement of the teeth causes pain, or a dislocation, if strained by a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put a broken mandible cerote on and put on an i. two-fold drape; and on the drape put a large sponge well made, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, and tie on the suture that you put in place, and command the patient to rest, and eat soft food.
If you see that the figure is changing, if the bone comes loose at the third joint, and then reset it to its place; and put on a dressing of powdered alum with abundant egg or oatmeal, after you have oiled the cerote; and put on a dressing of linen. If the dressing becomes loose, and the patient’s condition does not change, leave it as it is until it is healed; many times it heals in two weeks.
And if after suppuration the limb remains swollen, as we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, repair so that neither part of the bone is left unboned; if delicate of the bone has instruments that cover this.
And if the wound is wide, if the swelling has flared up as you need.
And when you have boned all these parts, and there is no longer any displacement, if the wound is wide, put on some dressings that cover this, to absorb blood, until it is healed
so strong. The strong force breaks several times before, over the shoulder, and the fracture is deemed to be in two ways: either it is broken and split into three pieces, and is the most light to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
And when the fracture is with a wound, if you have two assistants, let one hold the limb that feels the strong force; and the other extend the shoulder towards the part; then set the fracture even, so that the form be as it should be, and there be no bulge or protrusion.</start_of_turn>
And if you must extend more, put under the shoulder of the patient a round ball of wax, or linen, of the size you need; and stretch and hold the forcele, and strain the ball in your hand, so that you can put the fracture even, as it should be.</start_of_turn>
If you do not manage to push the head of the shoulder back in its place, because it comes out of its socket, you must know that the patient lies groaning on his side, and put a cushion under the shoulder blade, namely the middle rib, and hold the shoulder blade down until the head of the shoulder is lifted.
Then address the fracture to your side, and if you find debris, if you must, make an incision; and force the pieces lightly, and if the bones cannot join together by any means, if there is a fracture at one of the incisors that you have made; but that you put a cushion under the shoulder to prevent infection.
and seems like a scoop, and is neither thin nor thick, and be as wide as it seems necessary, according to the size of the bone and the extent of the work; and has two holes, as you see, and one is large, and the other is small, as is the course of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
And when you are assured that the incision is deep enough, if the wound is small, or if you doubt the depth of the incision, if necessary employ a dressing and bandage, according to its quantity.
And if the wound comes open again, if there is much blood, apply oil of rose, alum, and wine, and place above.</start_of_turn>
The stiffness of the bone, when it is painful and swollen, is that you put on the bone the plaster of the powder of wheat and egg-shell, and put on supports loosely above, and put a sponge below if you need it.</start_of_turn Then take a very great bend of a palm of large size, and put two layers of cloth over the wound, and press it down firmly; then take a needle about two fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage remains in place. Put the needle on the bone, and twist the bandage over the collar, and grasp the inner ankle, and grasp the outer ankle; and keep the part above steady, and when you see that the bandage holds the bone in place, and you see clearly that the needle does not move from the broken bone, if you praise each joint, and when you tighten the bandage.
And make the patient lie on his back, and put under his buttock one small pillow, to lift up the limb; if you align the break of the bone with the alignment of the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the collar, and do not unbind it until it is well healed, for about twenty days.
Then resume the displacement, if you see that it has to be done, and hold it and leave it thus until it is restored; and it is usually restored in about twenty-six days, and in less time to any home.
Then resume the displacement, if you see that it has to be done, and hold it and leave it thus until it is restored; and it is usually restored in about twenty-six days, and in less time to any home.
When the shoulder is dislocated or hangs loose in the socket, and it cannot be forced out except by touching it; if the limb appears according to the shape of the dislocation, and is reduced according to its natural form, in all ways as you wish; then put on the limb a coarse powder of mill-flour with abundant egg white, and bandage loosely, and put on a large and firm bandage, a little wider than the shoulder, and when the bandage is set, do not move the limb, and look at the limb every hour; and every time it swells, if you tighten the bandage, and equal the bandage if it has moved from its place, and leave the patient lying on their side; and the shoulder is restored in about twenty days or less. And when this number is completed, if the limb is flexible, and the patient is able to move, because it is not a bone that is easily loosened.
And if a piece of the bone hangs forward, and does not yield at all, if it remains in place, and the bone itself, do as we have said in the bursting of the forcele to appease the pain of incision.
And if a piece of the bone hangs forward, and does not yield at all, if it remains in place, and the bone itself, do as we have said in the bursting of the forcele to appease the pain of incision.
The bone is never broken in the middle, but this happens often; but it often breaks with violent movement. And when it is broken in the middle, if it declines at the root, and causes the patient great pain, and swelling, and vomiting, and sometimes blood, and opens the wound in the broken bone, and they feel well.
And the restoration is this: if the patient lies prone on his back, put one cushion between the scapulae, then press the scapulae together, and reassemble the ribs at your hands, and subtly bring into equal all the ways you can, until the bone is set as it should; then put on bandages and stamp under the staple of salt, or other soft substance, and wrap in one bandage, and bind on the bone break, if it does not move; and turn the limb round about the back, and strain gently, and reward chest pain an hour later, and if it relaxes, strain again; and if it will not come loose, by corrosion or by purulent discharge, or pain or swelling, if you are in a hurry, and it comes loose, loosen the bandage, and rasp off the dressing, and address what has happened in the manner of treatment; then rest the dressing, and strain until it is healed.
And the restoration is this: if the patient lies prone on his back, put one cushion between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulder blades together, and reassemble the ribs at your hands, and subtly bring into equal all the ways you can, until the bone is set as it should; then put on bandages and stamp under the staple of salt, or other soft substance, and wrap in one bandage, and bind on the bone break, if it does not move; and turn the limb round about the back, and strain gently, and reward chest pain an hour later, and if it relaxes, strain again; and if it will not come loose, by corrosion or by purulent discharge, or pain or swelling, if you are in a hurry, and it comes loose, loosen the bandage, and rasp off the dressing, and address what has happened in the manner of treatment; then rest the dressing, and strain until it is healed.
The breaks of the ribs only come from the great joints below the back, and at the shoulder, and do not happen for anything other than because they are slimy; and the patient feels well at the inquiry as two.
And if the restoration is that you put equal pressure, as it should be. Then put the support, and bind with an elastic, if you have need of it.
And if the fracture of the ribs is downward, if the patient feels great pain, and swelling, as with pleurisy, for the bone pierces the membrane; and there is swelling, and vomiting, and a great discharge of blood, which is a great grief, and they have put much pain on it.</start_of_turn>
And if it is said of these things that it is necessary to administer food that inflates the belly, to push out the fracture.
We do not do this, for after the catarrh has passed, life does not come back by itself. And if it comes back, let it be well.
And they say that no one puts on a bandage on the limb to soak up moisture, for it is like reason; however, there is doubt that the bandage will not retain the excess moisture on the limb due to weakness.
And they say that no one should cover the limb with coarse linen soaked in oil, and put on tents between the ribs to make the layer even, then either cure the pleurisin, meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that points to the navel, and there is doubt in the patient, if it is commanded to cut above the broken rib, and to put in [a] sponge; then one must cut the bone lightly, and then sew up the two layers of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with sponges, as long as it is healthy. And if there is pus coming from the abscess, if one puts on wet cloths soaked in rose oil, and puts on the limb; and cure while the limb is held in place, as long as the rib is not displaced or it must.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that points to the navel, and there is doubt in the patient, if it is commanded to cut above the broken rib, and to put in a sponge; then one must cut the bone lightly, and then sew up the two layers of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with sponges, as long as it is healthy. And if there is pus coming from the abscess, if one puts on wet cloths soaked in rose oil, and puts on the limb; and cure while the limb is held in place, as long as the rib is not displaced or it must be displaced from its fracture.
Never comes a fracture of the bone of the collar, and often it rains; and also at the thorn of the back. And when this happens to no avail, and you see that he will be well or not, if you take heed if you see his hands limp, fleeing and dead, and that you cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, if he does not feel it. Such are the signs that he is in a mortal condition in many positions, and if you move him and he feels well when you strain and point, such are the signs that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if we put him to the cure.
And when such things happen on the spine, and you see that he will be well or not, if you take heed if his fingers are soft and his hands are swollen, and if there is a wound on his back that is vomiting violently and involuntarily; and when we have bound him on his belly, if he is vomiting involuntarily. And when he is bound on his back and he sees his wound selling, if he cannot move. Such are the signs that he is in a mortal condition: if he does not work in his cure.
And if this does not happen, if the thing is lighter.
And the treatment is that if there is a wound at the edge of the bone, put upon the spine oil of rose or oil of nutmeg of an egg, until it is calmed; then put upon one of the comfortable and absorbent plasters, and bind it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where there is pain, until it is healed. And if a bone breaks, if you cover on the limb; and stretch the bone, then assemble the two ends of the wound, if it is great, with a splint, and bind it up securely; and if the fragment of the bone is broken, which is called the "break of the marrow", if it is in your left hand pouch, and put it equal to the right hand at your side, then put on the dressing and the bandage, if you have need of it; then strain it, and if there are broken bones underneath, if you leave it there, and stretch the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
...and if the thigh bone is fractured...
When the thigh bone is fractured, if there is no other wound at the head; and if it persists, and declines downward, and comes to the patient great pain, swelling, and inflammation of that which is fractured.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over the fracture, until you reach the break; and take hold of the broken fragments and their position; and if the break is only at the head, if you make the break even, until it is in its natural position.</start_of_turn>
And if the break is on the side or it declines downwards, if you make the patient sit on his belly, until the restoration of this break is apparent.</start_of_turn When you have placed the limb even, if you place on the support, then place on a staple of lead or copper, and strain the bandage, so that it does not move; and use the thumb and index finger to hold the limb steady, as long as the limb is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his side, or on his back.</start_of_turn>
And if swelling comes, do not touch it, until the swelling subsides; then put on what we have said before; and then return to rest, and strain it as it should be strained, if there is no other mishap; and this is the method.</start_of_turn>
De la brisure de l’ajutoire.
From the dislocation of the shoulder
And so there are two methods for restoring it: one is to take one fist full of moistor and hold the patient’s arm above their seat; then bend the patient’s arm towards the shoulder, and put a curve in the fist, and then put the fist on no weight or have the assistant hold it down; and put the eyes level with the hands clasped together, until the dislocation returns as it should.
And the other method is to support the patient’s shoulder and tie the arm to their collarbone, and command the assistants to hold what is on the dislocation at their hands, and to hold down the scapulae at their sides.
And if you see that the extraction is too violent, strain [the limb] so that the bristle [bone spicule] is grasped by the bone on both sides. And if the bristle is close to the head of the shoulder, grasp that the middle bristle of the shoulder and another towards the elbow, grasp the bristle; and if the bristle is towards the elbow, grasp that the lightest, with effort, as long as the bristle is even on both the shoulder and the elbow; then set the bristle even, if possible, and strain, since the aftershocks do not come.
And if after-shocks come, do not strain for more than thirteen days; put on a thick dressing of lint and rose oil until the after-shocks are calmed; then strain, and the way to strain is that you place the bandage over the bristle, then assemble the limb on the shoulder and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; put on the bandage and strain the limb, and the arm will be in its place, without anything hindering it, or without the bone being fractured.
And if you doubt that the bone is not moving, use splints, and place on the bristle a splint that is wider and stronger than the others, and put between the splints two pieces of wood that are equal in size to the thickness of the bristle; then strain on the splints, as I have said above in the beginning of this chapter, more strongly and less loosely.
If you see the swelling of the shoulder blade and the tightening of the muscles, as we have said, when restoring the limb, if you doubt the completeness of the cautery, leave it bound for seven days as we have said; then watch for two days whether the swelling subsides and the pain disappears from the limb, or whether the swelling returns to the limb because it is too tight.
If no such thing happens, if more than two days have passed, and the patient sleeps on his back with his hands on his stomach; put a cushion made of equal wool under the limb, and watch for an hour or two to see if the limb remains rigid or if the ligaments are softened; if the latter, treat it by medical means and do as we have suggested, in part by giving the limb its natural mobility. And when it begins to recover, if it is considerable. It is customary that the assistant and the limb must be kept bound for forty days in total; and then it must be loosened and a bath and medicinal poultices must be given to the limb to restore it to its proper condition. And if the fracture is difficult and embedded, it must be left to loosen for one or two months.
In the event that the arm is fractured,
The arm is composed of three bones, which are called the "radius" and the "ulna". One is small and the other is large. The small one is inside and the large one is outside; sometimes the large bone breaks alone, or the small one, and sometimes both together.
When the small bone is fractured, the restoration is easy and the healing; but when the large bone is fractured, the healing is poor and more painful than when they are fractured together. If only the small bone is fractured, if necessary extend it slightly and make it even.
And if it is the large bone that is fractured, if the grip is increased; and extend over one cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the other, and the small one must be lower than the others, and let the patient cross his arms over himself, with one cushion in front of him higher than the patient does not suffer any pain; then extend the forearm to the outside of the hand, or at the elbow, and another assistant at the other side. And then set the bones even, as best you can
And if in the fracture the limb is split into pieces, if one puts in a pin without removing any splinter that may be left in, and you cannot remove it, you must leave it and let it heal naturally as we have said before.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, as I have mentioned in the singular chapter; take the cure.</start_of_turn>
And if at the beginning of the restoration comes after the dressing, glue together with oil rose and white wax; and bind tightly but not too tightly or too loosely; and keep bound tightly by hand until the dressing has settled.  Then oil the bone and wax, and put in the dressing of meal with much egg white, for put in the nails, and let the nail of the fracture be more firm, and a hole wider than the others; and soak that it must have between the nails or arms multiple arrangements: either that the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two; and is more strained above the fracture than elsewhere, and all the days less in aligning, as I have said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not too hard or rough; and let the thread, which is strained, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.</start_of_turn If other evils follow the limb, as when there is itching, if you must raise the limb with warm water, until the itching ceases; and leave the limb still. Then repeat the stretching, and when the ligament is softened and the bone is loosened, and similar things, if necessary.
If you take care that the swelling does not come back to the limb, because it is too tight, if you must soften it somewhat, and leave it for some days, until the swelling goes down, and then strain it.</start_of_turn>
If none of these things that we have said help the patient, if not until after .xx days, or more, then he should rest his hands on his collar, and keep his collar even; and take care of movement and discomfort, and sleep on his back; and give him nourishment when the swelling has gone down, in .xxx days or .xxxv., or even in .xx days, according to the compositions and constitutions of the virtues.</start_of_turn>
From the fracture of the hand
From the fracture of the hand: At the back of the hand there are two bones that often break; and it does not come out but pours out many times.
And when the bone of the hand is broken or split, if it is known that the patient is limping, if he is sitting straight before him equally; then put his hand on the extended cloth and stretch out the broken bones, and put them even with the thumbs, until they are well joined; and put on the plaster and the bandage, if the abscess does not come out, then put on a splint as much as is necessary; and be wrapped in one cloth.
And if the fracture is on the edge of the limb towards the belly of the hand, if you make a loop of bandage, and command the patient to hold his broken limb firmly; and then stretch from a long cloth, and be the splint as great as the bone of the hand, and strain it, as it should be.
If the fracture is on the side, then command that you place a splint above and below at the root, so that the hand is overextended and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and seal the gap between the two.
If the fracture does not come from either side, if it is the pouch, if it is equal, as it should be; and strain with the root, and if you see that it does not move, put a right splint small enough to raise the fracture, and do not move it; and if the fracture is elsewhere, as in the index or one of the others, if it is equal, and bind it with the two fingers that follow; or bind them all together, holding the wrist tightly, or put on a splint, as for a pouch; and take care in restoring and disposing of the wound, as I have said.
of the broken limb
The bones of the thigh are often fractured, and it is well seen when they twist before and behind; and the restoration is when it is bound with a thread above the fracture and below. The patient lies on his face, and extends his limbs equally; and it is when the fracture is within the bone itself
And if the fracture is close to the head of the thigh, if either the upper or lower ligament of the fracture is grasped, and the other is below the fracture. And in the same way if it is close to the knee, and in this case either the upper or lower ligament of the limb is grasped, and the other is below; then put the thumbs of both hands at the same level as the natural position of the limb, and then put on the dressing and bind it, without causing any displacement.
If there is an abscess that has burst, let it rest peacefully and then return to your work and your treatment; the bandage is made in a timely manner. If there is an abscess that has burst, let it rest peacefully and then return to your work and your treatment; the bandage is made in a timely manner.
If there is an abscess that has burst, if it comes loose, address what has come, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, it is necessary to extract them; and if this cannot be done, it is necessary to cut the limb open and drain the pus.  The treatment is as we have said, until it is healed.
And never is the bone broken in this place where I put the needles, as in the arm or the shoulder; nevertheless, in the restoration made in this place, I do not cause any pain to the patient.
And the swelling that remains in the bone is restored in one or two days, or less or more, according to the variations of temperaments.</start_of_turn>
of the rue du genouil</start_of_turn
The swelling in the rue du genouil often breaks, but it rains many times. And if it breaks, it is not but a tear, or a break, and there is pain, and this is well known.</start_of_turn>
And if it is set right, do this: put everything that is round back to its place until it is firmly assembled again; then put on the dressing, and put on a round cushion, if you need it, and strain it as it should be strained; then reward all the orders that we have said before, as for example incision and other like that; if you put into practice each of these things that it should be done, until it is healed.
And if it is set right, do this: put everything that is round back to its place until it is firmly assembled again; then put on the dressing, and put on a round cushion, if you need it, and strain it as it should be strained; then reward all the orders that we have said before, as for example incision and other like that; if you put into practice each of these things that it should be done, until it is healed.
And if it is set right, do this: put everything that is round back to its place until it is firmly assembled again; then put on the dressing, and put on a round cushion, if you need it, and strain it as it should be strained; then reward all the orders that we have said before, as for example incision and other like that; if you put into practice each of these things that it should be done, until it is healed. As for the fracture of the limb that has three bones, one is called the "muscle" and the other is called the "fossa"; and there is all together a breaking as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the work is the same as that of the arm.
And if two bones are fractured together, twist the limb from all sides.
And if a bone is fractured near the surface, twist the limb forward.</start_of_turn>
And if a large bone is fractured, if one sees great pain and it is visible; and twist downwards. Then bring extension, and make it even, and tie the bones even; however, if the fracture is severe, and there are more pieces, even if extension is less and lighter; and adjust according to your skill.</start_of_turn>
And when you have completed your work, if you take .ij. strips of coarse cloth that cover the limb from one side to the other, and be as long as the limb from the knee to the toes; then wrap in .ij. layer of lint from under and from over, and bind firmly in the middle, and with this binding the limb will not bend either to the right or to the left, and that is good; and no one will administer any more than .ij. dose of pain that is long as the limb, and if there is a wound, and put on the limb to prevent movement, and do it properly in the fracture or there is an injury; and move each joint of the limb, to see if there is any swelling or other accident; if the cure until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Of the fracture of bones at their root.
At the ankle, there is no fracture, but in the bones of the root of the limb there is no fracture at all, and two must suffice; there is no other means than to wait until healing is complete.</start_of_turn>
And if there is a fracture in the bones of the root of the limb, and you see these bones pressing against each other, if you put the limb so that it hangs down to the earth like a bird in flight, and then put the limb back in its place, as soon as the bones are raised, then put on the dressing and bandage, and put a little bandage under the limb at the joint, then restrain the limb from moving, and cover it with a cloth bandage.</start_of_turn
And when two or three days have passed, if the limb is healed, because you will find the bones equal, whether fractured or dislocated.</start_of_turn>
And if there are two fractures, if you restore them as we have said, then hold the hand still; then place under the fracture a splint according to the length of the fracture, and make it wider than the width of the fracture, and put on the dressing that I have said; and if there are three or more, fracture them and place under each fracture a splint according to its quantity, covered with a bandage of linen, and strain the dressing from the bone.
And remember that you must not neglect the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said; and secure each accident as it should be secured.</start_of_turn>
from the fracture of the clavicle bone
When the bones of a woman are fractured, if she sits enlarged, then lean her forward; and support her behind; then fill the belly of the wound with wool, and put as much in as a sto; then draw out the woman, and keep her back and front; and then jump up the wool, until it reaches the entrance of the wound, and return the bone with the sto; and when she sees her piss, if she has pulled out the wool, and when she has pissed, she will recover; for she will make thirty-nine days or more. If the fracture is restored, and you see it, take a bladder of birch, and tie a cord to her belly, and pour all the bladder into the wound; then blow in the cord until the bladder is expelled: the wound will then return to its normal state; then fill with wool, and leave it in for a few days, until it is healed.
When the forearm bone of a man or woman is fractured, if you restore it as we have said concerning the thigh bone; and these fractures do not usually remain hidden, for they proceed from those who study and use it, and they are mentioned in my book. For a fracture signifies that there are several ways to restore it: therefore take heed.
In the groin, when it is fractured, take a goose neck and bind it up; then cover it with cloth, and leave it for two days or until it is healed, and it will be perfectly healed then.
Of sudden with wound
In case of sudden fracture with wound, even if it is great, as for the bone of the thigh or the shoulder or similar, that it should be sound now, if what we have said is true
And if the wound is sound, if the clot of vitriol remains, if you have nothing else, then resume the fracture in the same hour, or the following, if there is no other sign of fracture.
And if there is swelling at the fracture, if the swelling persists until the next day, leave the restoration until the swelling has subsided, and do not touch either the third or the fourth part, for you will risk causing further damage.
And if the bone is fractured and is apparent through the skin, cover it immediately with your hands, lightly extending your fingers.
And if extension does not appear to you, hold this instrument of iron, which is about the length of three or four fingers, and its width is according to the extent of the wound; for this reason it is necessary to press three or four fingers, according to what is necessary in the wound of a fracture; and let it be round and firm, so that it does not press against the limb at your work, or be placed before and behind, and large in the middle forward.
It is called "palainche" because it is necessary to place the curved limb upon the head of the fractured bone; and once it has been placed, it must be even so that one side meets the other. And if the fracture is slight, and the instrument does not well grasp the bone, if you press the head of the bone, while the instrument still has possession of it.
If you cannot restore the bone, as we have said, if you grasp with a covering instrument that can reach that area, or if you must incision or burn, at your peril; then withdraw that which is remaining embedded in the bone, with rough rasps and scanty pus.
When the bone is restored, and the patient experiences great pain afterwards, swelling that is not in its natural position. If you do too much to restore it, then moisten with black vinegar, and do so cautiously; do not put anything else on the wound except oil, for it will cause decay and corruption; then administer stars when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the dressing all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take care that the wound is not strained with the bursting; for many times this has been done foolishly, and it has caused the patient to die or become lame or corrupt many times; let the inflammation be milder and more delicate than the others.
If the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that it will heal, as we have said, and you find pain in the limb, if it is not necessary to put on stars; but wrap around, instead of stars, a firm cloth, and bind them. And when you see afterwards that it is swelling more or less, if that which you put on has become soft, and there is healing wound, like ointment tetrafarmaçon and the like.
And you must stretch the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is soldered and healed.
And you must keep the limb perfectly still in some measure that it can move easily without causing harm
If it is dislocated again, and it cannot stay in place, it must be reset while the limb is still slightly bent, as there are small pieces of bone that must be broken in order to stop the pain.
If a fistula arises in the limb, or any other kind of corruption, if you must cure it, according to what is said in this chapter above. And when the bone is broken, and opened on the limb, as for example the bones of the thigh or the shoulder, and other large bones, if you do not treat them, many times death comes from this. But leave them as long as they bleed; perhaps by chance it will heal by itself after twenty or thirty days, and then cure the wound if you wish; or if you do not wish, leave it alone.
The hairs which come out from the beard
The hairs which come out from the beard come out many times after the heat of the summer, even when it is close to the joint, and it is a helpful thing to see how the limb is positioned; and by chance it cannot do its natural work.
Beware then that you take care: if you administer astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocoll, acacia, and the like, do not take any of these things, or all of them together, and mix them with wine that is astringent or with plenty of egg or with oil; and put them on the wound in bandages, and strain it well, and do not remove it from the hand for days; and then dislocate it, and do it again, until the dislocations are bony; or you strain it on a well-made piece of lead; for the property of lead is that it hardens all the swellings under the limb; and if the dislocation has already become hard like stone, and it is necessary to break it, if the swelling above has burst, and to make the excess apparent; or you leave it without a drain, until it is bony, and cure it until it is healed.
When the break of the bone is restored, and hangs limp after the limb is weak and limp, if there is any cause for it: because it was too tightly bound and was not bound properly; or because there are too many bands, and cannot come back to the limb naturally; or because of many wounds; or from too great movements, not even in its proper place; or because there is much blood in its body, if it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat and make the limb firm, as long as it does not swell in him; and give him bath, and make him joyful and cheerful; then put on a bandage over the limb, so that the bandage attracts to great nourishment, and the blood flows often hot, until the nourishment comes back to the limb; and restore it to its natural position.
The limb is bent after the illness.
When the limb is bent after restoration, and the bone is broken open, and the limb is deformed, all this without damaging its natural work: for it is not believed that one should break the limb anew, as some fools say; and many have suffered from this treatment in our land; this work is blamed, and many deaths result from it; however, if the swelling and pain are fresh, if you can raise them with warm water or soft herbs, such as meadowsweet leaves, and roots, and honey, and similar things; and you make a soft dressing, like with aquaint well done, and take the nourishing draught of meadowsweet, and mix it with grease of gelline or olive oil, and make a dressing on top; or you take fat figs, and grind them with horse dung, and similar medicines that alleviate the swelling.
And never should the bone be dislocated by continuous rubbing and for a long time with wet hands. And give the limb a gentle movement every hour.
If the dislocation is swollen and hardened, like a stone, and requires iron tongs, if you cover it up to the bone, make a superficial incision; and put cushion and packing in the wound.
If the dislocation is swollen and hardened, like a stone, and requires iron tongs, if you cover it up to the bone, make a superficial incision; and put cushion and packing in the wound.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to no avail, if it can now be remedied.
For if it is late, and if the limb is swollen, and by chance we reset it, we have pricked the limb at its root; for this reason we must not move it while it is swollen: many times it has caused swelling and other pains.
Whenever this happens, if the patient is made whole, then let him rest; until the swelling subsides; then raise the limb high and with oil, and move it gently, and cure each limb as it comes to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters concerning dislocations from the shoulder to the foot
Des mandibules.
The jaws are loosened and the dislocation of both is like this: when they are united to their bones, and softened by moisture; or when they are entirely loosened, and hang towards the chin, and close the mouth that it cannot hold it, cannot close its mouth, and engulfs its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is slight, if it returns by itself in several positions.
And if it is complete and accompanied, if you must, to hold it fast, and do not delay;
And in such manner that the minister holds the head of the sufferer, and look that you put your hand on the pocket of one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the mandible in the mouth, if the dislocation is of one and a half parts; and the other hand must be loosened, to make them even; and command the patient to soften his mandibles and move them from all sides.
And look that you make the thing even, until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn>
And if it returns grasped, even if both mandibles are together, if they arise with hot water and oil, keep them lightly; do not force the return, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And when they are brought back even, and the patient’s mouth is closed, and feeling well, put upon damp cloths moistened in cerote made of rose oil and wax, then bind loosely with fine thread.
And the patient sleeps on his back, and his arms rest between two cushions, so that they do not move forward or backward, do not attempt to straighten, but grasp lightly meat, until the pains are overcome, and the teeth are quiet;
Then eat what he wants lightly, and do not work too hard to open the mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well quiet and healthy.
If the jaw bones do not manage to be reset at a single hour, and are not firmly converted to their place, then fever and swelling become accustomed, and by chance solution of the belly, and by chance vomiting of pure bile.
When you see that, then know that it is a loss; and many times death is the consequence in eight days.</start_of_turn>
of the forceps.</start_of_turn>
The forceps cannot remove the bone from its place without causing further damage, and is always damaging when it is used.</start_of_turn
And if the patient lies prone on his back, extends his arms; then press the limb towards your palm, and it will return; then place the bandage and the dressing, and strain it.
And the one who is beside the knee cannot unbuckle; if it does not, and if it unbuckles once, if you hold it firmly, as we have said; then place the dressing and the bandage, and strain it, and command the patient to rest until he is healed.
And the limb is brought back to its place, when it is relieved from its limb.
De la dislocation de l’espaule.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated by moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with a slight movement as we have experienced, then it is necessary to first reset the dislocation.
and it is not loosened behind by the shoulder, and is not loosened within by the nerves; and several times it is loosened below towards the shoulder, even among those who have much hair, for among those who have enough hair, there are prickles, and they return with prickles.
And by chance, there happen to be blows or fractures, and swell the shoulder from a deep abscess, and care that it is loosened by that.
Therefore, you must certainly be sure, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that a dislocation is when it is turned towards the shoulder, and distinguishes between the diseased and the healthy shoulder, and you will find between their diversity a visible difference; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a cavity, and the arm hangs down from the shoulder, as if it were a bow; and the patient cannot move his hand back to its place, or move in any way.
And thus, if it is displaced upwards, if not hidden, for you will find it clearly on palpation.
And this manner of dislocation is not forced to restore it, when it is new, or if the limb is painful.</start_of_turn>
And the way is that the assistant holds the painful limb upwards, then places his thumbs below the armpit, and holds the joint forcefully upwards; and the assistant holds the limb, and extends it upwards, because it is put below; if necessary.</start_of_turn
And if it does not come as we have said above, if it is to be known that the patient is to be bathed in warm water; and it is administered soft and soothing nourishment, such as decoction of heliotrope and fennel and honey in water, and is administered;
Then, if necessary, soothe the patient on his back, and put on the seat of the assle a cushion of linen equal in size, not too soft nor too hard, then put the eye of the thumb on the cushion, and keep the head of the shoulder firmly in place, and treat the hand of the patient.
and another minister holds the head of the patient firmly, if it does not move downwards; the shoulder will return immediately. If you see that it remains dislocated in this way,
and that you make yourself present, that is to say, someone who is greater than the patient; and that you place two fingers against the cost of the shoulder, and keep the shoulder depressed by the patient’s hand, so that the patient’s arm hangs down And another minister treats the hand of the patient backward toward the belly. And if the patient is too light, if he can bear nothing heavy, the dislocation will return immediately.
And we must also remember in another way: if the bone is fixed, that is to say, long as a nail in the earth, from which the head of the shoulder must not be too great or too small; ... then put on the patient’s hand, but that it be covered with coarse cloth, and that the patient’s hand be placed long enough; then stretch out the hand backward from the other side, and the dislocation will return to its place immediately; ...
If these things fail to restore it, if you wish to perform this cure: take one thumb and two fingers of great length, which have the tip rounded like a mouse entering through an opening in the wall, and place them under the armpit, following this form.
If these things fail to restore it, if you wish to perform this cure: take one thumb and two fingers of great length, which have the tip rounded like a mouse entering through an opening in the wall, and place them under the armpit, following this form. Then support the shoulder with a cloth, so that it does not bleed the patient, and place it under the armpit of the patient. Extend your arms above the shoulder, and support the arm at the wrist, and place the thumb on the index finger of a fist, and extend the hand outward. The joint is now restored.
And when it is restored, in whatever way, if you wish to keep it in place, put under the armpit a square ball of wool of equal size, and put on it a pad of powdered meal, with incense and alum of egg, on the whole shoulder and around the joint, then strain under the armpit immediately, and keep the limb resting on the pad, and embrace the hand at its collar, and keep the hands still together.
And it is necessary that he move the limb gently while it is comfortable, because it will heal faster; and then move it more vigorously after five or six days, and move it. And if it is stiff and cannot be softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is stiff due to moisture from the beginning, or for another cause, if it is necessary, administer two punctures with the cautery, as is often done before or alongside cautery procedures.</start_of_turn>
And if you do all this, and the joint remains dislocated after six days, and the limb still cannot be raised, then the nerves at the head of the shoulder are compressed or stretched or softened; and if the joint never heals in its place.
The shoulder dislocation which is from the front, and the arm, or behind, if it is done by impulse, and extension of the hands, and is administered with another bandage; and it heals as long as it is sound.
And if after healing there comes pain in the limb, and later movement, if the patient uses the limb many times, as long as that pain is relieved, and returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation that remains.
The joint is dislocated at the point where it is usually stable, and the same thing happens at the front and the back; and it is often detached, both front and back, and the dislocation is not easily remedied, for we see it clearly and feel it well; and it is detached in this way. And when you join the patient with a bandage, if he can see it openly. For the joint is stiff, and cannot bend the arm, touch his shoulder at all.
And must keep it still as before, because if it were to come loose again, if it should ever happen, it will bring grief to bring it back; and by chance it cannot be brought back whole, even if it is at the back; for it is better to leave it as it is than to cause further pain, and by chance there comes death.
And if it is restored again, when it is such that it can be brought back, you must extend your hand with both hands; and let your arms be spread out, and your hands down to the level of the patient's shoulders front and back, and hold the joint firmly together, or at the root of the bone, until it returns to its place
And if the dislocation is in front, if it returns when the patient doubles their hand over their hand, and grasps from the root of the thumb which is dislocated.
And if it does not return to its place, if you administer strong extension; and if two ministers extend the arm and hold it firmly, so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm from the armpit, and wrap around a double-length and wide bandage;
and when you have looked at the joint at the hand, if the limb is devoid of any oil to soften the joint, then stretch the joint firmly, until it returns;
And when it is in place, if you put on a dry plaster with a piece of egg, and it strains, and bends the arm at the shoulder of the patient, and leave it for some days, then take it off.
When the joint is firmly in its place, if you loosen the limb and leave it; if you see that the joint does not hold well, repeat the plastering and the limb, and leave it until it is firmly set; then take it off.</start_of_turn>
And if there is pain after the joint has been reset, and it moves, bathe and massage it well, and press until it is relieved; or you put on the joint a greasy poultice of mutton, then leave it for a day and a night, then take out the poultice and the bone, and do the same.</start_of_turn When he sweats, let him wipe the joint gently; then reset the nail on, and then put in or bathe; do this three or four times until he is healed.  If you see that there is excessive moisture in the sweat, add ashes to the bath; this will absorb the moisture.
When the hand is dislocated...
When the joint of the hand is loosened, and its return is laborious, more so than the others, it must be immediately reset in its place without delay, even if there is swelling or if there is a fracture.
And if you put your hand on a table, and extend your arm, and look at it so that you see that you put your palm on the surface of the joint, and hold it until it returns.
However, you must look to see if it is well in place; then put your hand behind your back on a table when extending and returning it.</start_of_turn> And if the dislocation is at the back of the arm, if you put your hand behind your back on the table, and look to see that you put your hand on that surface of the joint. If it returns now, it is well.</start_of_turn>
If not, if the strain of the calming patches is excessive, let them be removed and leave in their place.
And if he cannot bear it, and you do not wish to keep it in after a while, the joint will remain broken
neither does it harm the patient more than that his hands are relaxed, and cannot do anything: because if the nerves are cut or the vein is severed, except for the case of cautery, nothing else is worth doing.
And when the hands are in place, if you put on the dressing that we have mentioned, then strain and leave it for three days, then remove it and leave it like that.
If he cannot move it easily, and there is no pain, if the wound is filled with warm liquid, and it is washed until it is healed.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
et le laisse ainsi trois jours, et puis le met égal celui jour; et de ne pas le lier, si comme nous l’avons dit, et garder des yeux ouverts, et ne le fasse pas bouger, et le serre lier de nouveau; et fais ceci souvent, tant qu’il soit étroit.
and leave it thus for three days, and then put it equal today; and do not bind it, as we have said, and keep the eyes open, and do not move it, and bind it again; and do this often, until it is narrow.
and do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same if it is dislocated from another part.
When the shoulder blade or the collarbone is loosened, or if there are several loosenings, if no remedy is found, for the patient is in haste.
When the swelling leaps forward, it cannot be held back, and many times it softens no limb, or the knees or arms or legs.</start_of_turn>
And many times the shoulder blade turns three times; that which turns behind is called "gilbosite."
The cure is that if the gilbosite comes from childhood: if there is no cure or healing of all.</start_of_turn>
And that which comes from sitting or impacts or similar things, say the old methods of treatment with great words, or there is no benefit at all.
but I have abridged it according to my intention, and I have devised instruments in various ways.
I say that in the swelling that comes before the wound, there is no healing at all;
and also that which comes directly at the cost, and one cannot cure it but what comes from behind, as I say.
And let the patient keep his face stretched out one inch above the level, and have tension from his eyes, that he does not move;
Then hold one thumb at the top of the limb in the earth forms, and one at the toes, and bind one thread beside the patient’s armpits, and one at the waist, and one at the hips, and one at the ankles;
And two assistants know the threads, one at the top and the other at the toes, among the three thumbs;
And be well closed, the thumb as we have said, and look that he puts his palms on the spine forms, until it returns.
If she does not return by this treatment, take two fingers of length, and hold them against the side, and let the patient lie on his side; put the thumb against the side, then put the middle of the thumb on the spine. Put the thumbs over the other thumb, and press firmly, until it returns to its place; and if you see that it does not work, do it with the pin that is at the hand.
And put four stitches at the head of the patient’s arm of great length, and between each stitch, a knot and a thread, a palm of space of length.
And every basin has one opening, or the tube turns crooked, and let the basin be firmly fixed in the earth, if it does not move; and between every two basins there is one basin returning, so that when the thread returns, there are in two returns two small basins of a palm's length, to bring back the tube.
Then the thread which is among the knots towards the head, and the other thread towards the pieces at the other end, and let the basins turn their tube throughout the thread, and the master puts the thorn even as we have said
And when it is even, put upon a dry dressing with abundance of eggs, and then press, and then support with a tablet of two thumbs, that it may cover the root of the pain and the part of the ribcage that is painful, and then tie with a thread, as we have said, and use the patient’s natural nourishment, until it is healed.
And if nothing else comes to pass at the end of the sickness, if it is commanded to administer soothing and calming medicines, with the exception that we have said before; and in no case shall a piece of lead be administered.
And never let the appearance of a swelling on the back of the neck be seen as anything other than a dislocation; for it is the bone that opens, from which we must not presume: by chance death will come.
hip dislocation
Hairs that are attached to the hip and shoulder joints only become loose from dislocations alone, and do not come out with other joints; and the hip joint is loosened in three parts: within and without, and in front and behind; and the more within it is loosened, the more loosened is in front and behind.
And the knowledge of dislocation within is that when one joins the painful limb with the tendon, if it is longer, and if the patient groans more than before, and cannot bend the limb at the joint to the fire; then it is the bruise that is left behind from the cautery, because the head of the humerus comes there.
And the sign of one who comes to the aid, if it is that this accident is contrary to those mentioned above.
And the sign of one who comes to the aid, if it is that he has his limb well in accordance with the accomplishment; however, do not double his knee with pain, and if you see him do so, do not do so before, and retain his urine, and swell his groin, and when he walks, pass over his heel.
And the sign of one who comes to the aid, if it is that he cannot expand his knee, cannot double it, and is that his limb is shorter than the other, and his groin is softened, and his shoulder is dislocated from its socket
You must take back this semblance of dislocation if it is an old dislocation and it remains according to its habit, if there is no cure; and it is not recommended that you do so unless there is presumption.
And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are three ways of dislocation, if you are hasty you will twist the joint, and stretch outwards and downwards, and move it to the right and left; by chance if it returns, and there is no need for any other treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, if you must, apply one strong minister, and stretch the limb firmly with both hands, or with one hand that is sufficient to bind it on the knee; and another minister extends his hand downwards in part as much as he can stretch out his hands downwards from his ankles, then bind it with a loop of thread above the hip; and another holds the head of the limb.
And extend upwards and downwards at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.
Such a method of extension is common in three out of four cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, that is good.</start_of_turn>
If this does not suffice, if you deem it necessary, you must put a cure in place. When the dislocation is at the shoulder, you must first elevate the patient above his costal margin, then place the limb on the root of the scapula, and that which is below the elbow, and extend the limb upwards towards the armpit, and downwards towards the forcele.</start_of_turn>
Then grasp another assistant to support his arms, and embrace the thick limb of the afflicted shoulder, and extend it outward: if it returns to its place now; and this method of dislocation is less laborious than the others.</start_of_turn
If you do not manage to bind the shoulder firmly in this manner as we have said, if you know that the patient has a severe pain in his limbs, bind his arms together with a strong thread around his thumbs and his knees, and let the affected limb hang down more than the others.
Then let the limb hang from the shoulder, or suspend it from the ground for the length of two arms; then command the minister to grasp the shoulder joint, and let another minister stand beside the patient, who graspes the shoulder, for the joint has now returned normally.</start_of_turn>
And when the dislocation is overcome, if the patient is lying down, as we have said in the case of dislocation, grasp the limb firmly with one hand, and on the foot as well;
Then place the thumbs, one at the shoulder and the other at the hip, and grasp the thumb between the thighs of the patient in the form of a triangle. And have damp cloths placed around, so that the patient does not feel pain, then extend your thumbs ministerially towards him, and look with your eyes that the dislocation is equal to his hand.</start_of_turn>
If it returns, that is good. But if not, put on his table, and press on it as we said in the treatise, and keep the patient lying on the side of the cost.
And when the dislocation is forward, if you must, extend the limb gently, as I have said; and look with your eyes where the pain is on the painful side, and press on the other hand, and extend it backwards towards the groin.</start_of_turn>
And if the dislocation is at the shoulder, if it does not suffice to extend the patient forward, do not lift him up from the ground, but rather that he remain as if he had been loosened at the shoulder, as we have said above concerning the two thumbs. Or if he is lying on his face, and the limb is extended as we have said before, and must press on the joint at the table;
Then he will be at a point when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then join the buttocks, put the support, and strain with a bandage, so that the shoulder does not move;
And if it rests two or three days, then loosen it, and place the bandage upon it; and if you see that they are even, if it has strained as before, leave it. For two days; then loosen it, and make it comfortable without delay, until the limb is restored to its normal position.
From the dislocation of the shoulder joint...
The shoulder joint is dislocated in two ways: forward and backward; and do not strain it forward
And the sign is that if you instruct the patient to bend his limb at the knee, and it does not reach his buttock, it is a sign that it is dislocated.
and restore all of them if you make the patient sit upright, and extend his limb if he can, and put your hand behind his face, and put his heel on your toes
then take his knee towards your palms, and draw between your shoulders, then bend his legs so that the knees touch each other; and another attendant extends his heel as long as the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that his limb has been properly bent at the knee
And place the padding on, and raise the limb to the hip, and bind them together firmly for two or three days, then remove it.  Do not let the patient move until the limb is comfortable.
If the limb is not in its place, if an extension is administered firmly, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder is never completely rigid and is always somewhat dislocated and painful.
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and that it has been displaced beforehand to the part where it is loosened.
If the lameness is slight, it must be gently extended with the hands when it is only slightly swollen
And when it is thoroughly dry, it is necessary to make the patient sit upright, and hold him, that is to say support him strongly under the arm, below the ankle;
Then draw the limb towards your right hand, and then towards the left hand twice, and then extend it upwards, and hold it firmly;
et fai ce trois fois, si com nos avons dit, en monast et en traiant le pied; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient.
and if it does not return, make the patient lie on his back on the earth, and hold one foot firmly in the earth between his thighs, and bind a bandage around it, so that he does not bleed the patient;
then hold the shoulder steady, and another attendant extends the limb with his hands or with something, which is placed on the collar of the limb; Then extend the chest muscles equally, and hold them either apart between the knees of the patient to keep the patient steady when extending.
Then put the eyes equally on the dislocation at his hands, and another minister grasps the limb firmly at the shoulder, and the dislocation will return immediately.
And when it returns to a point, if you put on the dressing and press upon it, and the strain is complete, and you bind the limb to the limb, and keep the nerves that are above the ankle behind, that they are not too tight;
Then leave it for one or two days, and if the strain is gone; then loosen the bandage at one-third or one-fourth, and send the patient away after three days. If he goes before that end, it is not my certainty that he will not be spoiled again.
If he pricks at his base, if you must hold his eyes still as we have said before, until he is whole again.</start_of_turn>
until he is healed.</start_of_turn>
When the two are dislocated, if you can gently stretch the limb, it is a light matter.
And if the dislocation is in no other place but at the back of the shoulder, it is advised that you make the patient sit upright on a chair or on the bed, and place your hand on what is open of these joints, then press your hand firmly until it returns to its place.
And if it is equal, and there is no opening, if you put the hand of the arm on a table at the shoulder, then press firmly, and leave it for two days, then release it; and rest it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
with wound and dislocation together
When a wound accompanies a dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, many times it has happened that the patient has died.
If you are not cautious in the cure, and you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and compassionate and timely, do not be rash;
and use at the beginning soothing things appostomately, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, if you now restore the limb to its place, even if the swelling remains;
And when the limb is at rest, if necessary, administer calming things around the wound, and cure the wound if possible, with dried sponges.
If the dislocation has burst, and softer bones are fractured, if the bones are flexible, do as is said in simple diseases;
Beware of entering a state of fear, as I have already said, for this brings danger to both your soul and body. Amen.
