Your voice, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last part of the science of assembled medicine and have finished it through its explanations and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I would complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from top to bottom, thus the science has perished and is decayed, and there remains nothing more of the fuels than the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this comes the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is estranged.
It seems to me that I want to vivify together the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together the forms of the iron instruments of cautery, and other tools of work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands were found in our time, is the art of medicine extended. And it is necessary for the one who undertakes to thoroughly learn the science of anatomy, as Galien says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of them, and their movement and rest, and how they issue from there.
And for this reason Hippocrates said that the name with the noun is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of hand.
We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned beforehand, if they do not take care to avoid error and not harm people; thus I have seen many who engage in this science and abandon their sense and experiment.
For I saw a foolish doctor who operated on an abscess of the throat or neck of a woman, and cut through the arteries of the neck; because so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who treated a stone of a man's age, and the stone was large; if he took out a piece of the bladder with it, and the man died within 22 days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and I knew well that if they had operated on him, he would have died.
And he saw another doctor who took in hand the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the doctor, ignorant of the treatment, held the fracture steady over the wound as it was strongly swollen, and did not leave the wound at all to suppurate, and left it thus terminated; and he commanded that it should not be disturbed; and remained thus until the leg was entirely inflamed and the foot came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and dislocate the leg; and when I had it dislocated thus it was at peace and felt no pain.
But all the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the limb was almost entirely lost.
And he saw another doctor who burst open an abscess that was hidden, and then it became inflamed due to the evil of his lordship's malice.
For cancer, when it is pure melancholic humor, it does not seem that one should touch with iron unless the place is entirely clean so that one can remove all that is corrupted.
And for this reason, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into 12 divisions: namely, to know whether there is danger in various dispositions; and I will show you in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary that you beware, so that foolish people cannot speak badly of you.
Take your arms in confidence, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and salvation; and abandon the painful diseases of grievous sanity; and lay down your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Here is the translation:
I have divided this treatise into four chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cautery and medical cautery, and this chapter is organized from the head to the feet; and on the forms of instruments, and the furnishings of cautery, and all that which is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping glasses and wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is organized and on the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from the head to the feet, and on the forms of instruments.
Here is the translation:
I say that the qualities of aid and usefulness are the longest speech and subtle science, and the secret responses; and from this, many wise men speak, and agree to it; and I do not suffer much from their words, for I reduce lengthiness.
I say that fire cautery universally aids every complexion where there is matter, because there are two complexions: it is to know that hot complexions have matter, and dry complexions lack matter.
In hot and dry complexions, they found matter, some devised that fire cautery is great aid; and the others said the opposite: that fire cautery is of no value for a disease that comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to cure hot diseases by heat, nor by dryness; and he who said the opposite claimed that fire cautery provides great aid for hot and dry diseases that come from the bodies of men. For when you examine the body of the man and its moisture according to the complexions of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it true many times through experiment.
And in no way, let it not be meddled with by those who have not experienced it, and who know through long practice the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the happenings and the space of time; we have no fear of other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses. And all the mirrors assemble and agree with the cautery.
And know, son, that fire cautery is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than medicine burning with ardor.
For fire is simple, and does not come except to the member that is cooked, and does not harm another member if it is not named.
The burning medicines come from one member to another in alignment, and bring about the limb's diseases of grievous sanitation; and by chance, they kill the patient.
The fire is for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not make this, if it does not have surplus.
And this I have found through experiment and through the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me that I should conceal the secret which is deposited in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out the diseases of bodies, as the philosopher said in demonstrating; or you receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agree at the time when they should be done, the cauteries, and choose promptly.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries occurring are often relieved by the aid of cautery; and also the cauteries are for necessary pains and swift ones that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
And do not think of anything else, dear son, as the foolish doctor does; for in the disease that is healthy by cautery there is no relapse; and he says so; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors that are cause of pain, and is more valuable than medicine for the hastening of its value, and for the virtue of his work and signory.
And it is possible that the disease becomes worse at times according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue; and there are gathered in him the superfluities through the acquisition of foods and similar things, so it is not cauteries administered in place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as fire cautery for pain, and similar things, and the pain does not return; but this happens little.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth more than medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cures in any disease and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it is valuable. Then it appears clearly that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Here is the translation:
And always when you heat up a gold instrument, you do not know how it is heated by the color of the gold, and it is soon cooled down; and if one heats it too much; they make it catch fire; and thus there is enough obstruction.
And for this reason we do not use cautery of iron that we have not made appear in our work.
Now I have ordered this chapter concerning the wounded head just below, because the way is easier to find.
of olive oil cautery
Fire cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and it is used for the cause of an illness called "soda", and because of many humors that descend to the head as eyes, and ears, and for a multitude of sounds and pain in the teeth and pain in the throat, and also for all illnesses that come from coldness such as paralysis, sodic and apoplectic diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by medicine solutively modifying the head, three or four times, according to whether the strength and age and habituation of the patient can suffer it; and then make the head of the patient ready.
And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands on the soles of his feet; afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes; and there where your two fingers will come, if it bleeds from the notch, then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", whose form is this:
And put it on the sealed place of the notch, and make it descend and extract your hand little by little while turning; then lift your hand slightly, and rewind the notch if you see the opening small; and if you do not see it, restart the cautery until you see the opening as I have told you; afterwards take a little silk thread, and put it in the soft and wet cotton inside, and put it on the notch, and leave it three days; then put it under a warm poultice; and leave it until the eschar is removed; afterwards cure the wound of the incision which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
And the ancients said that the more one delays in covering a wound, the more it suppurates; and therefore one must assist movement.
And they said that one should not leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
And others said that one should leave the cautery so high, and press so hard that one removes as much of the bone as a vertebra, like women put in their hairpieces, because the humors issue out; and one must leave the wound covered for a long time; afterwards one must cure and dry it.
And these two manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good in every way, except in some homes where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the head is weakened by the continuous natural solutions, as we demonstrate in other members; and similarly when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more salvatory and miraculous to me, and of this use I often find salvation.
of the old pain at the head
When the entire head comes to chronic pain, and lasts a long time, then the patient should use yarrow and pills that are called "cough", and of purging the head and eyes and plasters; and if they do the cautery that we mentioned before, and it is not effective.
Take care that the head of the sick person is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize beneath that which was cautered a little as we said above.
After doing cautery on each horn of the head just to the bone, as we said before, and do it where the vein called "vasselz" is; and it is where one puts ventouses; and hold your hand so that you do not touch just to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it seems that the cauteries of the horns should be more subtle than those on which one does the cautery on the middle of the head, and this is the form:
for fire cautery of the head When in one part of the head pain suddenly comes, and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is purged with mundane medicines, and other treatments have been done as I said in the division of diseases, and none of this helps: then they make cauteries according to eight methods, that is to know medicine from ague and fire.
The cauteries of medicine from ague are that you take a sweet almond, and remove the shell and recover it with a little pouch as eight heads, and then make the temple where the pain holds in some manner so you can replace the sweet almond under the skin; and when it will be replaced, tie it and hold it well and leave it thus for ten hours; and then untie it and treat it with the sweet almond, and leave the wound thus for eight days or nine; then put on a soft poultice in butter until it can be pierced.
After the treatment of wounding, until it is healthy; and if you see that it makes use of some burning medicines that I have written or treated with twelve kinds of burning medicines.
The iron cautery is according to this method. Heat the cautery of the shape:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a hook or it has little curvature, and in the middle a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold with your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that the majority of the skin's thickness is cauterized; and lift your hand so the artery is not hurt, which is devious, and abundantly flows blood.
Afterwards, put cotton in the wound, and place it on the spot for three days; then I put moist cotton in a bundle, and then cure the spot of inflammation until it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this emigraine with the cautery called "cultellare", at every point, and be careful not to touch the artery in this emigraine which is not ancient.
of the emigraine
Here is the translation:
And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the enemy of the chief as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in this chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. burnings; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
from the pain of the ears due to coldness
When pain comes to the ear from cold, and we have applied solutive medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery which is called "points", of which this is the form:
After pointing everything around the ailing ear, or around the .ij., where the pain holds in both, and you extract a little below the root of the ear, then you have signed the place of the incision; and there are .x. points around each ear; after cure the place until it is healthy.
of the torment of the mouth
Torture that must be cured by fire cautery is not except those that move with flux, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses; and do not apply fire cautery to similar things that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
When you cure this kind of torture that moves with flux and evacuations of the head and gurgling, and it does not work, then you must cauterize the patient with .iij. cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little further back from the temple, and the third in the setting of the .ij. lips; and place the cautery on the healthy part, and make the cautery exactly at the top of the ear above a little below the crown of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery there until most of the blood is burnt; and that is the form of the cautery:
And it is similar to the cutting that we have described before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the cuts be a little larger; after curing the wound as I have said before, until it is healthy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not profit at all, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the head, and one on the spot that is called "vasselz" as we have said before, and apply the last cautery to the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large years and mondified pills to clarify the brain; afterwards, place the entire head of the patient in an emplaster of sinapi, which is written or treated among the emplasters; and that's the way of cautery: if you do as I have said.
If he is sane in this way, it is good; and if he is not, make three cauteries in the head descending just to the neck, and leave a space of two fingers between each cautery; and cure as for others, and if you have seen them joined, and the patient is suffering, make one cautery in the middle; and if it is necessary, two others on the two horns, and cure until he is sane; and be the cauteries that are called "olivare", as I have said before.
from the cold of the head It is necessary that the head be moisturized with years and with what we have said before; afterwards take the head of the patient, then make a fire cautery in the head and on each horn, and behind and on the spine of the neck; and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is fierce, then make four fire cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the greatest heat is burnt, and lift your hand; afterwards cure until it is healthy, and may the cautery that is called "olivare" which we have said before.
from epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to moisturize the brain with years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the disease is great and suffers from taking medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot endure the suffering, make them gargle and perform softening of the brain with good meats; after they have reposed their head in a warm place, and make them undergo cautery as we said before, and apply cautery to the vessel, and to each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffers, make them undergo cautery as I said for one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the olive cautery be done according to the method I said.
If the patient is an infant, make them undergo subtle cautery according to this method:
When the cause of melancholy is excessive or corrupt and gross humors, then apply the cautery of such cauteries as we said for one who has paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive humors declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will cleanse their brain according to what was said before in the division.
After the patient's head is shaved; after make .i. a well-made tortell, just like .i. a circle, if you put it on the head; and the patient should be crossed, and held firmly from all sides; after presenting the linen, and applying old borax powder; and heat it with fire tempered, so that the fingers can bear the suffering; after passing the circle through within the head, and let it cool down; and do this to each patient once a week with another good government, until they are healthy.
Where you see that you cauterize the entire area by making many points on the whole cautery. This manner of cautery moistens the brain similarly; and then put on cotton wool soaked in borax powder and fat of goose.
from the warmth of the eyes When warmth comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient something warming the head, and the guard against all moisture, and let them sweat or bathe many times a day.
After the command to shave his head, and make him undergo cautery on his head, and make him undergo two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the brain is thus gathered in the eyes, or if it descends there; and apply all the cauteries to all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then staunch it with a little power as you can.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and in the incision of the cautery, how you will make it steady; and no one ever makes a cautery or incision beneath the two bones at the back.
because of the course of the tears
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and are on the veins, or beneath the arteries that are in the appearance of the head before; and one sees that it is from superfluous cold fluids, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the descent of the brain: one cautery on the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or incisions beneath the two bones; and if there is need for more, then one cauterizes gently above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
They burn the tears back behind the eyes
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit at all, then give a drink to the patient with three nauseous ingredients; after that, reposition the head, and apply fire cautery or mild olive-tree cautery; and apply three cauteries of the cautery called "clavulis" on the three painful areas, a little below the eyebrows; and beware of the artery so you do not touch it. And this is the shape of the cautery that is called "clavulis":
When the skin of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery that is called "olivare". For this is its shape:
And if you see that it is necessary to apply cautery to the sore spots, as long as the hairs are like the sorcil; and do not leave your hand there except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the method I have described.
of hair that pricks the eye There is never a time when the hair of the eyes is converted into a pustule, and pricks the eye, and then one makes cautery according to certain methods: that is to know whether it is by fire or by burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and are even, then place the patient in a healthy state; afterwards, sign on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as if the dead leaf of a tree, and let it be the beginning of the sign from the hairs; then put cotton moistened with the yolk of an egg and muskillaige of persillion on the eye, then heat the cautery to the form that it is.
After cauterizing on the figure that you have signed little by little many times, so that the blood vessels are burned in that place; and the signs of the health of the eye are that you see the paper retracting, and the hairs rise to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it be thus for three days, then put cotton moistened in a poultice until the burning is removed; afterwards, treat with ointment until it is healthy.
And if after that the hairs come, and the paper is softened, then recommence the cautery on the same place, as you did previously; and if the hairs are defective, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye with the hairs.
The burning cauterizing medicines are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as big and even as possible, then make a parchment in the shape of a tree leaf; then take French soap and live chalk, one ounce each, and mix well together; and do it quickly, so it doesn't get cold, then spread on the shape you made like the tree leaf, and put on the paper of the eyes; and if the disease holds in one eye only, you should operate on one, and if in both alike; and put under the eye cotton moistened with egg white; and the head of the patient is in a healthy state and put your finger showing on the medicine, and press a little and loosen all the times that the patient feels burning from the medicine, for it feels burning like fire. When you have done this for a long time, then apply the medicine to your finger. And when the morification will be passed, lift up the swelling of awe, and reward yourself if you see the skin lifted thus as it was lifted by constriction of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good. If not, then reapply more medicine to the swelling or the medicine has not worked, until your operations are equal, and your eyes are in point; then put cotton wool moistened with balm as long as the heart's arteries are clear, after curing the swelling of the joint which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
And if it is necessary that you take great care to protect your operation well with a strong guard so that the medicine does not reach your eyes.  And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the medicine on the swelling which is softened by the proper skin, thus as you did before; after the cure until it is healthy; and this is the form of the foil of dou mirte:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and adjust your constrictions accordingly; and do not mistake the right path for him who is studying this art.
of the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary to perform cautery according to this method.
Instruct the patient to put their head in a healthy position; and hold their temples between your hands in such a way that they do not move, nor nod their head; afterwards place moist cotton around the affected area or in juice of persillium on the wound; afterwards heat the cautery which is suitable: and it is adjusted at the head as if in the shape of a curved pen, so that it may be the cautery; if you see, if it is pointed from one side of the head to the other, and if you see, it is thus like a tent; but anyway, this which is adjusted is better for your work.
After pressing the fistula which is overturned, and extracting the pus, and the dryness; and if it is closed, sew it up, and extract the fluid from the bowels; afterwards place on the hot cautery in a circular form, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nail near the wound, so that your hands do not make foolishness; and put the cautery in the fat of the wound, and corrode.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, it would be good. If not, if you recommence the cautery once again, and another time you have mastery over it, and let it be for two days; afterwards I put on a soft cotton dressing in a blister, and cure the ointment of the desiccative until it is healthy, and if ten days pass without it being healthy, I put on medicine with corrosive water to uncover the bone; and I re-establish according to what would come into its chapter.
And there is a manner of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. Then touch the fistula, and feel the place; afterwards put in the incision a subtle instrument, because this is the form: and they make the quantity of an ounce of lead; and hold your hand or instrument firmly, and do not move the patient at all, lest the melted lead run to its source; and it is necessary to put on the oil a soft cotton dressing in a bag of eggs or in water: the lead then draws out the humor of the fistula, and cleans through marvelously the sanitizing.
And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer pertus to the nave, and bring the fistula back to its proper place according to what is needed in its own humor.
of cracks in the lips Many times cracks occur on the lips that are called "hairs", and similarly on the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks with what we have said in sections, and the treatment does not profit, then you should use a small cautery tool according to this form:
And apply it hastily to those cracks until they reach just to the source; afterwards, treat the lip of the scab as long as it is healthy.
of the abscess of the gullet
When an abscess forms at the root of the gullet or in the uvula, or in the roots of the teeth, after making a perforation and becoming round and being enveloped and becoming fistulous; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit: then it is necessary to apply cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after boiling or puncturing the fistula, and holding your hand so that the iron rod comes to the font of it, and removing it from the rear; and do this once or twice, after the treatment we have said in cures, until it is healthy; and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupt bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines and it is of no value, then put the head of the patient in a healthy position; after heating the cautery, whose form will come hereafter in such a manner that you place a chain around the tooth; and place the hot cautery hastily, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after remove your hand and recommence the cautery according to your volition; after fill the patient's mouth with warm saliva, and hold it for an hour and strongly firm.
And in this manner the teeth which were moving are confirmed, and the gums are softened restrained, and the moisture corrupts the scab.
of the pain of the teeth
When tooth pain comes from cold, or there is cold or glass, and medical treatments are of no value, then it is necessary to use cauterization according to several methods: and cauterization by borax and cauterization by fire.
Cauterization by borax is such that you take borax of a vein, and the end in an iron or copper spoon; after taking cotton and wrapping it around the point of a tent, and boiling it in borax water, and placing it on the aching tooth quickly and holding it until it cools; and thus do often so that its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the boiled cotton and borax are cold, and place it on the aching tooth, and place it on the iron hot enough that the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
Here is the translation:
When the scrophula is of flux and cold moistures, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the fire cauterization where it follows after, and has two openings for the fumes to issue from the cauterization of the other part; and place the hot cauterization on the abscess once, or if the mastery is, until it reaches the source of the abscess; and if the abscess is small then place cauterization according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and place on cotton wool in a burst so that the discharge is removed; after curing the limb with ointments and tents until it is healthy.
When the moistures come upon the channels of the arm, and similarly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by solutive medicines; after do fire cauterization at the root of the throat, and take care that you do not come near the throat, and do not harden the heart but only a little. After do another cauterization at the jointure of the neck to the head of the spine, and it is the cauterization which is called "clavile" from what we have the form before; and cure the limb as we have said before until it is healthy.
of the thumb When all the diseases of the forearm are from cold moistures, and the patients have no fever nor sweat, and it is an ancient disease, then make them two cauteries on the strength of their veins; and another cauterization between two muscles; and let the cauterization be called "clavile" according to the form previously mentioned.
And if you see, make a cauterization by pricking all of the cauterization called "poins" because the form is thus beforehand in the disease of the ears; and let the poins be just as... or however it may turn out. After curing the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauterizations be at three places according to this form:
And because they are lighter cauterizations, because you make them in three places at once.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After that, soothe the patient on his back and on his side; after lifting the heart which is within the tender spot of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery which has .ij. nerves in the form:
and cauterize the heart as far as it reaches the side, and the figure of the cautery would be assembled from .iiij. cauteries; and because it is made with the cautery which has .iij. nerves, for this reason the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tent and that is the form of the cautery which has .iij. nerves:
And often is applied on this same nerve because it has eight cauteries.
After applying the cautery to the burned areas with oil; afterwards make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, that little thing happens quickly, then make a cautery on the thick part of the clave cautery, or many cauteries in pricking. For the joint is re-formed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
of the cautery of pleurisy
Here is the translation:
And certain ancients said that no man should use fire cautery, which seems to shave, and they heated it and placed it between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess; and soon the pain subsides, as we have stated in the aposteme of the liver. But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the spleen
When you treat the disease of the spleen according to what we have said as divisions of treatments, and it does not profit at all, then they perform three manners of fire cautery that are good for everything.
One of these manners is that you make three fire cauteries, or four, in a line according to the length of the spleen, according to the figure of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the fire cautery, and let the patient be comforted on his back.
and another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery iron which has .ij. nerves, as we have demonstrated in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is at the tip of the finger, or where the pain of the patient comes from the left side, and be the elevations that you lift the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery iron should be according to the width of the body.
After that, burn the .ij. nerves so much that the heart is perceived from the other side, and then you will remove the cautery iron, and thus there will be .iiij.. And if you see, if you cauterize the entire cautery at .iij. nerves. After the cure, when it has taken hold by long tension, and this is better than the other cures mentioned beforehand.
of dropsy
Cautery is not suitable for dropsy, except in the manner which is called "asclytes". When you cure according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make .iiij. cauteries around the belly, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the finger, and .ij. behind the back on the spine, and one near the thigh; and so the cauteries are well close to the vital spirit of the heart.
After the fire cautery is opened for a long time, and do not leave the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and all intentions will be together with the aid of God.
Here is the translation:
of the inflammation of the feet When the feet are inflamed in one who is dropsical, and are full of yellow watery liquid, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and the little finger; and hold your hand with the cauterization without turning. And do not insert too much deep into the fontanel, lest the yellow watery liquid would flow out, and let the cautery be according to this form:
After doing so on both legs, make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the cuticle; and let the cauteries be of a length, one above the knee in front and the other behind, within the leg; and leave the cauteries for a long time without curving, so that the watery liquid goes out; after curing with the other cures that we have said.
of the swelling
When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are afflicted, and cannot be cured by methods of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong virtue, if you do. Then make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken about beforehand or cautery of the stomach, with circular cautery; and three cauteries around the subtle bowel, one subtle clave cautery, and two cauteries on the flanks.
And if you see the moistures abounding and the patient suffering, make him a cautery on the finger, and one cautery on each rib, and two small cauteries on the stomach beneath the great one, for the cure is profitable when it has good aid.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, one or more, and are ancient and of gross cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit, if you make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is all defiled beneath the almond date a little and a little in triangular, and one cautery beneath the bowel. Two doses.
and if you think that the stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face inflating, then one puts a great fire cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the clavicle cautery; and let the cautery burn for a long time. After curing the limb until it is healthy.
of the fleshiness which is named "thelul"
When you encounter thelul, if you heat the cautery which seems ready, and then apply it thoroughly to the affected thelul area; and leave your hand there until the cauteries reach the origin of the vein, where the blood flows freely; do this once or twice, and if there is much of thelul, if you cauterize each one as we have said; after the treatment of joints profits as long as they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it will be of greater aid.
of a badly healed wound
When the patient cannot endure a surgical procedure or an operation, which we will describe in its place, then comes such a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Here is the translation:
of the kidney disease When pain of the loins comes from cold, and from great windiness, and does not take heed of a woman's nature, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to the loins on one side and the other to the clavicle, as we have previously stated; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will bring greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is tender and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you must apply cautery to the upper part of the bladder, where the hairs begin to grow, and one on the right side and one on the left side, and each cautery should be as long as our thumb; and make three cauteries above the back, or two if you have a need for it; and the clavicle cautery should be according to the form previously stated.
of the marrow When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow conception to occur, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms delayed; and when they come, if great pain is felt: then it is necessary to apply three cauteries around the belly, as we said about the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back; and let the cauteries be gentle, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the places of departure are empty, so it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient on the hip joint with one cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the place around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not present to you, make three cauteries of olive oil, and let the cauteries be as deeply penetrating as all the wounds; and heal them until they are healthy.
from the pain of the ankle When pain comes to the ankle joint, and it's from coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated for what we have said in the division and the treatment doesn't work, and the illness is ancient: then you must purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
After making the cautery; and the manner of making the cautery is in three ways: it's knowing how to assemble medicines burning, and cautery by fire. Cautery by fire is in many ways, one of which is such: that you make three triangular cauteries on the ankle joint in this form, and you make them deep and large, and have between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive oil; no time do they make a cautery in the middle on top of the ankle joint, because there are three according to this form.
And if you see, if the cautery is applied to the circle that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the thigh; but do it in such a way that the circles encompass the entire thigh, and all the spaces around the heart are burned.
And it is the manner in which one performs in sciatica, when the pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach just to the knee or just to the leg. And if it reaches to the knee and the leg, do two or three cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds, and make a cautery above the ankle three fingers wide, on the left side a little; and let the cautery be circular, and let the spaces around the heart be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends just to two fingers from the foot or almost to the ankle, then apply the cautery where they feel the pain, at three points or four at the cautery which is called "points".
And if the mastery is, do more of it; and if they know that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery at the circular or annular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much cautery that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause more nuisance and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot also, and was pierced and corrupted to the point where the foot was lost. After a flux of the belly, which he had until death.
And if the pain is in two parties together, make cautery on one and the other, in this manner. And the wise men say that for the cautery of the thigh, it must be done thus: take a thick iron rod about as big as a thumb, or a little less, and apply it by intervals, and let the intervals be from one to the other of a finger's width; and let the intervals be on two parts, and also like our nail, and have a well-made iron handle; and this is the form:
And heat it until it is completely red hot and gives off sparks, and then place it on the affected thigh, turning it on the healthy side; and cauterize once with a single cautery stroke, and leave it for three days; and then apply a poultice of borax, and let the wound remain open for a long time; after treating with ointment until it is healthy.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its reaction, and we see few who use it; and however, these are good cauteries that can suffer, and there where they are affected.
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from a fall or percussion or by too great an evacuation, or by similar matter expanded cold, none of these appearances is worthy of cauterization, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after this that the patient is freed from putrid pills or similar things, that one makes on his back, there where the pain holds, three lines marked with an inch, and in each line 5 or more cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the cauterization be done according to the cauterizer who is called "points"; and if you see, make 3 or 4 cauterizations at the cauterizer claw-like finger according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a shriveled arm when they lift themselves up, and fear; and you find it in the lower spine of the back and in the appearance that comes on the other spines.
When you see this and you want to cure it, if you cauterize with the fire cautery according to this method.
If the fire cautery touches each part of the spine equally. And if you want to cauterize, cauterize around the spine with the poignant cautery .ij. lines or .iij., and let the points be close to one another. After curing the limb so that it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not misapply the cautery in curvature which is in a spasm of nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When pain of the joints is caused by moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes on foot, which they properly call "podagra", and when it is from cold cause and treatment with medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make a circle of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this method.
And if you have touched the patient's face with your finger, make a complete cautery on the entire area that is claimed "point". And if pains come just to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, make a cautery on each knee, 3 or 4 cauteries for each part, a complete olive-tree cautery; and if you have mastery of more, do more, but do not hold your hand firm unless the space of the heart is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer the cautery that we have described in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make 9 lines around the finger; and if there remains some pain in two places, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come just to the sides or just to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and make good government for the patient and take medicines. For if you make good government and purge the flux, it will be healthy with the help of God.
of the rupture of the spleen
When the rupture comes from anger, and the intestines descend to the hips and it is newly happened, then you must cure it when you see it, so that it does not harm anyone on that day; and if it makes things that loosen the belly, then the filth descends from its belly; afterwards, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm as long as the intestine is repaired, and reset it with your two hands, and sign underneath the rupture on the bone of the thumb, and all around a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then apply the cautery in the form of:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, have a well-made splint, and the same for 40 other days; and let him have good rest, so that he works little and guards against too great repletion of drinking and eating, and too high pride; and when he does this instruction he will be entirely healthy. And I shall say afterwards about the treatment of a tailor in his workshop. of the rupture of the belly
When ruptures come into other bellies and are swollen, and you see that they do not grow more, have them make 10 cauteries of the cautery according to its quantity, and be careful with the third of the heart; after the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one must cauterize at the cautery at 3 angles according to this form:
But first mark the place of the incision and make a line along the width above the rupture, and another below, and hold your hand in all the cauterized claw-like parts. But the first cauteries are lighter and more flexible.
of ancient pain in no member When pain comes in no member, or from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts a long time, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and let the cauteries be according to the length and smallness and weakness of the member and its virtue and location of twisting and of its pain. If it is healthy from the first cautery, it is good; if not, begin another cautery on top of that one, for such is the custom that it must be changed in the member that is next to it, because it is necessary that you perform the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
of messelry
The messels are aided many times by cautery with great aid, and especially the disease that comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy. When you see to cauterize, take care that the disease is at its beginning, and it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not delay nor hesitate, and you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the whole patient, then perform .v. cauteries on the chief: one in the chief anew, and another towards the front at the end of the veins; and .ij. on the .ij. horns, and .i. behind on the haiterel; and you leave so much space that the cauteries come just to the bone, and until the scabs issue forth so that the vapors of the gross humors can exit; and cauterize on the mouse according to what is before it.
And if the mess is scattered everywhere; and it appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization to these cauterizations that we have mentioned above, and one cautery on each knee, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and three cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the chest and one other on the sides, and two on the shoulders, and two on the joints of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the last calcifying ridge, lest you burn them; and never apply cautery to the bone of the finger, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
And know that the more you do cautery, the more it helps, and it profits; and know that the patient does not feel any pain from the cautery if they are healthy, because the body is already almost entirely corrupted. And it is necessary for the cauteries to be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the veins. After curing with flour of various times with honey and other cures until they are healthy.
of inflammation
When inflammation occurs in a member and is treated with medicines and ointments and plasters, but it does not heal, then one must perform cautery on the member according to its size and smallness of the member; and let the cautery be a little deep into the skin of the heart; then treat with ointments until it heals. And often one performs cautery on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if the inflammation is removed; and never get involved unless one is knowledgeable about the members and issues of the moving nerves of the body.
about ulcers
When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed, and the remedies of medicine are of no value, then one must cauterize with a cautery a little deep, according to the quantity of the skin of the heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed; then treat with flour of veal and of lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colin and blood of alondre, each one part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a bandage, and apply it to the spot until it heals.
The treatment of chancre by cautery
When chancre begins, and you want to arrest it, if you cautery with the cautery that makes a circle around the whole circumference of the chancre. And always the wise men say that one should make a cautery also at the middle of the chancre; and always this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen; and more rightly, it is better to be cauteryized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
of the swelling that cannot heal
When some people have a disease that is called "adubelati", and it delays healing or because of the superfluousness that it makes or because of the weakness of the patient when they are decrepit (that is to say, too old) and there is little blood, or because of the tension; and you want to hasten healing: then cauteryize around with many small cauteries in pricking; afterwards, let it be. For it will hasten healing.
And if you want to pierce all around the cautery, then heat the cautery of copper, which is its form:
And put your hand in the middle of this disease which is called "adubelati" so that the cautery perceives the heart, and be such the cautery that the patient feels relieved in some manner that the course of the putridity is alleviated. After the cure, so that it is perfectly sane.
The treatment of fire by iron
Another type of disease is called "corrodens", and it's nothing but a wasting away of members, for it eats away at the limbs just like fire consumes dry wood. If you see this disease in someone who can suffer cautery alongside fire, then heat up the small and large cauteries according to what the patient needs; after cauterying all parts so that you burn out all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything corrupted is removed. And then leave it for three days, and apply cauteries that suffer burning with oil until the fires are extinguished, and all corruption. After the treatment of wounds generates flesh.  And if after three days healthy flesh does not grow, it's good; and if not, restart the cautery on what remains of the corrupted limbs. And this wasting away is often cured by medicine in the vein of fire cautery; but nonetheless fire cautery is of great aid, and I have already said the treatment of medicine in the division: take as much as you need to master it.
for pores that come to the feet
Many times it happens that our feet are afflicted by a disease called "clos" according to our intention, and it's a big faulty thing that whitens the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are in two ways. It's either fire cautery or hot water cautery. Fire cautery is when you heat up one cautery that has been made like a pen of violet, and it's made of good iron to the measure that it can penetrate all parts of the nail, and it has subtle edges; after that, put everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it reaches the root of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to rot; then make a poultice of bruised savages boiled with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be disrooted from its roots. Then treat the wound with ointment generating flesh so that it becomes healthy.
Here is the translation:
the treatment for trembling hand
When some people shiver with cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or another, if it is necessary that you do three cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery or foot, and one on the stomach for olive cautery; if they leave the trembling, and hasten the health of the cold disease.
of pus-filled boils
No time appears by default the bodies bathed, or pus-filled boils, that come from gross corrupt materials. if it is necessary at first when they appear that one does cautery on each head of the boil: a subtle cautery of wood of myrtle, of which the point is taken in fire, or of root of aristologe long, or of lentricular cautery. And no time do they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow afterwards, but are dislodged the superfluities from which they come, and are healthy; but it is necessary that it be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times there are great outpourings of blood from the cut artery which goes to the wound that comes from the outer skin, or from the incision of the abscess, or from the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to staunch.
And always when this happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very still so that the blood is appeased under your finger, and does not issue further; then apply fire cautery more or less small and large as they are all red; then take, I, or great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is located, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery still until the blood is staunched.
And if it happens that when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
And do not cease to make this one after the other until the wound is congealed; and beware that you do not irritate the nerve which is delicate, and that another evil does not come upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be well stanched immediately because the artery is large, so it is not by one of the four methods we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines placed upon which have the power to stanch blood; and let it be bound and held firmly afterwards.
Whoever administers the stanching of the bleeding wound tightly with strips or by placing heated things on it, or similar things, does not benefit if they do not do it little by little.
And if it happens to no one and there is no better medicine present, then he should put his finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch well until it is stanched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but keep it still in cold water so that it becomes very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and stanched; and make an inquiry beforehand about those things which he has need of cauteries and medicines.
We have said in the first chapter that every disease requires fire cautery, or hot medicine, and the instruments and causes and materials and forms of cauteries; and I placed this chapter among the main chapters just below the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method because one finds it easier to follow.
And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one of the cauteries, and because of this it requires more caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake foolishness. For many kinds of people come for cures. If they come from those who are afflicted with such a disease that they die easily from the fierceness that they find in their disease, and from the greatness of their malice; and one should have fear of this. And of those who give you their sense, and say: «wait, I am ready»; and the patient is desperate. It does not become that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of what you are certain, and what you can have taken and lost; and use prognosis and indication in cures of your maladies so that health may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good renown, and glory, and long memory.
Very dear son, Our Fathers give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Now I have arranged this chapter in divisions, according to what is before or the chapter of cauteries, which I have divided from head to feet, because you will find it easier to master.
of a head full of water
Here is the translation:
And I never saw this disease except in children, and almost all those that I have seen hasten death; and for this reason it seems to me that it is worth leaving the work on certain treatments.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head was swollen every day so that it could not hold itself up; and the moisture was so great that it became mortal, and this moisture was gathered beneath the bone under the siphac, between the heart and the bone; and the treatment is such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and let it be as long as our finger, so that the moisture runs; and see there the form of the spatula:
If the moisture is more increased, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the signs that you observe the commissures of the head swelling from each part, and the water shoots out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not respond to you: so it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, remove all moisture. After hold back the edges of the drapery and powders, and apply wine and oil, and let it be until the fifth day; then disengage, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and let the head rest evenly, and give the patient dry food to eat, little by little, until the limb is comforted and healthy.
And another way of incision is that you examine where the greatness of the abscess opens, and assemble the edge of the water; for it is never in front; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.
Cut then where the abscess opens, and fill with water, and sew according to what you have the power; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and avoid flowing blood, so that the patient does not die from the flow of blood and evacuation of moisture.
of swelling
When it happens that a patient has a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or in the breast, and the disease is chronic, and the medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with fire, which one copes with by burning the .ij. arteries.
Then it is necessary, when you cauterize the veins, that the patient makes a movement with their head; afterwards rub the spot of a rough cloth as much as the arteries appear, then hold the patient's neck at every .i. fold; then look where the veins are beating, and the veins of one and the other are behind the ears, and are somewhat bent back; then mark the veins at the bend, then cauterize one and the other with a sharp pointed instrument .ij. parts as much as the vein reaches just to the bone, and that should be done through the width of the head.
And if you see, insert the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cauterize above, cutting also as .ij. two at the traverse.
And when the vein is cauterized, then the blood flows back up continuously afterwards.
And if the artery does not open to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of two fingers, then sign from the notch and make just up to the bone; and it is necessary to put blood flow so it is six ounces, and by chance a little more or less according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains on the bone point of the syphac, if the cope that apostemes are not visible, then strain the wound and clean it, and the treatment of the ointment until it is healthy.
of the emigrant
When an old emigrant comes, and has a catarrh, because of the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and the old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is treated by ways of medicinal cures and all that does not profit him, if we extract the arteries of the temples and their cauterizations, as we have recounted.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs of their temples grow back, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is slightly restored more than in some homes which are too cold; and if it is restored, then strain the patient's neck from certain drapements, then rub the bone with a rough cloth, and raise the bone with warm water as much as the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of the form:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
For the fire cauter is aid to finish the swellings: because it is of greater aid against the swellings. Where it is necessary to extract the arteries that one fills the vessel with much cotton and places well-made tents; and when one removes them, if one is cured by dry medicines that make the flesh grow, and of tents, until it is healthy; and if without cutting into the artery as you will open, if you hasten to cauterize, or you fill the vessel with vitriol and hold it in your hand so the blood is staunched; and if you do not have this present, if you put on the vessel your finger until the blood is congealed, and raise the vessel of cold water until the blood ceases, and hold steady as it is necessary; and that which is more moderate and lighter in extracting the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this trenchant .ij. parts, but the trenchant should be well spaced to prevent longer delay of their healing. For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their heat. And should have between the .ij. knives .i. thick of space, and then when you have signed to incline the .ij. vessels, and you put the burning iron on until it reaches just to the bone, and cauterize the vein in .ij. vessels; and be separated between the .ij. joints because it is not supported by this cautery at all; and that is the form of cautery:
of the tears
When the tears of the eyes fall from veins that are above the hot head of fire, and it does not benefit from any medical treatment that one does, and you see the face of the patient become inflamed, and feel on the forehead a numbness as if from frost; and since they are tense and moist so that the hair of the papers is bent, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the heat of the tears, so it needs attention to this treatment.
And they called it the "confused cure", and it is that you do for the patient who has this disease the hairs on their forehead, then make three equal incisions on the forehead according to its length; and let one of the incisions be as three fingers deep into the forehead downwards to the nose, and the others three fingers as three ribs above the papers, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are three ribs above the papers; and keep your hand from the continuation of the three mandibles, and each wound is the quantity of three fingers at the joints.
Of the incision that is to be made at the temple just up to the second incision; and scrape off all the skin that is between the two fissures to the whole syphac that is on the bone, then make another part of the mean incision just up to the other second, and then extract the spatula.
if you put in the first fissure the instrument that is called "cultellare", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is smooth, not very sharp, and that's its shape: And put the cutting edge towards the dry skin at the bone, and the smooth edge towards the bone, and the instrument as far as it reaches the mean fissure. And cut so that the veins that descend from the head to the eyes are as long as the incision continues up to what opens the bone, and then make another part in the mean fissure up to the other defect; and then extract the blood equally, and press the skin for the taken blood; then put in each fissure a piece of old cotton, and put on soft drapery soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and guard that apostemes do not reach; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and I will mix great abundance of water tede, then cure with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures that one uses to treat wounds, until it is healthy.
of the eyelids
When a vein is accustomed to flowing, and you see the eyes are tired and small, and the sight is blurry, and the papers are burned; and the hair falls out, and where the head is in pain from ache, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these signs that those materials and that catharre do not come from many veins, and the death cure is what it is, if this is.
And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the forehead, and another one of equal size. And start from the incision on the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; and separate your hand from the nerves of the temples that move to the brain; and when the bone is uncovered, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then swab between the lips of the incision and put in much cotton, and stretch it with linen; then spread over it drizzled medicated wine and oil, and beware of hot abscess; when it is healed, you must rub the bone so that flesh begins to grow, then apply treatment of excitant things, which cause inflammation.
In this manner: take three parts of flour of wheat, and of colophony four parts, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to cause flesh to grow throughout.
of the swelling of the ears
All that falls into the ears is one of these three things: either grains, or beast, or stone from the mine or similar thing like iron; or seeds, if they are rusty, beans, peas; or flowing thing like water and similar things.
When it falls into the ear, stone or another kind of thing that does not adhere to the ear, nor grows in the ear, then place the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, if distills any drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then you will make an extraction; and let it be sternuated with condition, and it swells the nostrils when the sternuation comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and hold the ear above. Many times it is made to come out by this cure; and if it does not come out, then you will make an extraction as subtle pincers, in which case it is the form:
If it comes out with pincers, that's good; if not, then make an extraction with the subtle hook of a small double-ended instrument; and if it does not come out by this means, then make a cane of iron and insert the head of the cane or perforation into the ear strongly, and swells what is around the cane to ensure that nothing can enter with the cane; then pull it out in a formed manner, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this way, then take glue made from something, and put an instrument which is pointed for this purpose, and put a piece of cotton inside; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull it out. And if she doesn’t know how to do all these things that we have said, hasten to open the ear thus, that the abscess bursts into the vein, and spasms; and the manner of the incision is that you first make the patient’s head healthy, and extract blood according to its virtue, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends on the fat or lean; and let the incision be like a moon, until you reach the stone, then scrape with your power, and suck hastily into your mouth; and cure until it is healthy. And if it's a grain that is inside and it swells, administer an extraction; and if it cannot issue forth, administer a spatulum with a subtle touch according to this form:
and administer an incision of that grain. But do not do it when you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, so much that you have made many pieces; then extract with subtle pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extractions are alleviated.
Here is the translation:
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, thus as a pimple and similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great body that one can feel it, thus amenistre extraction of pincers; and this is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where you treat distillations, and the cure does not profit at all, thus it is necessary that you examine the ear in the sunlight: if you see no worms, take them out with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, take the candle of what is their shape.
And it is narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle instrument in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck out all the wax; do this as often as all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, stuff a piece of cotton into the ear as I have said in the stone; and if they do not exit as we have said, administer distillations that the old ones have experienced in the extraction of worms, and you will find them where you treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, from which it is their shape as you see:
And it is of silver or copper, narrow below a small opening, and above covered for distilling; and to press within the distillation a well-made instrument of copper, and if you see take the scraper and wrap it around the point with cotton; then throw in your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the ear, and the ear is in the instrument; then put in the scraper all the cotton, and press your hand temperately so that the oil is distilled or removed from the ear; and the patient feels it within, and it is the distillation a little warm at the fire as one distills in the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
of the inflammation of the ears
No child is born who does not have a small hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through inflammation of the wound, or of flesh growing within the ear, and these inflammations come sometimes from deep inside the ear, if one cannot see it well; and sometimes it happens that the hole becomes small due to the flesh closing over, and one sees it clearly.
That which comes from deep inside, if one cannot see it well, is of grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in this case where you see it is necessary that you place the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see apparent opilation, then the work has accomplished all this spasm, which is its form.
And let it be smooth and clean in front and behind the entire plain, so that it does not obstruct the ear; if the opilation is of flesh grown or cors of the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers, and touch it lightly, so that those characters are completely removed.
And if the opilations are deep in the ear, take a subtle and light razor and shave slightly with fire, then put it at the root of the ear. If you feel the opilation where the patient feels great pain at the hearing, probe lightly, and be careful not to touch the nerves of the ear; then put a tent in the ear according to the size of the perforation, and apply the Egyptian ointment.
Do not cease for a day until the wound is dry, or take a tent and apply ointment made from rose water, and powder with crushed vitriol; and if you see the ear inflamed, it is necessary that you remove the tent and replace it with another ointmented tent made from oil of roses and wax, until the inflammation is eliminated; then cure until it is healthy.
And if a flow of blood comes, soak an sponge and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that eliminate the flow of blood which are or treat with distillations.
of the flesh of papers
Here is the translation:
And if without uncovering, if the cautery is subtly done with a linear cautery, and the cautery operator afterwards incises, it makes them grow; and many times they repair, when nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not return.
of the crust
Many times things appear in papers that seem like crust in their form and hardness, and because of this, this illness is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of thick moisture above and below; the operations are such: take care that the grandine moves from one part to another, and it's a light thing to know; make a large incision, then lightly scrape each part, then take it with pincers, and cover. If you cannot cover it without piercing a little of the paper, do not grieve anything to the patient; and if the fissure is large, attach it to a bandage, and cure until it is healthy; and if it is small, do not make any force, for the joints will soon restore and heal.
And if the grandine descends from the inside of the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and attach the grandine with pincers, and cover and press from one part to another; and if the paper is separated by the incision, do not grieve anything; and when the grandine is covered, lift the salty water of the eye, and cure the place of that which heals the patient's injury as much as possible.
of the fat of the eyes
There is a fat which is inflamed in the membranes of the papers above, and this happens more to young children, and greatly hurts their eyes, and they come to have catarrh in the mornings, and cannot gaze at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and therefore they lie down on their faces again, and sleep on them, and are their membranes beneath their eyebrows moist that the inflammation and appearance are covered with the fat which opens in the eye. And when you press the flesh with your fingers and feel the fat between.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient puts their head in a healthy state; and then takes a linen cloth, and makes a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains fat from each part, then places it on them; and presses with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the fat is gathered within the circle; then makes a small cut in the moisture with a sharp instrument, and does not make it larger than the wound one makes when opening a vein; and makes the skin deep enough that you reach the fat; and in several dispositions comes fat from the cut, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then draw out a piece of charpit cloth between your fingers at the bottom, and turn your hand to the right and to the left so that it is spread out; and be careful not to touch the cut, that you do not reach the whole spatula just up to the eye, that you do not blind it.
And if the patient's skin does not open at the beginning of the wound, increase the wound slightly so it opens; then hold it as we have said, then wrap in silk and water, and put on the limb, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who break and put on to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then cure until it is healthy. And if a hot abscess comes to the limb, then cure with plasters soothing until it is healthy.
the hairs of the papers
When hairs of papers are born joined to others than their natural ones, and are enveloped, if they harm the eyes, and bring on ways of sickness such as customary tears and softening of the papers and albumen, so much that it is the cause of destruction of the eyes; and there is a cure in three ways: either by cautery with gathered fire, or by medicine according to what is before or chapter of cautery, and it is done either by incision and costure or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you place the chief of the patient in your healthy state, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, if you pierce an awl through all the thread above; and let it be at the edge of the paper where the hairs grow from these hairs, and draw the thread above all the paper, and turn to the ruler; then do in the part below the paper, below the aligned hairs, all the spatula covering, from the large scraper up to the small; then extract the thread, and place under the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then sign on the paper a figure of an inch, as if the leaf of myrtle, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevate the paper which is divided into sections.
And if you have a part that has mastery, cope with a great quantity of the paper according to how much the paper is moistened; then do all the spatula on the .ij. lines that you have signed, and start from the large scraper up to the small; and let one of the fissures be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then pierce the awl in one of the .ij. angles of the circle, and scrape it all; then assemble the .ij. threads at a costure with an awl through all the subtle thread of wool, and suck out the blood, and make the superfluity of the threads on the .ij. eyebrows all sticky things, if you see fit to do so; and if not, if you have no cure, then leave the costure and the threads up to .iij. days or .iiij.; then cure the wound without costure of dry and constricting things, for the paper revives suddenly at the assembly of the wound and its reunion, but the costure is mortal (as the ancients say), and it is a work without fear;
and if there is another manner: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is as if the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, at .iij. ounces dispersed according to the form that is here:
then apply this to those who have small equal forces in harmony with the form that is here:
And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the thing is not even, take a needle or have a thread, and put it in the figure; and put another thread from the large lancet, and the second thread from the small one, and assemble them between your two threads evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin where you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the edges of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments.
and often it happens that the hairs of the skin are converted: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the suture on one and the other is more artificial.
The cure of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the skin and make it thin according to what I have said, and then make artificial caines by art, and subtle liens as long as the skin and the width of the spatula is; and take .ij. heads of .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above the skin of the eye, and extract the .ij. caines from the .ij. parties formally; and leave it thus for several days, and the skin that will be strained more and less and purify, until it falls off by itself.
If it delays, if the wound has united forces, then cure until it is healthy; and when the wound is sewn, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer puncture the hairs; and this is the form of the .ij. canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The operations are such that you take a subtle needle, and thread a soft and subtle silk thread; then assemble the heads and tie one to another subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm in length; then order in the quiver another subtle silk thread briefly, and tie the head of the two threads; then place the patient's head in your healthy one; and let it dry in the sun so that the operation is clear, for this is a subtle and minor operation, then insert the needle throughout the quiver at the root of the hair implanted, and make it pierce through the paper hastily until you draw it above the natural hair; then pull out the hair as far as the quiver, and place in the quiver that hair, if there are one or two or three or more; then remove your hand so that the hairs come forth throughout the quiver on the paper with the natural hair.
And if the quiver is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then draw the quiver back down to the entire thread that you had ordered, so that the quiver comes forth through the hole above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then draw the quiver and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed for .ij. hours or .iij., until the hair is rooted in its place and grows out above; and if the hairs are small, then accompany a long hair from the natural whiskers, and raise it with that one or leave it, so that it is elongated and then lift it.
from the burning of the eye
When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the burning of the eye occurs, it comes in two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from a blow, or from cauterization, and similar things.
And the method of treatment is that you open the sore, and separate the lips of it, and put inside lint tents, and leave it until it is healthy; and do not think that you should use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before; but work with softening things, such as fenugreic; and the rose water or alembic and linseed oil are cooled, and ointments of galenon fondue in one of the eyes, and envelop it in a tent, and the treatment of this.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you take care not to let it settle according to the form it had before; and these treatments that we have mentioned are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form it had before.
of the flesh that comes in the eye
This disease that is beneath which truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and fractures and cautery and similar things; and the way of working on it is that you take a needle, in which there is .i. double thread, and prick the flesh, and make the thread pass through the left arm, so that the threads come together at the top of the flesh; then place the flesh above all the needle, and cover with .i. spatula large.
And if the figure of the papyrus returns according to what is needed, it is good; if not, take .i. rasp and put it in the fracture, and turn the papyrus, and make .ij. fractures or cuts within the papyrus; and be the head of the .ij. fractures at the .ij. angles of the incision that you have covered, and be made an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is just like the figure of a letter which has not «.j. griesche»; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity whose edges are adjusted below, from what follows the papyrus, then add the .ij. separated parts, and sew with a thread of wool; then cure it with what we have said about mollifying medicines, and tents, until it is healthy.
And if the disease comes from fracture or cutting or cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain fracture below the hairs of the papyrus, and according to what is written before; then separate between the .ij. leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to know how to make the figure return to its natural form; and the same patients, according to what they need from work and instruments in many dispositions.
You burn with the application of paper.
When this burning has occurred in a similar manner to the paper above which is scorched with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary that you apply the point of a razor beneath the paper, and lift it high; and hold it as pincers, until you cut what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient may not suffer from the too-sharp spatula or the oil becoming too bitter; and make your incision, by gently stripping away the assembled parts, so that the paper regains its natural form; and it is all healthy, without any more aching in the eye, and raises the clear water, and the cooling collaret; then place between the paper and the eye a thread of linen, and place on the eye a moistened cotton in abundance of water; and after three days use a soothing collar and things like that until it is healthy.
of the corner of the eye
Be aware that the corner of the eye is in two ways: it is nervous and similar to a hard, dry crust, and another which is not nervous but is similar to a whitish, congealed moisture, such that when you touch it with iron and cut it with pincers, it cannot be; and one and the other appearance begins to turn towards the great artery, and grows little by little until it covers all vision and all light and movement of the eye.
Here is the translation:
And beware that the spatula does not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the scalpel is not perceived; and after the incision, pour a little of the oil broth into the wound, and make a dressing from litargy, and leave it until the next day; then cure what needs to be cured so it may be healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the uncines cannot enter, many times this type of nail is cured with medicines; and grows as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, then open the wound of the patient, and take the lightest spatula according to this form.
And raise the nail subtly, and if you see that it is shrinking and the reason presses on, then distill from your mouth into the wound a dressing made of litargy and red colier, and oil broth, and stop up the wound until the next day; then recommence the other work according to this same method, so that it may be completely restored.
If nothing is contrary to you in the wound, as an abscess grows, then lance it, and first cure the hot abscess so that it may be healthy, then recommence the work as before, so that it may be healthy.
And if the appearance of the flesh shows pain from the arm during the night with great discomfort, if it suspends on the ankle, and in a part and not entirely, because the course of tears does not come; then distills in the eye a red serum which is made from litharge.
of the flesh that grows on the nail
His eyes are of those men who never grow red flesh, and cover the nail and restrain against the skin and twist at the joints, and seem like a rose of balsam; and the work is that the patient puts his head in his healthy state, then he opens his eyes, and gathers all that flesh as convenient uncines to this, and holds it with force; then take the first flesh, and go entirely cutting to the raspier until the end, and beware that you do not bleed the eye at the work; and be the incision of the spatula which we have said in the incision of the ankle and small forces of how one detaches the septum, as one forms after this chapter that demonstrates.
and when the incision is accomplished and all the flesh is detached, then anoint the eye with a gentle broth or where you distill red serum and seem to apply corrosive medicines, and put on the eye a cotton pad with egg whites, so that it be protected from hot aposteme; and if there remains nothing, and the wound begins to suppurate, and you doubt hot aposteme, then leave the eye and cure the aposteme with soothing things that calm hot aposteme; then return to your work as long as it is healthy, and thus make all characters adjusted in the eye by this resemblance.
But in any case it is necessary that you lift the treatment of each oil from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
of the veins of the eyes
These are red veins that are covered on the oil, and take away from the view their work and weaken the oil every day. It is necessary then at first that you examine if the oil is in this state, it is forced, and there is no other malady except for the vein; therefore coil in such a manner: instruct the patient to put his head in your healthy tone, then suspend those veins on the entire circle according to their wisdom, and let the subtle double circles be according to this form.
And let them be of one circle by degrees in the body according to this form.
Then one coils the subtle forces of those veins skillfully, and extracts the blood at the right hour after another, so that you see removing those veinous fluids from the eye; and beware that you do not blind the eye with the points of the spatula, and perform this work at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not copy only those veins; and when you have done this, distill in the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what is morbidly swollen.
And if you are not able to extract all of it at that hour, make an plaster on the eye with soothing things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is alleviated and is assured of a hot abscess, then recommence according to this method which is presented beforehand so that it may be healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
of the fistula of the eye
The mirror is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healthy, if it is engendered in the eye that you open on the abscess, there where it must be softened, and draw out all the moisture that is there, so that the bone may be uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and blackness, if it reaches all the instrument of which it is the form; and it is called "aspre chief", and let it be made into iron at that point, and let it be pointed like a file as it is in the present form.
And put on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little so that you feel that the corruption is relieved; and do this several times, then restore the place with medications having excitative properties.
If the places are swollen, and there is no growth, and the body of the arm is swollen, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not improve and is not abscessed, and bad accidents come, know that it is healthy; if not, if there is another engine than to bring back the fistula to the opening of the nostril according to this form: and it is that you discover the bone a second time by iron, and by watery medications, and when it is uncovered take .i. forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at .iij. angles, and let the fistula be attenuated just up to the head as you see here:
Then put it on the bone of the armier, and slide your hand from the oil a little, then turn the entire forest so that it reaches the bone and feels the patient through that which comes in if he holds his hand against his nostril; and then restore the place with dry medications, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and endures the places, then put the material at the nostril; if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the exit of the eye
When the eyes are open everywhere and it does not disturb the nose, nor is it diminished, then you should read to the patient; then the healthy one, then apply warm cupping glasses or heated irons without touching to suck, then place them on the eye. Make a poultice of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then hold the eye steady, and cover it with bandages and drapery; and the way of the drapery is that you take fairly soft drapery, and double each in three, and then place one on top of another according to the quantity that the eyes need most; then hold them in place with a firm bandage, and reapply the cupping glasses without touching to suck; then remove the cupping glasses and let the eye be steady day and night, and if it becomes weak, then you should tighten it more; then remove the poultice after the day and night, and if you see the eye getting better, that's good; if not, then reapply the poultice and drapery and the cupping glasses until it is healthy.
because of the tearing of the woven fabric
When disruptions occur in the woven fabric, then open, and come from papers as if they were grain of resin, and it is astonishing to see; then you have seen the covering, the methods are such that you put a needle at the root of the part below up to the place above, then put another needle where there is double thread on the part of the armier; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its disposition; then cover the eye with double thread and tie a part of the weave around, and hold it well, then remove the needle and place it on the other eye, already moistened with an abundance of egg whites; and let it be until the threads come together with the weave, then cure the eye of comforting things until the wound is healthy; and no time will the wound be restrained by the weave, each part of a circle of drapery, until it is healthy.
And if the eyes take on a great appearance, if they pierce through the subtle spatula which comes from in front of the eye, and corrects the moist albuminous discharge and descends beneath the eyes, and inserts itself quickly; then it extracts as much as it is healthy.
from the socket of the eye
This illness which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but the socket of the eye that is assembled in the eye, seeming to be descending, and it is not really descending; and the manner of its appearance is such that you make the patient sit on a well-prepared seat and upright, then take the head between your hands from two sides, and move it so that you see the socket coming up to your eyes; then it is stuck, and does not descend, and the light is obscured, and you see the patient's things as they should be; and if it does not descend thus, know that it is a real case, and if the socket is not well-prepared as we have said. Make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and place it on the cornified tissue, a little beyond the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornified tissue and the corona, until the socket is; and when it is thus, distill in the eye warm honey-like medicine, or warm fenugreec mixed with honey, then be cured by another cure as much as it is healthy.
from the tears of the eye
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And if the almond eye cannot enter into the oil by its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard eyes, so it is necessary that you take the instrument which is called "alberit", of which this is the form:
And then pierce the conjunctiva gently, and do not go too deeply in fear, but make it subtle, then put the almond eye as we have said; and at the completion of the work appearing to the patient asleep, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be warned of all movements, and take light food, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be bound according to his disposition until the third day; then unbind him in the same dark house, and test his vision, and make him see some things, and then put him back in his bed until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this at the hour of the treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you hasten it, because the water rises quickly.
The abscesses which come, that you unbind the eye before the seventh day, and address what soothes the abscess; and when it is appeased, then unbind the vision and put on his face a golden ornament to cover for some days, and be again in that dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and convert into its cases; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country they made almond eye salves, which drew out the water, but I never saw any of them in our land, nor did I ever read about them in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the similarities of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them go astray; and they should be properly arranged.
And the head is of gold in this same subtlety, and the handle in four angles alike.
of the flesh above the nose
Never born or nose characters diverse, because there are some that seem scorpions at the foot of pieces; and if it has such flesh with a fixed color, and if it has soft flesh of bone color. In those cases of these characters which is soft, and not fixed, you must make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open their nostrils, and pour the onion on those characters, and remove the impurities; then cope with what you can sustain in the subtle spatula from one part, so that you know that this character is all removed.
And if there remains anything that cannot be coped with, open everything .i. of subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without surpassing, or abscess bursts, drain it as it should; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is burned, then pour out or make a poultice with water or wine.
If the nose is not open and moisture comes up to the palace, it means that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pass as it should, it means that there is a new flesh growing in the bone above, which the instruments cannot reach: then you must take .i. a thread of linen, somewhat thick, and be careful with our hands, and have between each notch of space .i. an inch or less; and put the patient's head on the thread in his nose to purify it, and pull it through as it comes out through the nose; and many times children do so at school, and it is a simple thing for one who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and take them in order as we are with the thread. Do this until you see that the notch has cleared up that flesh, then pull out the thread, suck out the blood, and wrap the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh; and then put a poultice of plantain on the nose for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need of medicines afterwards, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, where they distill oils and medicines into the nose.
And let it be of silver or copper, resembling a lamp overturned, like a cane, and guide it thus; and if you see, make a close cane, and let the instruments be plain for purging the head; and have .i. a handle on the head to hold it when one heats the oil or some liquid.
of the flesh over the nose
Many times a disease appears on the head near the nose, which is called "telul", and grows and becomes large quickly, so that it is visible to behold; and for this reason you must apply the cautery or burning medicine at the beginning, and remove all hair, then place the cautery over it or the burning medicine; and if you delay applying it until it becomes large, take heed if it is hard, of a dark color, of poor sense: if you do not touch it with iron for it is an encrusted abscess, for when one applies it many times, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of dark color, and you see that one can apply all remedies, if you behold the patient and apply sense without fear, and cure the place with dry and restraining things.
when the nose is cauterized and burned
You know that when continuous suppuration comes in one of these cartilaginous wounds, it profits little, because in some homes. It is necessary then to wait until it has come to nothing, if you see the wound is fresh and full of its blood; and then add the .ij. leaves to a dressing, then cure it until it is healthy; and if the leaves are joined from one part and another, it is necessary that you scrape all parts of their skin so they may heal, then assemble the .ij. leaves into a dressing, and restrain it, and sprinkle with powder of dragon's blood, and incense and bruise; and put on the powders a piece of strong or other plaster, and let it stay until it adheres by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healthy.
The manner of the stitching is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or with thread, as I have made you know.
of abscesses of the lips
At the hands of men who have within their lips an abscess hard, similar to grains of vezes, and smaller and greater; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut into each node, and take them as pincers and cover in each part; then apply the oil after the incision of vitriol broth, so that the wound may be stained; and then apply the oil of iris, and cure the wound of dry things until it is healthy.
of the flesh of the gums
Here is the translation:
the filthy ones
Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and bitter; and sometimes the black, yellow, and greenish teeth, until corruption comes to the gum, and they are stinking teeth; if it is necessary that you take the patient's head between your hands, and their jaws should be in your saint, and remove the teeth or scabs that appear, until nothing remains; and thus do with the blackness and bitterness, and jaundice and other taints, until they are cleared; and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good; if not, then restart on the second day and the third, until you have removed everything; and know that teeth have need of diverse forms of instruments for extraction, according to what the work demonstrates, because the roots that one extracts from the teeth have other forms than those that are between the teeth; and these forms and others should be well-prepared with you.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay to treat it as soon as you can, because one must not do it hastily; for it is a very high substance just like that, so there is no excuse for delaying treatment. Then when the patient is constrained from treating, it is necessary that you are certain of the aching tooth. Often the pain bothers the patient, and thinks it is a sound tooth, and makes the good tooth ache; and never departs the pain for that, until the bad teeth are extracted, because we have already wanted to do this to these healthy ones; and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth at all i. spatula strongly to ward off the gum from all parts; then place your fingers or subtle pincers on the first molar and molar, until they are well loosened, then affix them well; and let the patient's jaw be in your saint between your knees, and hold it firmly so it does not move.
After extracting the tooth directly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and gently insert it into each part lightly, and remove it as you did previously. And if the tooth is pierced and weakened, it is necessary to fill it with pellets; where the perforations are; and if you hold it subtly in the grooves, so it does not break while extracting; and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And you take care not to break it, and leave a part behind, and return the pain to the patient through the malice of the root, causing greater pains than before. And beware that you do not act like ignorant surgeons, who in their haste and hardness often break the cartilage, and do not amend what we have mentioned; but they often come through the questioning of this great disease due to the roots that remain, or because of the cartilage they break, as we have seen often; and when the tooth is decayed, wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood flows out, which often happens, apply the liquid of vitriol broiled; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, which one must use to extract teeth first, should be long and pointed and have large handles, so they do not slip when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
And they should be of large limbs so that they do not bend in the shaft, and they should be of well-made iron, and they should be held by muscles to keep steady.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains in the shaft, then you must put cotton soaked in borax on the affected area for a day or two, as long as the affected area is swollen, then apply the tongs called "algefri", which seem like a hawk's beak; and they should be made thus, like a file, and that is their shape.
And if the roots do not want to come out with these tongs, then you must uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and apply the instrument called "althali", that is to say a scalpel, of which this is the shape.
And it be thick and large so that it does not break in the middle, and if its root jumps through this, it is good; if not, then you help with all the instruments, from which the forms come here afterwards:
And if one helps with this instrument that has many grooves, from which comes the form:
and other iron tools that are before in the arrangement of the teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large forceps, from which comes the form:
And it be these instruments that cannot break, and know that many of the teeth's instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtly find by themselves their own instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are certain diseases where the ancient ones did not teach at all about instruments because of the diversity of wounds; and they do not break a piece of cartilage or other bones, or it becomes porous, if they seek the instruments that they need, which I have told you, and help with gestures, from which comes the form: And be thick and well-held to hold the bone, so it does not slip away, but can hold and ostrude; and then restore the limb with suitable medicines, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, thus take this entire instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to the natural body, and its form is ugly, and especially in young women, thus it is necessary that you know if the teeth are not after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot make it straight or file: then take this instrument; and if it is in accord with the tooth, take this instrument which has a similar form, and is like a small iron beak, and is made of iron angled in a point.
And the instrument takes a little and little in the jaws for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, thus take the file of one part file as it is the form.
and it is also like the file of which one makes the needles; and in filing the tooth little by little in the jaws gently, so that it does not move as much as it cuts; then smooth it out at the end without any roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, thus it is necessary to file the asperity so that it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech.
when the tooth aches
when the front tooth aches, whether by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it because it hurts, and you have cured them with constricting medicines, but it does not work; if you need to restrain it with a thread of gold, because the silver thread turns green and rotten, but the gold does not move at all; and so the medium-sized thread is neither too large nor too small, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you want to straighten the teeth, take the thread and double button between the sound .ij. teeth, then put the heads between the bad teeth, if there are one or more, until you reach the sound tooth on the other side; then resume the covering up to the part where you began, and hold your hand subtly and steadily, so it does not move at all; and let your treatment be at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape. Then tie the heads of the thread to a holder, and assemble them, and put them between the sound tooth, and place it so it does not touch the tongue; and then leave it tightly as long as it can stay, and if it comes loose, or the thread breaks, hold it with another thread; if it stays and serves thus all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the straightening of the sound .ij. teeth, and of the bad .ij., as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, put it back in its place, from fresh to fresh, as we have said; and do not interfere with it, for it is wise and suffers, and no one makes the shape of a tooth of ivory from a cow, and puts it in the place where the defect is, and holds it steady as we have said, and it stays and serves thus long time.
of burning the ligature of the tongue
It sometimes happens that the ligature which comes from under the tongue or nature, that one is not born with it; or by accident of a wounded abscess; and the treatment is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold their head in your healthy hand, and lift the tongue; then burn the nervous ligament far back, so that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is hardness or numbness, and it is suddenly wounded, if you apply the oil and burn far back the ligament; and beware that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery which is underneath; and when you have done, lift up the lever of warm water and vinegar, or cold water, then put under the tongue a thread of linen; and tie the patient's mouth each night, so they cannot speak. And if a flow of blood comes, put on the lever vitriol bruised; and if the wound does not heal, cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for this; then cure with another cure until it is healthy.
and if you see the flesh of a fistula colored or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer; and if it declines to a whitish color, and there is moisture, apply the oil, and make a subtle spatula, and deliver from one part and another; and if the wound does not heal with your treatment, put on vitriol bruised until it is stained, then return to your treatment until you have treated everything fully; then lift up the lever of vinegar and wine, and cure with other cures until it is healthy.
of abscesses of the throat
Here is the translation:
You can't press the language against all this instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the onion and place it in the embers, and draw the string above more than you can; and draw nothing from the tiles with, then cover it with the instrument, because of its shape, which seems like a force; and always the head is curved, and one end to the other, and are very sharp, and made of iron or lead.
And if you don't have this instrument at hand, then cover it with a bandage, because of its shape.
And be cutting on one part, and naming on the other part; and when you have covered one of the embers, then cover the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and warm and gentle, and if blood flows, then gargle the patient with warm water, or scorching pomegranates being cured, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is healed; then cure it so that it may be healthy; and no other time will abscesses grow in the throat besides these .ij. embers, if you cover them thus like the .ij. embers immediately.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, it was a small abscess; and it had almost closed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage which was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus .i. hour or .ij.. And the abscess was so elevated that it had sent .ij. roots through the .ij. openings of the nose. I hastened to act, and placed an onion in one .i. opening, then drew out a large portion of pus; then I made another incision in the other nostril, and opened her mouth and pressed on her tongue; afterwards I placed the onion in these abscesses, and covered part of it, and only a little blood came out; and thus was unclogged the passage of the woman's throat, and she began to drink warm water and wine, and did not cease to cut away from that abscess for a long time; and the abscess recurred again, and refilled the void I had made, so much that it grew very large; then I cauterized it and inserted a tube into her throat: thus it took longer to heal; and I departed from those regions, and knew not what God would do with them after me.
of the eye
When the vein descends into the eye, and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round, it is called an "eye". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and you see that the aposteme is appeased, and it is subtle; then you must cut according to the method I have described, of its whiteness and length. For there is great danger to the patient.
Here is the translation:
This cure is safer than incision, not like cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in a pot, and put it thus, and make it boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and in the pot there is an instrument that sweats according to this manner: And it should be of silver or copper, and one of the heads is placed in the patient's mouth as long as the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, until the eye is mortified; afterwards, you frequently recommence, until the eye dries, and beware that you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of hot abscess, because many things happen; and do not do it too soon except at the decline of hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put in the chief a crutch of egg, so that the patient's mouth does not have too much heat; for the crutch of egg does not let the vapor pass through the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether salutary.
Many times it happens at the throat or spine of a fish, or anything else; therefore, you must try what you can see, and press the language to the sun with all the instrument, so that you may see the thing; and what does not appear to you and is rejected in the throat, you should make the patient vomit thus, so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if it strays through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and tie to the sponge the thread, and then transglutinate; and when it comes to the place, it will be rejected, and then you will try again; and if it does not come from what we have said, take this instrument of lead according to this form:
And let the curved instrument be at the top of the head so that it can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high and lifted; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all may go wrong, nor push the bone within; and it is useful if the patient pushes the instrument, because it will be pushed or the thing will be easy; if it goes down, where it draws forth all of the instrument equally, until it is drawn forth.
from the hollow of the throat
No medicine is suitable for the hollow, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when it does not profit, then gaze at the throat of the patient in the sunlight, then press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the hollow, draw it all out with a small hook, or with subtle tongs that are suitable for this. And if it is not useful, take a twisted thread, and put it into the throat of the patient, then pull or cut with the twisted thread iron, and make it so often. And if you hold the patient's water throughout the day, then take full sight of the cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in sense of swallowing, and move it with their hand often; and if at once the hollow feels the water, then heal.
And if it does not heal as we have said, then fumigate the patient with assafetida, at the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the urine; do this many times, for it will descend without delay. And the manner of the fumigation is that you take a pot where there are visible coals, and let it be covered with a perforated lid in the middle, and in that hole put the head of the instrument; then pour on the fumigation, and the patient puts the end of the cane into their mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not issue out, but goes just to the hollow; and the hollow will heal now, and if it does not heal, then recommence the fumigation many times; and suffer the patient thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink any water; and then it is necessary that they be governed by this regimen.
And the shape of the instrument to which one treats the blood, it is, when one can see it, similar to curved tenailles entering the throat; and it has resemblance to a hawk's beak, and it has roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot release; and see here the shape:
the lancets for the abscesses
Many abscesses are similar, according to what the memory brings here after one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and it is in three ways that one is in its own resemblance, and because of what it holds moisture. And the second way is by the veins where they are in the body. For abscesses of the head are other than those of the foundation, and abscesses of the flesh are other than those that come into joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if abscesses are not to be pierced, as long as the swelling is tender according to its completion; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are in the joints. For when abscesses come from the joints, and one leaves them until they are fully ripened within, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is in a principal member, and you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; or if it is in the foundation, one pierces it thus so it is ripe; and it is not necessary to pierce an abscess without complete digestion, unless it is in the foundation, which does not ripen within, and becomes fistula; and it cannot be healed in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the signs of the perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to completion, and it is when the pain is appeased, and the departures from the fever, and the lessening of the pain and of the redness, and the debate and the settlement of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation or more depending on the location of the abscess, and where it appears most; and let the perforation be long in the course, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and in the veins, and in all equal places where there is no putrefaction.
In these cases, according to the member. And when abscesses are in the carnal part, it is necessary that you let the perforation be until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce beforehand, the corpse will be full of great disorder; and perhaps the lips and the depths of the body will harden. And if there are abscesses that are pierced according to the length of the corpse, according to the member that has need of it.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And it is necessary to cauterize completely in the treatment of abscesses: for you have said how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
of sores
Where you have small abscesses, and are ways of treating them that are in the skin, like a swollen gland, and many similarities. There is fat and flesh where there is moisture, just like in a bird; and if it has hard and piercing parts to cut through, and there is no doubt if the artery does not act against it. And the work of cutting is that you try everything .i. instrument called "entromissoire", because its shape comes from this, which contains moisture. For if it contains moisture, pour it out from above the length. And when the moisture is evacuated, scrape off without leaving the skin that contains the moisture, for it will return again if you leave nothing; then put cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and in oil, and apply the treatment, and let it be until the next day; and this corrects what is delayed from the night. And then reapply the cotton as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not delay from the night; then treat the wound with suitable ointment, until it is healthy. And if the abscess contains .i. fat, cut according to this shape, from the length; and pour out your juices, and scrape off all around, and put all your treatment in order to remove the flesh where it lies; and if the artery acts against you, do what I told you before. And also do for the abscess if it is piercing, and cut through and treat as I told you.
And the cutting into the piercing abscess and moisture, is more gentle, for they are of little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and those were .i. abscesses that I cut into or removed from an old woman; and found the abscess like a rotten stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and if one had made any effort, one would have made a wound as bad as a stone. In other abscesses coming or growing, except for those that come as heads in children and roots of ears, the treatment should be delayed at least three days, to allow the pus to flow out; and the cures are done as is necessary.
of the scalp ulcers
Many times an abscess forms on the neck, and beneath the armpits, and in the groins, and sometimes it appears elsewhere on the body, and they are numerous, and are connected with one another. And each ulcer is properly situated on its side, as the knot and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these ulcers are many. There are those that contain moisture, and if there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health. In that case you see good disposition in the touch, and it is similar in color to the body, and moves from one part to another and is not airy as nerves from the neck nor in the artery nor in the conduit, and is not deep; so it is necessary that you cut above, and strip the skin from each part, and expose the .ij. veins of the heart as once, if you are skilled, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and remove it little by little, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve nor the vein, and do not cut too much, so you do not touch what you should not.
And if you cut into a vein or artery, and it does not allow you to operate, then put on the wound a vitriol paste, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound steady; and let it be until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to suppurate. And when the blood is staunched, return to your work, so you accomplish it; then seek with your finger if there remain small ulcers, if they are cut and treated. And if there is a large vein at the root of the ulcer, do not try to cut that ulcer at its root, but tie it off with a strong double thread, and let it fall away by itself, without harm; then fill the wound with much cotton wool in an Egyptian ointment, then cure it.
And if you cut out the entire ulcer, it is necessary that you reassemble the .ij. veins of the wound, and sew them now, so there is no more superfluousness due to the size of the ulcer. It is necessary that you intend to cut at its root, and draw it forth, and sew as we have said. Those ulcers that hold superfluousness, pierce it where it appears most evil; and pierce thus as before mentioned, in dependence, then apply tentacles with ointment and similar things, so it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well treated, apply a curative ointment, soothing the flesh, so it may be healthy.
of squinting
The ancients spoke and talked about the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their words.
For those who have squinting, it is necessary that the opening of the throat which is called "epiglote" be cleared; and one should not help by this alone, because all the veins and the purging of the patient are for those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the mandrels. When the disease is in the channel of the purging, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to prevent the destruction that comes from the strangulation.
It is necessary, therefore, when we want to pierce the epiglottis, that we pierce it beneath three or four circles, or a small piercing through, between the three circles, or by the quantity of the piercing, not in the cartilage.
and if it is convenient to section the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long enough to be reached.
And if the masters are fearful, it is necessary that they stretch the skin of the throat to its full extent, then pierce the heart as far as it reaches the gullet; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see nothing, and then cut through the syphac, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the flesh of the gullet which falls out through the broken place, and by the loss of voice.
and let the wound open a part.
And when the time has passed during which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with sweet care, and sew entirely without sense of cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, so it may be healthy.
Avoid doing this just as much as the throat is entirely stuffed, and the patient is judged to death, and the default lacks the wing. Then cut on the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death.
and therefore we instruct the old man to leave the open wound alone as long as the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four days. And then we instruct to bind the wound and to cure, as long as it was cured.
and I will tell you what I have seen. I saw that a young woman took a knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the sinew of her arm.
and I was called by the healer, and I found him almost as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and saw well that it had not been properly covered, nor did a vein lead to the throat, and the veins were issuing forth through the wound.
I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and cured it so that it was healthy.
and I had nothing against the maiden for she was hoarse of voice, and returned afterwards to her condition.
because I know that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the color of a jaundice, and it is very common in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental; or natural does not have any injury.
And the accident is in two manners, one of which is similar to a swelling that comes from us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery. and there is fear, and it does not seem to operate on fierce fires except in the small one, and it tests and searches everything thoroughly. if you find it thus as I noted, that it does not penetrate to any vein, if it is blocked, if it is blocked like we block them, and it draws everything to its coffin, if there is a point. and examine thoroughly, and cure it thus as it seems, until it is perfectly healthy.
of us
There are many ways of treating us, which I will describe all the similarities.
and it is necessary that I say all the differences that exist between them and us.
I say that the patient is suffering from fever and chills, as long as the inflammation has passed, and the putrefaction is accomplished; then the fever and chills will subside.
With the ninth [ninth treatment or remedy] there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains .i. syrup, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the body, and begins as a kind of jelly, and becomes thick.
and they are according to their resemblance, whether gray, or moist, and much of the color is as I said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the ninth [remedy], that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to what its form will be or the chapter that follows.
And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of the nails is that you take or touch the most moist spot where you find the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, so that you know that the instruments have perceived the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the entromissoire, and take care in this so it knows how to make a furrow.
Here is the translation:
and after the swelling goes away moisture, knows that it is fat, if they make a cross then, and take hold with pincers, and lightly scrape each part and around the joint where you treat it healthy with the noument.
and if you cannot treat it healthy, then treat it by pieces so that nothing remains there.
For if it remains there, it returns to us many times;
and if it stays there a little, and the wound does not grieve you, then apply some corrosive powders to the wound, and hold the wound steady, and put soothing things on the abscessed hot spot, and cure other wounds so that they are healthy;
and it is great for us, if we cut the edges of the wound, and the treatment of those who are injured by chance.
and it is good for you to be contrary or otherwise if you hasten and employ the level of vitriol ointment, and let it stay two or three days, until the wound suppurates, and restore the ebullition of blood; then return to cauterize what has remained of the tumor.
Here are the forms of inserted instruments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are four quarters that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula.
and they are also like the needles with which one cuts the sorcels, and they are of citrus iron, or of iron, or of silver, and those that are yellow are more experienced in piercing the black abscesses of fistula.
and they are of three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the parts.
The forms of the onions are very similar, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are onions that have three curvatures in three manners also;
and if there are onions that have three curvatures, and they are also of three manners; and if there are onions that have two curvatures, and onions with a single curviture only, and they are of three manners; and all this is necessary in their place.
The head of these things that one cuts are piercing, and there are those who do not cut except from one part, from which one scrapes the nails, because one does not cut the vein nor the nerve;
and of these introducers are the limbs bent back in joints, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of the abscesses;
and they are of three manners: large, small, and moderate, as you see;
and do not use a larger force than in the flesh of the body, such as legs, and arms, and members, and similar ones;
and no one makes another small instrument, similar to scrapers of fisticules, according to this form, where one stanches blood;
and set it at no time on the joint that heals by joining of veins, and as arteries, and no time is found according to this great form:
No time do the breasts of certain men become inflated when they start being corrupted, so that they seem like breasts of women;
and they remain swollen and inflated, and those who want to cure them, if it is necessary to follow according to this form of this line, right up to the sign .G.: then scrape off the fat, and apply the plaster of medicine in a circular motion, then assemble the two lips of the wound to close, and the treatment so that it may be healthy;
and he massages the injured limb downward, and it is mollified by its greatness just like it happens with women, if they do it in nine places, above nine similar fractures; because one is holding onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line B up to line G; then scrape off the skin that is between the nine levels, and remove the fat, and mix in what we have said about dressings and powders, and what is necessary for the treatment, so that it may be healthy;
and if it is not healthy, or the incision has not been fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the lack of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil; and let it be until it diminishes the remainder and the fat, then cure until it is healthy.
of abscesses of seats
These abscesses that come from under the seats are kinds of hard scrofulas or they have ribs, and there is only moisture that they contain.
Those which contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g. And when the entire abscess is empty, fill the wound with much cotton, and let it be until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and heal by applying ointment to make it healthy.
And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, do as we have said for wounds of scrofula, and if the wound is open, apply cautery as we have said before.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is swollen which is above, then often come abscesses, and it also happens to have an inflamed and abscessed vein.
and if you examine it carefully when it is through the artery, then the abscesses are long and in the background; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel the straining; and when it is through the vein, then it appears as rough ridges;
and it is foolish to touch this abscess, and similarly when it is under the seats and angles and in the neck and on many other joints, and it is very large. It is necessary then to avoid the treatment with iron, and the one who is at the head must avoid it also, and in the one who is inflamed by an artery, they make a cut above the skin of the loin.
It is necessary then to avoid the treatment with iron, and the one who is at the head must avoid it also, and in the one who is inflamed by an artery, they make a cut above the skin of the loin. then open the incision so skillfully, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues, until it is exposed;
then put a needle beneath it, and make it pierce right up to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two loops, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
then locate the place which is between the two ligatures of an intramuscular abscess, until the blood that is in it issues out, and thus release the abscess;
then apply a treatment that will reduce the swelling, until the ligature heals; then heal this joint approaching it, so it is healthy;
and if the abscesses are by the size of the vein, it is necessary that you hold with your hand what you can of the abscess at all the skin, then put the needle beneath the skin that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and it has a double thread, so that you draw it from the other side; then lay the abscess, as I have told you, or bind it with one of these parts as these joints have a double thread;
and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, so rebury another needle everywhere the thread under the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in three places.
then cut into the abscess as much as the superficial [skin] comes out, then cut away the superficial [skin] from the hard part and leave what is attached.
then put on a clean cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply treatments of tents and ointments as much as it is healthy.
of abscesses of the kidneys
Also, as abscesses come into the artery and into the vein, they come to be abscesses as nerves when they are irritated, or by too great effort, and similar things.
And it happens more often in the joints and the fingers or where there are joints, and these are grievous abscesses, and their color seems like the color of the body, and they are in many dispositions without pain;
and when one extracts it forcibly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in the depth of the body, but beneath the skin;
and one must examine well from all parts, and it does not move forward or backward, nor beneath nor above, and the one that is in joints does not seem to be able to be cured by iron: perhaps it would contract through an adventure;
and those who are on top or on the forehead, make the skin at the spatula. If the abscesses are small, hold them with pincers, and cut into their root;
and if it is large, hold it with an onion-shaped device, and scrape, then oste and assemble the wound at the suture, and cure until it is healthy.
of thick hanging lips Here is the translation:
and I saw a man who had .ij. or wind in the belly which was more like a fungus than anything else, and there was no difference, and it was white, and had little root, and it was cut open, and immediately moistened.
I cut them and found in one 16 ounces weighing, and in the other 6 oz., and the work on the incision is that you examine if the patient's moisture is excessive, and the color of the artery is pale and moist with subtle roots;
if you cut with a large spatula, and be in its presence the fire cautery. For when you make an incision, there often come great evacuations of blood, and if you do not take precautions, then hasten to give a cautery treatment;
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread of plant fibre, and tie off the artery as we have said, and leave it .ij. days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease from restraining the flow of the pulse as long as it touches the joint; and work through it without effort; and if the roots are thick, you should have less fear in cutting similarly for the belly, but you can well cut half of it,
then cauterize so it does not return; then heal the wound, and be careful not to cut the tendon that is of faulty color and poor sense and lazy regard.
For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted abscess later on.
when the swelling is full
Here is the translation:
and it is by the rupture of the skin and by the exit of the boil, if it is the color of the abscess similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various exits. And if it is by the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses with their fingers if it swells up, and then returns, and perhaps by chance it is severe, and greatly increases at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press with your hand, does not constrain at all; and if it is by blood, it opens through these signs the large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity.
and if it is by flatulence, it is soft to the touch, and the operations are that you examine whether the appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or flatulence. Here is the translation:
And if the appearance is through the intestine or the bowel, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold their gut, and be stretched out straight, then sign from below around the bowel; then he is commanded to sit comfortably between your hands, then go into the place where you have signed at the entire circumference, then insert half of the abscess downwards to the entire large ulcer;
then operate on the majority of the abscess spread out over the binding, and you should press with your finger, and examine the intestine; if you find it taken hold of by the binding, then dislodge it, and press the intestine to expel the wind from the belly;
and if you find the bowel, then take it in your hands, and cut away the superfluity;
and you make the artery feel opposite, or the vein, if it goes badly inward, then return to your work and take nine needles, and thread nine forces of threads, and put the nine needles inward so that you have done in a cross that you make pierce;
then extract the abscess in three levels above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the limb putrefy as long as it purifies, and choose the dead flesh by itself; where you touch it when it is subtled and purified, then heal what needs to be cured, and shave the abscess as we have said;
where you touch it when it is subtled and purified, then heal what needs to be cured, and shave the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the limb of what needs to be cured, and sew the limb.
swollen tumor
We have said in the division the similarities of tumors, and how one should operate with medicines, and how one should eschew the cure with iron; and we say that the tumor grows in the marrow, and great caution is necessary in its cure, and the ancients say that when a tumor is in the body or where it can be rooted like a tumor which is in the veins, and in the arteries, and in similar places, and it should be totally removed when it is in its beginning; and when it is large and old, one should not approach it, for I do not know how to heal any of them; nor did anyone ever heal before me.
And the operations, when it is in the body or where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile; then make them healthier if they show manifest repletion, then perform the operation on the affected limb to do the surgery; then cut out the tumors and all parts, and remove all the bone without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, and hold the limb well in your hand or with something, and see that the blood does not flow contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, if you cauterize so that the wound is staunched; then cure another cure until they are healthy.
of dropsy We have already said in the division the similarities of hydropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is done with medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is only clarified; and one must not touch iron for these similarities: it is to know, tympanites and yposarche, because it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this similarity of hydropsy called "clarified" with medicines, and the cure does not profit, if you see the patient is weak, or if they have another disease besides hydropsy, as in thinness and solution of belly and similar things; if you do not touch iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient is very virtuous, and they have no other disease but hydropsy alone, and it is not too young nor too old, then you must work thus: Here is the translation:
then look to see if the hydropisy is turned towards the intestines: if it needs that you make an incision below the navel .iij. two fingers directly above the pubic bone; and if the hydropisy is due to liver disease, then make the incision on the left side of the navel .iij. two fingers; and if it's for the spleen, then make it on the right, and don't forget that the patient should gaze at the incision so that the superfluous fluids do not flow towards the weak spot;
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and cut, and lift your hand to all the space between the skin and the vein, just as in cutting a quantity of an inch or so; then pierce the vein until the space comes into view, and that is the vein of the water, then cut it off, and you cut this instrument according to its form: And it resembles a subtle silver cane, and is made of light copper or tin, and has a small opening at one end; and where it is pierced on one side, three openings; and two on another side, and one on the other; and the head is shaped like a pen, and that is the form of the incision that the writers cut with the pen.
at the top is the scalpel, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it descends now onto the instrument; empty then the half or the third part, for if you empty more than it needs at that hour, perhaps the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit from the arm, or he falls into a swoon, or he approaches death.
but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses; then cut the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now by the cord that stops up the opening which is on the vein, as I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then reinsert the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and cut from the water a small quantity.
Here is the translation:
of the stopping of the rod No child is born who does not have holes in the rod, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place. If you need to pierce it so that it has none at all. Then put a very subtle spatula according to this form: then put or make a small subtle hole, and tie it with thread, and it will be like this in three or four days; and when it wants to urinate, if the opening is closed, and make it urinate, and then replace it; and by chance it does not close, for the urine that comes forth does not let it close. Those whose hole is small are medicated with a subtle spatula of lead, as we have said, and it will enlarge. Those who do not have the hole in its place are stricken, for none are born who have the hole at the head of the rod, because they cannot urinate before lifting their rod high; and they cannot be cured because the matter cannot come up to the marrow, and it is a bad illness.
And the manner of the work is that the patients sit bent over their back, with their head against the rod and their arm as long as a pen, so that the hole is in the middle, as it needs; and beware of the flow of blood that comes many times, and if it happens, then staunch the bleeding, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
blisters of the penis Many times cysts come on the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly lichen; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; if it is necessary that you take them with a very subtle onion, and scrape and clean all, then put on soft cotton in Egyptian ointment; then the treatment of ointment Diafinicon until it be healthy. And if the cyst is malignant, of putrid color and festering, it is necessary that you apply cautery. When you have scraped it, and the cyst is on the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the cyst that is inside first; and when it is softened, then treat the outside. For when you treat them together, it is not assuredly the flesh of the penis that will not be perciezed, and blackness and corruption come in his penis and in his groin; it is necessary to expel all that is black and corrupted, then lay on a plaster made of honey and flour, which is made from the scrapings of pomgranate seeds and of veal, then treat with other treatments until it be healthy.
And if the blood flow comes, then apply the lunar cautery in this form: The cauteries thus aid in these dispositions together: it is to know, at the flow of blood, and against corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you insert a tube of lead into the penis, and inject the patient through it; and when the skin becomes aerous at the head of the penis which occurs in those who have not been circumcised, or it has occurred due to wound or abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape it with an instrument that cuts, so that the bonds are loosened, and the flesh of the penis is delivered from all parts.
and if it is grievous to devise this, then it is necessary that you scour it with a spatula at the tip of the rod and of the skin; then dissect gently between the two, and I put subtly a thin layer of millet in cold water, so that it does not get worse again.
of the circumcision
Circumcision is not one of the less severe wounds; however when we perform this work of our will, and properly with children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for salvation.
I say that the ancients did not circumcise their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Because I wanted the largest part of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcisions around there, and with forces, and all in a new manner; if it happened that the courses because there are two tiles, and by chance if one covers on top and stays below.
Or the recovery is covered, and the pain is double, and in the mending which is two fingers from the point of the limb; and in the mending of the ankle by chance the iron escapes, and corrupts the work, and many times it happens that they have no need of mending and I wanted.
From the mending which is done with forces all the way to the thread of wire I have found the goodness of the experiment, because the forces cut just as well above as below.
Because when you press your hand, it cuts equally in the whole soul; but that the wire is well stretched around the leather; and be the manner of the first work so that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not make him do more than bind the wire around the stick only, and then make it happen in all the ways that you can. Then the fire is straight between your hands, and hold the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the veins do not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or breathe, and lift it up high as the head of the rod is in place; then cleanse well the discharge that is assembled there, then tie the rod with a double thread, then tie it under another ligature; and hold it thus by the second ligature at the pouch and the index finger, and cope between the two ligatures, then lift the breath above hastily and pull the head of the rod.
Then the fire is straight between your hands, and hold the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the veins do not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or breathe, and lift it up high as the head of the rod is in place; then cleanse well the discharge that is assembled there, then tie the rod with a double thread, then tie it under another ligature; and hold it thus by the second ligature at the pouch and the index finger, and cope between the two ligatures, then lift the breath above hastily and pull the head of the rod. Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the remedy; and put powder on top and on the powder a drapil glue made from a mixture of water cooked in rose-water, confectioned with oil of rose, good and fresh, and leave it on until the next day, and cure another wound as much as it may be healthy.
The shape of the forces at the cleansing is this: the two heads should be turned and should be cutting, and the heads should be as large as the equally-sized hands.
Here is the translation:
And if they trespass for three days, and that which is beneath the rod is inflamed, let it be until the apostemes of the wound are appeased, and lightly scrape off; if you touch it as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, this will not harm.
Heal then the wound of sudden powder, that we have said or treated with powders, and if you touch with a gentle hand beyond measure, and it goes to the surface, it will not harm; heal then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
due to retention of urine
The retention of urine is from obstruction of the stone, or congealed blood, or bowel, or nerve, or similar things, that we have said in the division.
and if the urine does not flow, and you see that it is retained by the stone which is in the bladder or near the bladder, so it is necessary that the patient be bent over their knees; and they should put their feet on their back, and extend their belly from the upper part of the back, and stretch the patient's loin as much as they can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted by the pressure of the stone above, because the urine does not flow;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, so it is necessary that you prepare an extraction with all the instruments which are called "syringe", of which this is the form: and let it be a subtle silver tube, like the feather of a bird; and let its cane be a palm long and a half, and let it be subtle at the head.
And the manner of the flow of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head of a piece of linen or cotton, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe; and cover the superfluous part of the linen and tie it just at the head of the syringe, then oil the syringe with olive oil or butter and honey, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the rod with moist olive oil and honeyed water.
then insert the syringe lightly into the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then double the rod above towards the belly; then insert the syringe before reaching the bladder, and feel the patient coming to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless it is led by someone who knows how to guide it; then pull the thread little by little on the linen, and the urine follows the linen, then it is extracted, and make the urine flow.
and apply the syringe until the vein is empty, and ease the patient.
of the diseases of the vein
When blood or pus comes into the vein, where putrefaction is assembled, and you have seen to distill sharp points and medicines, if you make all the instrument called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
It is closed, and if there are two perforations: one on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the tubes are arranged so that the medicine flows in such a way that it reaches well the sensitive area without excess, so that one can then draw out the moisture, and push when necessary.
and when you see the medicines in the bladder, put the head of the cautery in the moisture, and pull out the pulling which is inside; if you pull the moisture to the cautery, and then strongly pull back the pulling inside; if the moistures enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and it is the subtle form of the instrument for injection, which one injects into the bladder: if it is so:
And it is of silver or copper, and the head is higher; and below are .i. veins or tendons which hang; then take a bladder of a sheep and put the moisture that you see inject into the bladder, then tie it between the .ij. shaped breasts with a double thread of a bow, and heat .i. this moisture on the fire; then put the head of the instrument for injection in the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder to inject all the moisture coming, so that the patient feels that this moisture has just come into the bladder;
and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make .i. circle, and pierce it roundly all around; then put .i. strong thread through these holes, and assemble the circle as one assembles .i. a dial, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, to press with your hand so that the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already said in the division the methods of stone, and the extraction along with medicines; and I said the difference between the stone in the kidney as it rains, and all the signs, and in which stone one must operate by cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is in the bladder often affects children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder with similar subtlety; and it openly hurts, and grievously afflicts the penis, and many times then becomes inflamed; and most of these jumps are fundamentals; and it's easy to heal children until they are 12 years old, and it's very difficult in old age, and it's as if midway, for those who are between youth and old age; and it's easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to clean the patient through clusters, in order to remove all the filth that is in the intestines. For it often hinders the quest for the stone.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct him to extend his right hand above the loins, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the loins in the area where the waist is made; then he inserts the spatula, which is the form.
And make an incision between what is between the loins and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left hip; and let it be straight above the stone, and the two should be thus or in the fundament, and let the waist be traversed so that it is large by default, and within it is narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too great.
Perhaps the pressure if the two that are in the fundament, so that it feels a sense of labor; and know that there is a stone where it has angles, and margins: if it is difficult to extract; and if there is a part that is underneath, similar to a glance, and rounded, whose issue is light.
At that point where it has angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, then you must extract through the tenons that are like a file on the head, to carefully remove the stone so that it does not break apart; or you insert underneath the subtle curved instrument at the head; and if you cannot engineer it thus, then enlarge the small hole, and if the sans (skin) is not decorated, then extract with vitriol.
and if it has more than one stone, first remove the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull strongly, and the small ones afterwards if there are many. And if it is very large, you must be careful, and make a bigger wound. For these things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes back through the wound that the abscess cannot hold; but in any case, strive to treat, or to break down the strongholds, as much as you can treat by pieces;
and when you have completed your work, apply the plaster of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put over it a dressing soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and warm rose water and cold froide water, to appease the hot abscess; then resolve the patient to his bed, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen it, rub very well the joint with oil and water, then apply the ointment of diyafinicon and ointment of basilicon, until it is healthy.
And if the hot abscess comes in the wound and corrodes, and congeals the blood in the bladder, and so retains the urine, which is known in such a way that without it being evacuated with the urine: then put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and make it putrid.
Here is the translation:
And if the stone is small, and it is led by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot exit; if you cure this as I say thus, that you cut many times, it is excused from the cutting per this cure. I have already proven this.
Take a rod of iron in this form and it is fixed at three angles in the thigh.
Then take a thread and tie it around the rod beneath the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then put the rod in the rod lightly, until it reaches the stone; and turn the rod with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can feel the stone from another part; if soon the urine comes, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is within the rod. If it is soon broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
And if you cannot do this because of some thing that hinders it, then tie the thread beneath the stone and another above, then make the rod in the place where the stone is between the three ligaments, then extract it forcefully, and untie the ligament, and clean the congealed blood which is in the wound; and cure until it is healthy.
of the stones of women
It is rare that a stone forms in women, and if it happens sometimes, the treatment is difficult, and is defended by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well how to conceal herself as mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who knows well how to perform this manual art; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more embedded than the stone of the man, because it conceals itself more deeply, and there is greater fear in it.
And if you need to dislodge it, then you must take a well-experienced midwife, and prick the true vein on, and if you do not find it, then ask for a subtle and skilled midwife; and she presents a wise and knowledgeable life among women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands that she does what you command in the inquiry into the stone;
and look well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to thrust her finger or foundation and touch the stone; and if she finds it, so constrains beneath her finger, and recommends that she thrusts her finger or with the patient, and presses her left hand firmly on the bladder in form.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it little by little from the entrance of the bladder to beneath, until she reaches the root of the thigh; then feels on the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft con, there where it has moved and appears, and feels the stone in that part; and does not move her finger above the stone or beneath, and so is the first adjustment.
then put the rule in the adjustment, if you feel the stone if it grows into the wound so that the stone can issue forth, and know that there are many kinds of stones: that is to say, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have roots. if you know the similarities to know the outcome.
And if the sans (without) fails you, then put on the glass vitriol broth, and hold it for an hour so that the sans is stained; then return to your work, until the stone is forth, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the stone as remedies to aid you in your work.
and if he feels faint, it is because of the artery that has been cut, so put powder on the wound and hold with bandages and tourniquets, and do not start again, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it, lest the patient may die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the veins are purified, then return to your work, until the stone is loose.
of a fleshy hernia
Fleshy hernia is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white syrup, which is beneath the skin of the thighs, that contains the egg-white; and it is called "syphac", and sometimes is properly in the membrane of the egg-white, if one thinks it is another egg; and it is the skin of the thigh between the white syrup that we have said; and this has not happened little.
And the generation of this limb is from weakness that comes to the joints, and it spreads that matter.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: whether it's declining to yellow, or it's without red, or black, or watery pale, and that happens more.
and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, because if it is white or yellowish as we have said, then the abscesses are ripe, .i. almost round like the figure of an egg, and do not open the joints, for it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in its own fabric, then the abscesses are ripe with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it's another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the thighs and the white sifac, he feels it well; then when you want to know the color of the moisture, you examine all the inner quarter, because its form is thus before. According to what comes after the inner quarter, judge of what is inside.
According to what comes after the inner quarter, judge of what is inside. And when we cure by iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the replenishment of his body; then he puts himself on his back, on a slightly high thing, and many cloths are placed under him.
then he sits on his left, and instructs the minister to sit on his right, and stretches out the rod to one of the joints of the hollow of the thighs.
Then take the spatula, and cut the skin of the joints within the length just up to the white spot, and make the incision entirely straight while dividing the skin of the joints right up to the white spot, and scrape subtly according to what you can do.
Then pierce the white spot plainly with a large perforator, and extract all the water, and then put your onguines, and the white spot is above; and do not touch the heart of the joints, but only the white spot should be sufficient; cut out everything or in pieces, carefully remove the costal from it subtly, so that if you do not cut well, the water will return.
and if the white spot has fallen for a tonsure, if you reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white spot; then assemble the leaves of the heart of the joints at one costure, and cure it like the other wounds, until it is healthy.
And if you find the white spot corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you lift the veins that are suspended, doubting the decormentation of blood; then cut the joint at all the suspension, and extract the white spot, and cure it as we have said.
And if the wound is assembled in two parties together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other party just as you did the first equalization, then suck out the blood, and put into the clean wound a moistened oil rosate;
and put besides another moistened linen in wine and oil, and put on the two corns, and put above doubled drapels, and bind it all with the lien that is according to this form;
Then take two drapels, and fill them with linen charcoal according to this resemblance, and they are assembled by sewing in the throat of the arms, and one of the heads takes on the foundation just to the back, and the other at the part of the thumb; and the other two heads on the two angles, and so it is all assembled, the restraint in the loop of the arm;
and no time is medicine made with this cautery iron in the form of a tailor's iron, and it is that you take a subtle cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the corns, and be careful as we have said, so that the white sap which contains the wound is discovered;
If you take the cautery in this form, and pierce the skin with an onion-like shape, and scrape it with this subtle burning cautery.
And you take the cope in all the ways that you can, so that you scratch everything; and beware that the fires do not touch the egg; and know that this work is more salvaging; and mindful guards of blood decay, and worse than the operations of cutting.
and if nothing makes you counter, or abscesses swell or blood decay or other things, if you cure what makes you counter, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to attend to this operation due to its horror, then make a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain through the signs that we have said that the watery fluid is there.
Here is the translation:
Then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let it absorb the remaining liquid of the water, then treat until the wound is healthy.
and let the white cloth not allow the liquid to issue from the mouth of the wound, if it is necessary that you insert a tube or instrument through which one treats the fluid of the hydrops, because its form is thus beforehand; and enlarge the wound a little, and know that the liquid returns, and is assembled after 22 months or within a year, and when it is assembled as beforehand, and thus the patient will pass their days.
of the abscess of the groin
Know that in the treatment of this disease, there are more fearful dispositions, because it seems to me that many are worth leaving;
and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come from corruption, and likewise from wounds; and it is in most cases.
It is to know by excess of bitter and acidic humor, which is spread through the wounds, or from percussion;
and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the corpse; and there is no lack of pain, and it is a grievous abscess.
and by chance there is a grievous abscess, painful and piercing, of dark color, and often it comes from the thickening of an artery, or from the inflammation of a vein.
When it is from the thickening of an artery, it is known by the disposition of a hot abscess, when you press on it with your fingers. and do not think that you touch it.
That which is made from the inflammation of a vein is known by its disposition to the expression of tender touch with the fingers.
and one can well make the incision on this similarity, and on the other wounds; and it is that you cut the cord of the loins, then is the egg in high, and the tray moves dou white syrup, and delivers the suspensor from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already sewn with these new wounds, then it is necessary that you draw the egg, and cut it.
and if it is stuck to the syrup, or in that which is inside the veins, then it is necessary that you deliver all of that turgidness, and cut it roundly.
And if the birth of the flesh is where the skin is behind, then it is necessary that you cut it all, and withdraw the vein, as we have said.
And when the operations are completed, then apply the plaster of boiled linseed oil and wine, then heal with other treatments until it is healthy.
of the abscess of the groin
These are abscesses enveloped in an envelope-like formation resembling a .i. bud, with the softening of the groin, and the patient must be gently turned when they fall;
and the treatment of this disease is well pressed just as painful as this one before.
and in every way we will direct their work according to what the ancient ones did.
It is necessary that you seat the patient on a high chair, then put the suspension of the joints below his two hips, to all the vessels that are close to the vein, and prick the masters, and extend them firmly;
then cut into the spatula-like instrument, widely traversing to uncover the vessels, until they are discovered,
and then scrape from each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
then fix a needle or it has a double thread, and tie it to the first joint where the vein was found, and then tie it again to the other joint; then they take the cupping horn directly, according to the length of the body, and drawing out the corrupted humors;
then heal the wound as if with others or by applying a poultice, so that no vessels burst that nourish one of the intestines;
for by this there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come together, then it is necessary to treat the intestines with all the vessels; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and dry out and cannot be helped.
of the treatment of this face The symptoms of this rupture occur through the section that comes from the face, or the extension onto the belly in the region of the entrails, because the intestines descend from that route to one of the flanks;
and this rupture is from the face, or from the extension of it, and these two manners of many causes come from it: either from a blow, or from a jump, or from a fall, or from the lifting of a heavy load, and from similar things;
and the signs when it is an extension from the face, are that it comes gradually and slowly, in a long time, and does not come suddenly; and it is equal abscesses right up to the peritoneum, because the syrup presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is a section of the syrup, which causes sudden onset of pain, and there are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin, close by, and this is due to the issue from the intestine and the body being weakened by the syrup.
And sometimes it descends beneath the circles with the intestine, and is retained inwardly, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments to fear, because they think they will escape it.
And the manner of the surgery is that you instruct the patient to hold their intestine with their hand inside the wound, if they can re-enter it. then he should be supported on his neck, between your hands, and lift the hips.
Then stretch out the heart upwards, and cut all the skin of the thighs from top to bottom. Then put inside the kidneys of the loins, uncinate according to what you have mastered for opening the wound, and be such that your eyes can issue forth.
then scrape the dead skin that is underneath the skin of the joints, so much that the white dead skin becomes uncovered on all parts;
then put your finger index in the one that guides the joint, in the one that is between the white dead skin that is underneath the skin of the vein, and between the second dead skin,
and separate what is behind the vein, and between the second dead skin; and then move the vein to the right hand inside the circle of the joints, and hold the white dead skin high with your left hand, and lift the vein towards all the dead skin near the waist; and instruct the minister to stretch the vein high up, and separate what is above behind the ligament;
and if you find in your fingers that the intestine is wrapped around or white and hard, and if you do not find anything, then it bursts in the belly below;
then take a needle or one that has a large thread made of six threads, and sew up the rear part of the hard skin, which is behind the skin of the thighs; after the waist, then cut the heads that appear as threads, until there are three threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the form of a cross, and tie the hard skin, which we have said is behind the skin of the thighs, with a strong thread of two parts; then wrap the heads of the threads, and tie them firmly with two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them may enter into them, lest an abscess should grow there; and set the bandage according to the first long band .ij. fingers of that one, and after these .ij. bands let two layers which is below the heart of the joints a great finger;
and after that all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part which is beneath the skin of the thighs, as long as the vein runs, and the bowel, as we have said before;
then soften the millstone in oil, and put it in place, and I will soften the ligament that we have spoken of. And at no time is the white skin cauterized as we have said, after the incision, due to fear of blood deterioration.
For it often happens, and let the ligament be until it heals by itself; and if it delays in healing, so be aroused by warm water, and put on what we have said, until it heals.
then heal the wound with another treatment, so it is perfectly healthy.
of a fleshy hernia
In this case I never saw anyone who dared to make the treatment with iron.
And the old ones said that it is done in this way, as the ramice which is assembled with the vein, in such a manner that you tie the veins, after cutting slightly beneath the skin.
Then I take care of it, and cure the abscess of those who are overcome, as long as the veins bleed; and one cures in the way we have said, until they are healthy.
No rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and opens the joints; and they do not descend into the intestines like guts, and if they do, it's little, and repair all hours;
and always if it remains too long at this point, the wound or syphilis increases, until the intestines descend;
and this happens through the extension of the syphilis which is in the groin, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then becomes softened and inflames the joints and opens;
and the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before; and no treatment is made with iron in this way:
and it is that the patient leans back on his back between your hands, then take the level of the swollen area accordingly to the quantity of two fingers;
and then extract the skin that is under the skin which is swollen, then take the razor and place it on the apparent level of the swollen skin;
and press at the front of the belly, then cut the two apparent levels of the swollen skin on the head of the razor, and cut one and the other;
Then extract the head of the vein, and do not cover the point where the blood flows so that it does not extend to another thing, just as I have made you aware in the treatment of the inflammation of the intestines.
Then heal by healing the wounds. And when you cover the fibers, if it is putrefied and heal the wound, so that it becomes healthy.
The blood flow is constricted, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cauterizations are moved to this place, and closer to health.
of the softening of the skin of the thighs
Here is the translation:
two cauteries
Here is the translation:
of hernias
Hernia is of two kinds in men: one is when it occurs between the testicles as if they were a figure from nature of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes blocks the urine.  And the other kind is in women, and it appears on the pubic area like a rod with two testicles.  And the cure for the man and the woman is that you should cover the affected areas entirely, and treat them as other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine passes through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
of the tendonitis
Tendonitis is a swollen area on the natural part, so much that it is too ugly to look at; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that is the cure. It is necessary that you reduce the swelling of the tendonitis with your hand or with onions, and cover it lightly; and do not put too much pressure, lest the blood does not flow, then the cure will be effective for another cure until it is healthy; and there is another swelling that appears at the mouth of the marrow, and the abscess, and by chance it bursts, and it is like the appearance of a cow's disease, and therefore the ancients called it "cow's disease". If you cover it, as we have said for tendonitis, and cure it until it is healthy.
of scarifying
Here is the translation:
of hemorrhoids
Here is the translation:
of the abscesses of the marrow
Many kinds of abscess come to the marrow, such as chancre and piercing abscess and herpes and istiomenes and fistules and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other maladies that I have said in the division. It is necessary then that I say in this treatise the hot abscess that comes to the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that swallow the bowels; and if you want to know the work of iron, observe how the abscesses are agitated at the beginning of their coming, and full of choler and fever, and if it becomes red you can see. Then do not hasten, but let it ripen so that the pain is appeased; and then set the patient on a seat, and have two small seats or he inclines, and leans on his back and assembles his feet in the form of a cross behind the leg; and are his thighs expanded, and puts his arms beneath his knees, and binds them well with a linen thread; then suck out the pus from the right side, and I will show you the instrument with which one opens the mouth of the marrow, so that afterwards it takes its form; and it is necessary that when you have shown this instrument, that you fix the rule first in knowing the depth of the marrow, so that what enters into the instrument does not go further than it should, and does not harm the patient; and if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marrow with drapings, so that the instruments do not hurt; and it is necessary that he puts the cornet of the instrument above, and holds the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one makes a poultice with molten lead, then you must cover it at the top, at the spatula lit; and when the bowel is empty, then you must put ten moillies in rose oil, or in green oil sec; and put the poultice on the wound at the bottom of the marrow, and put behind the marrow and behind the clean nail nettle in water or malves so are treated; then cure after two days of anointing, as long as it is healthy; and no time lift up the marrow and the wound by sprinkling with water and honey, and then with water or roots of lilies and aristologe longue so are treated; then return to the anointing. And if the wound is repeated in the marrow, then you must beware of cauterizing with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
of the swelling
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
from the birth of the child on its feet When the infant comes onto its feet, if it wants to walk upright; and then it turns little by little, until it is even;
then take hold of the feet and stretch them little by little.
When it jumps just above the hips, if it commands to grasp, and makes it steady with condiments; if it jumps frequently, then God wants.
And if it does not jump frequently as we have said, then it turns a little and a little, until it is according to the natural figure. For then it is lighter.
And if it does not come out as we have said, take a poultice of high altarage, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and crush everything in a mortar. and apply it to the woman's natural opening within and remove this ligature, then have her sit in a warm bath until below the ribs;
and when she is moistened below, have her wear a girdle of myrrh, and apply it below, and leave it for an hour; Then make them sit on a seat, then make them lean forward and hold their mouth and nose, and take the belly lightly, for the faintness is passing now. from the issue of the child on his knees When the faintness comes in this form, if you place his hands little by little.
from the delivery of the child who is coming out with one hand while It is necessary to train to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman lift up and go;
if she cannot walk, then make her sit on a bed, and stretch out her legs forcefully;
then anoint the muscle that I have touched;
and it does not become inflamed, if you make it sit on the seat, then study how to reposition the hand; and guide the child according to its natural shape, and make it stretch out, and instruct it to take hold as much as the veins can be strong.
from the issue of the child on its neck, and it has spread out its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back. I think that the vein takes hold of his hand, then turns it little by little, and the joint becomes lighter.
and when it is equalized, set on the natural muscle tone of the thigh and oil, as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little;
and when you will have done this, make it sit on the chair, and instruct it to take hold; and make it steady. in the same manner for all the secondary ones
in the same manner for all the secondary ones When it comes to this manner for all the secondary ones, then couple the secondary one to your finger, as long as the moisture is evacuated.
and he applies himself to his face and neck, if the cup of the womb, so it is not retained, and kills the infant;
then put the child inside, as long as you have placed it so that it fits, and instruct the woman that she should not take it out at any time.
from the issue of twins Here is the translation: They are strange things, and do not live, if one can name;
I know them, that they should be multiplied, and are separated by the syphac who divides them, which is tied to the intestine;
and none of them issue naturally like a spring, as we have said.
And if they issue grievously, the treatment is as we have said, and the subtle bath, and make it heavy and light as it does. and do thus as he values his health. of many children
of many children No times are formed in the marrow, i.e. one or two or three or four or five or six, and many up to fifteen, and all are formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage.
and it is believed that the wise man knows all this, for by chance similar things have happened to him; Do it according to what he knows.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman with a dead fetus or womb, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained by manual operation; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of healthy virtue, and has not had an accident or fear of death;
it is necessary that the woman be inclined on her back, and her hips bent downwards, and her legs raised;
and the midwife holds the thigh in both hands, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not affected by the downward movement of the child;
then rub the mouth of the womb with moist ointments made from altaea and fenugreek and linseed, then anoint the belly with these ointments and these muskinesses; then gently push into the womb, then want that she places the onions that are suitable for conceiving;
and take care that the infant's veins are prepared so they descend onto their head; if you touch the onions in his eyes or on his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the forehead or near the ribs,
and if the dislocations are on his feet, touch them or prick them and massage the moist places;
and it is necessary to hold the onion in his right hand, and put the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and bend all his hand lightly, and touch the onion on none of those places that we have said, until it comes to the desired thing;
then make a counter-onion, or the third one you have in this mastery, so that the extractions are equal;
and then they are equally positioned by moving one way and another, to make the onions issue, and let the onions be held in place, as this is the form:
And if one part remains, then anoint the boil with some of its own oil, and apply it to that part, and treat the other part;
and if there is a remaining point, then put this onion or higher up on it, and do that until it is all cleared away.
And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be reduced back due to the stiffness. then you must envelop it with a bandage, so that it becomes completely straight.
then put the cup on the joint of the sole or at the ankle, and thus you must do with the other hand, and in this way.
And if the head of the child is large and it is twisted at birth, or it has an assembled crooked head, it is necessary that you put the spinal instrument between your two hands, and make the head straight and extract the crookedness; where you round it to the instrument called "almidach", which is formed with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and thus the same makes the infants have a large natural head; and then treat the bones as fastenings,
and if the head bursts forth and holds onto the strength, so be it split, as long as the moisture that is or issues forth;
and if it cannot issue, then cut it into pieces at the joints where you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, then you must pierce as long as the moisture flows.
And if the infant is on its feet, it is light attraction, and the adjustments at the mouth of the mother are lighter.
And if it is twisted in the belly or in the breast, it is necessary that you stretch it out with a wrapped handkerchief on the hand; and touch the belly or the breast, as much as the moisture that is there corrects;
and if the other limbs are numb, and the head remains still, if he puts his hand in front of the marrow, and draws it just up to the mouth of the marrow; then he puts an onion or two, and draws it forth strongly;
and if the mouth of the marrow is constricted by a hot abscess which has come there, then it does not need to be operated on; then it needs to be treated with moist and greasy things; and the surgeon places implants, and injects with gentle, softening, and moistening treatments.
And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, then treat what we have said in the living infant.
and so that one cannot have power, if the strength is carried away piece by piece, and nothing is left of the secondary.
And when you have done this, then treat what we have said in the abscesses that come from the marrow.
and if blood flows out, it should be stopped with a tightening bandage, and other treatments should be administered.
And I saw a woman whose belly had been dead with a stillborn child, then she conceived another on top of that one, and rejected the other dead one. After a long time, a abscess came to him in the belly, and it inflamed so much that it opened, and began to discharge greatly.
I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and extracted a bone, and after some days another. I marveled greatly, because the belly has no bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I touched the wound, and extracted many bones, until the woman was in a better state. and let the woman stretch out long thus, and immediately afterwards a little of the bow of the back;
and I have not recorded this chapter further because, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to set it right.
to bring the thigh back to its place
Hereafter comes the form of the pressor, where one places the books; and at 10 tornans as 10 heads of the ligaments. In every way, the corners should be more subtle of the restrainer, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the instrument be wide, and the margin of the trees should be, and one palm and a half in length; and within the instrument's joints should be two adjustments of this same instrument, which are fastened at one and the other, half a palm in length or a little more;
and these adjustments are placed in the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the corners.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in resemblance, should be made of ebony wood or boxwood, according to the resemblance of the tongs. and it has two heads, two adjustments, as you see, a palm's length long, and two fingers wide;
and when you open the marrow to the entire instrument, then have the woman sit on a bed, with her feet hanging down and her legs covered; then put the two adjustments together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument down between her thighs; then you open your hand to the entire instrument, if you have done it equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the marrow, until the bail makes what it wants.
These instruments are all superior, and are multiplied in their similarities; and when the masters have them well-prepared, so much the more haste to open, and higher are the homes according to their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for its necessities are not excusable.
When the secondine is retained in infancy, then you must command the patient to hold their wing, and then make it sternly condense, and hold your hands at the mouth and nose. and let him jump through this, it is good.
If this does not work, take a pot and make a poultice or covering, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, such as calmant, rue, anise, chamomile, cassialigne, and centory.
all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or put in water over the fire; then put a canvas or poultice from the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marrow.
and let it steep until the vapors come out from the marrow; then make it settle, as we have said. If the second [injury] happens quickly. And if it remains after this treatment, and does not get worse, then instruct the patient to anoint their left hand with oil of sesame or in a mixture of alta, and then apply the medicine.
and seek the second [injury]; and when it has been found, take hold of it and stretch it little by little straightly, so that the marrow does not slip out during extraction. but you must move it gently to the right and to the left, and then pull; if it comes out and disarticulates.
And if the mouth of the morbid part is constricted, we have stated the treatment of purging, and of fumigating with herbs;
and if it does not consist of all that we have said, beware that you do not fall into the trap;
but it is fitting that what is at the mouth of the morbid part, you apply it to the hip of the woman, then cleanse it with a four-drug ointment;
if it puts forth and returns, and comes back fiercely; but however, when it puts forth thus, a bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and afflicts the patient.
Here is the translation:
The shape of the instrument is where one fumes the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the second thing, which is this.
And it is to be seen similar to a dog, and one puts the subtle head in nature, and the large heads above the fire;
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the tin until it is roasted, and recommend another one.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who do not have their foundation perceived, then it has been stifled by subtle syphilis. it is necessary then to apply the poultice so that it penetrates the syphilis with its finger, and does not touch the spatula of the ague, and makes the ligature so it does not touch it.
then put on a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until it is healthy.
And if you doubt that it does not stiffen, then put or insert a poultice of warm plaster, and leave it on for many days, and be careful when the children want to go to their chambers.
And sometimes these sudden swellings come from a wound or an abscess; it is necessary to cover that suddenly: if it be treated, if we have spoken of the treatment of a pointed wound.
of the fistula at the bottom foundation Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are nodulation, and those that come from beneath the deep foundation are further, or in the space of the adjacent parties,
if there is a fistula or several; and when that nodulation is ancient, it operates, and encounters moist air or subtle white vapor,
and sometimes these fistulae are persistent; and they are known by the fact that they cause emission or flatulence when the patient makes an effort, and sometimes by accident they burst forth.
And if there are fistulae that reach just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis, and they extend just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the knee.
And thus one recognizes the persistent fistula at the bottom, and not a passing one. and it is that you apply your pointed finger or instrument to the bottom, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has twistedness, if you apply a subtle tentacle of a horse's hair, as much as you feel the tentacle or the hair on your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come with a gentle push without windiness or twistingness, as we have said; know that it does not penetrate further; if you hasten to cure it quickly.
And when the fistula is piercing near the bladder or near the urinary duct, if the urine jumps out, and it cannot be soothed by medicines.
If it is perceived just up to the joint of the thigh, it is the tense vein coming just up to the place; if there is no twisting and the discovery of pain within, it is that it is again swollen, and no medicine is effective except by anointing;
and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure unless through work, and the foolish doctors who meddle with them.
In one that is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced.
and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his knees, and have his knees bent towards his stomach; then put a tent of arrowroot, or of plantain if there is torsion, until you know where the tenderness comes from.
If the patient feels it deep in the foundation, then it is necessary that you put your index finger there,
if you then feel that the tenderness has been perceived; and so discover where you feel between your finger the siphac or the flesh, then know that it is piercing; if one does not work on it, one cannot heal it.
One detaches everything so that one can well heal some, but this happens rarely.
and the aid that one makes, if it is that one heats the subtle fire according to the size of the fistula, as it was said before. and thrust everything hot into the fistula, until it reaches the bottom; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these burnt scars are raised, which resemble an eagle's claw.
and then the treatment of swollen gums in mud, until those teeth are firm, then the treatment of joint adjustment by softening and consolidating.
If it is thus healthy, it is good.  See, otherwise it cannot be healthy;
and hold it between, and do not pierce just to the finger that is at the foundation, and place a thick covering of flesh or skin between your finger and the holding, and you will see the fistula at the one who teaches the covering from the hollow of the heart; if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and cut beforehand near the holding, and then apply the cautery, until it reaches the head of the holding;
and it will be delivered the tent, and it will fall; then I will show you those withered fingers that seem a bird's pen, and none of them will remain.
And if the wound does not heal, and it is short between you and the joint, then cauterize with fire or medicine.
For the fire cauterizes gather these bone things: it is to know, the dryness of these joined fingers, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture.
then treat the swollen tents in mud or in broken chozes, as long as the joints gather wound, and issue forth the dry fingers in the wound.
Then heal the wound of the fingers suddenly inflamed by burning charcoal, and these are the dry medicines.
For when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not relapse again.
And if a fistula comes near the fontanelle of the fundament, and is separated from the body, then apply your finger or fundament, and inquire into that.
If you feel the tension, and between two is the cloth or the syphac or flesh, or it is near to piercing, if there are no other ways than the way of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the three methods:
where you apply the cautery as we have said, or you cut just to the deep, or if you can then put tente and cure as before;
and do not go too deep in the wound, so you do not cut the tendons that hold the foundation, and come to the passages by way of the intended sensation; then the cure, as we have said;
then the cure, as we have said; perhaps it will be healthy, or you remove that covering and the bandage then that it is cut from the deep foundation, or by tente or another pointed instrument; then define this faulty chart which is in the wound, as much as you can;
then study how to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the weak part of the foundation: if it is lighter for the patient.
And often fistulas are according to this manner: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is where the foundation of the wound beneath the skin is touched. if you take a perforated tent according to this form at the head: And thrust the twisted thread into the fistula, and thrust the tent into the entire thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is pierced in the margin of the fundament within, then extract the thread from that pierced one, so that you thrust your finger or fundament;
and draw the head of the thread, and assemble the fistula heads together, and hold one to the other, and let it stay there for a day or two;
and restrain it no more than once, until the threads grasp those flesh that are between the two, and hold fast;
then heal the wound so that it becomes sound and healthy.
If the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deep inside.
For it does not suit to make a copper plate for the ulcer's dressing too deep inside, and then heal it, as we have said, so that it becomes healthy.
The shape of the spinal abscess which makes the fistula is very sharp and pointed, piercing and cutting. and on the other hand not, because one does not see what one should not see, if you see it thus.
Wounds are of two kinds: either they are deep in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they immediately shed blood. and there is one or more of them, and they are deep in the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are deep have little moisture.
and immediately afterwards either a little citrine water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body;
and the treatment of those who have them deep in the foundation, it is that you instruct the patient to spread out on a chamber bed, until the foundations issue forth, and the threads appear; if you hurry, and you hold it like a nail, or you hold it at your finger, then you cut into its roots;
and the uncleanness cannot hold them by their moisture, if you take them with a drapil, or a cotton, or a piece of chamelot cloth; and hold them in both hands, then cover, and sprinkle above some warm powders that are on the level of cautery; where you cauterize as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then heal with other treatments until they are healthy;
and if the foundations cannot issue forth, then cleanse the patient of cleansing clusters biting and harsh to wash what is in the foundation, so that they can open up clearly;
when the patient takes hold, and if their veins are far from the foundation, then it is a light treatment; and it is that you prick them with your thumb or the nails, and cut, then cure as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear not the incision by iron.
It is necessary that you make the suture in this manner: take a twisted thread, and put it on a needle, and then pull the thread above and make the needle pass through from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle. and if it is too loose; and hold the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do thus for all the others, and leave one for correcting the excessive blood flow.
then put on the foundation a piece of cloth, either a milliet cloth or one soaked in oil or cerote, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
and then let it rest until it heals, and when they are healed, if the treatment of ointment and other treatments, until it is healthy.
you must drain thoroughly at the bottom or foundation Many times there is draining of flux in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
It is necessary that you make a poultice at the point of a spatula or on an angle to dry out the eczema above, which does not let it become moist. then the treatment as long as it is swollen so it needs.
and if it cannot be treated, then recommence the rubbing more strongly than before, as long as it hurts a lot and becomes scarred. then the treatment as long as it is healthy.
due to trembling A blister is a small faulty appearance on the body, and goes much in depth.
and sometimes it finds the frost, and one feels it as if dead from cold, and it comes in all the body, and more in the hands than other parts.
And the cure is that you take a thread of an owl's feather, or a strong bird's feather, and place that thread on the frost, so that the purple circles encircle the frost entirely around. then turn your hand all along the thread so that you grasp all around the frost, and insert it deeply, and remove the frost from its roots.
And if you see, make a cane of iron or copper according to this form, and be subtle underneath and draw above.
do not pierce, for you must hold at the finger, and press; And if you see, cauterize the frenum, as it is before or in the chapter of cautery.
of the form of the cluster Never make a cluster of silver or copper, or of molten iron or mail; and never make these small and large instruments, according to those which are mentioned there.
These are the things one uses to treat children who are weak and painful, they are small.
The shape of the enema device is small and large above, where the belly is tied in this manner:
and it has a separation or the belly is tied, as you see, and the chest is perceived inside; and it has on one side two holes, and on the other, one.
and let the belly be where one puts the medicines in a bladder of beast or parchment, and let it be entirely surrounded by small holes.
and has between each perforation, it should be widened, then push into these perforations a strong thread of twisted thread strongly turned in X or inquiring within, and assemble the belly as if it were a sack; and when the medicine is inside, then attach the thread to the instrument in front of a strong thread, then cluster; and that's the circular form:
And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the cluster with oil or albumen of egg, or similar thing, then push it in gently;
then sprinkle the ministers with his two hands together, as much as it is all visible, then extract the cluster, and lift the patient's legs to the partition;
and if he takes the medicine willingly, so much as he can; and if he sleeps one night completely, it is a greater help.
And if you cleanse him of the disease of bowel disorder, and the medicine hastens to be issued, so recommend it as much as he may be healthy.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the foundation, or abscess, so let the enema be as subtle as for a child.
and it is the form of the subtle enema on which the skin should be restrained:
of wounds
We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about manual and medical treatments, according to the accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the locations or where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by piercing of stone, and cutting with a sword or a knife, or with a lance or a stick or an arrow, or similar things.
where they are made according to the laws of the body, as if a wound falls on the neck, or on the head, or the feet, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come to its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if you take care it's not a matter of stones or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you suspect a slight abscess: if you make it healthier from the cephalic membrane immediately, as if blood comes out of the wound, and let the healing be contrary to the injured part;
and abstain the patient from repletion of wine and of coarse meats.
And if he does not want to recover, then let his food be diminished, and do not drink wine, nor eat flesh.
and put on the wound, apply a poultice of cotton soaked in rose oil soothingly, or with wine stippled.
and if there is no hot abscess, put on the wound, so that it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will discuss a little later.
and he arms are numb, if you put on some bandages, so they become healthy.
And if the wound is large, like a sword cut and similar, and the edges cannot be assembled by tugging, then assemble them by suture, as I will say for wounds of the belly, from the suturing.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it is deep, and only holds for a little while, then cover it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore the hard skin in place of the skin. and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, like boiled and roasted meat, and also as poultry, and similar things.
And if you find a putrid wound, and it has not attached to the bone, so cut out all the putridness, and throw it away, then heal;
and if it has entered into the wound or vein, without cutting, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, so seek to cut the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; and if this does not benefit at all, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which soothes in this way that the wound has moved.
And the manner of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; lively chalk three parts, and powder subtly, and apply the plaster, and hold it firmly, until it adheres well and joins with all its sap;
and then bind it tightly, and leave it without loosening, so it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healthy.
And never does one make a poultice of chalk solely, when one has not incense nor dragon's blood, but rather the arsenic has not moved the wound.
And if the wound has become putrid, meanwhile in this state, if you do not put this powder on it;
but apply some digestive ointments, or poultices made of flour of barley mixed with water and honey, until it discharges pus; then heal other wounds as long as they are healthy.
And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then remove it with subtle pinces.
and I will tell you about the breaks of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment, and not to put anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat. and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their connection is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but let the medicine be soothing, if you heat it in warm water, and mix it with rose oil, and cook it in warm water as well; and other mines of a similar kind, prepared in this manner, and applied with moist unguents.
And if the wound is large, sew it up with bandages, then treat it until it is healthy.
And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, prick below or further down;
and if the artery is cut, and a flow of blood comes, then open it, and purge it, and cauterize, for this is his profession;
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the jugular vein, and the conduit is guarded, because that's where the flesh goes, if you cut the jugular vein on the side of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then hold it steadily, and let it have some days, then heal the wounds completely so that it becomes healthy;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, seek it; and if there are pieces of bone, remove the broken ones you can, and those that you cannot have, let them be until the wound putrefies; and be careful and adjust the outlet;
and if the wound is fresh, then powder with the powder that I have mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then treat it as I have said in this chapter.
of the wound from a lance or a knife
If it is a blow from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, then look to see if the wound is ventilating, how much the patient is suffering: know then that the wound is mortal.
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put the powder on it at the first hour, nor bind it tightly by the blood that does not congeal yet. and return to the body, and open the patient's eye; but I put an attractive ointment on it, and bind it several times a day;
and if you have no ointment, then put much cotton into the wound to suck up the moisture,
and have the patient sleep on the wound for two or three days, or more. if there will not come a spasm, nor evil trembling of heart nor bad signs from the vein. and when you see good dispositions, then know that the wound is healed. Heal the wounds with tents and other treatments, until they are healthy.
and if she cannot heal, and make effort, at least know that there is a fistula; if the treatment is as one should.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or in the chest or back, then treat what is in front.
if it is large, of stitching; and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has caught pieces, then examine the wound, and remove the false fibers if they are severed. and if they are not severed, then let the wound purify, and alleviate the extractions.
and of other wounds to other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
because of the obstruction of the belly
The obstructions of the belly are great and mean and small;
from the great wound often the intestine, or the knots of the intestines, because of the intrusion of it;
and the stitching is more painful, and often worse than the small wound than the great one;
Because one must put back together the intestines in, so that they are not repeatedly reset from hot to hot; because the intestines swell so much that they feel cold, if they return again to the points,
and because it wants to soften the moist wound, because one must reset the intestine to its place that is suitable for others.
And know that the rupture of the belly is in three ways:
The common stitches have an effect on the stitch of the belly,
and the stitches for other wounds of the body and these specific stitches are common to other wounds;
and however they are more suitable with the stitch of the belly, and I will describe one and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine is outside, and this thing is to put back, it is by one of the two manners: for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it up in such a manner: wrap a sponge or a lot of cloth in water to soothe it thoroughly, where you apply a hot poultice and cupping glasses and a spike, and lift the intestine until the inflammation is removed;
and at no time should these veins be constricted, and it is necessary that they be freed from inflammation.
And when you see the inflammation depart, if you calm the intestine of water or wine and bad humors are cleansed, for it is aligned with the entrance to a small extent;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small wound at the instrument by which one gathers the hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is to remove what is superfluous, that we must not cut without great necessity there is;
and it's the instruments for cutting:
if you cut within the curvature and do not deviate, and see here the form:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine bursts out, If you reset it according to its natural form in its own place, See you then have power, for that is worth much.
When the wound is large and it is in the part beneath the belly, then you must make the patient sit up on his back, and place his legs higher than his head; and if it is on the lower part beneath the belly,
and thus the rupture of the belly is in one of the injured parts you intend to understand in this that the numb part is higher than the other;
and thus you should minister to it, as I say, in great and tender wounds.
In small wounds you put that which is prepared for you,
then hold it in your hands, I minister piteously who pulls out all the routing from his hand, and gather the lips; and it is the common manner of stitches,
and it is the common manner of stitches, and it is that you prick with a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound, that is to say, a thread of space, and fix a needle or it has a strong thread; and pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the syringe,
then stretch a double thread inside the needle of two parts, then gather the edges of the wound together immediately
and then let the space of the fingers, and fix another needle; then thread it with a double strand as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to how you have mastered the use of needles, until the whole wound is restrained;
and let the needles be moderate, between subtle and large, for the subtle needles take in all the flesh, and those that are too large cannot enter well: because it is suitable that they be moderate;
and do not want to push the needles too deep into the flesh and two layers of skin
so they don't touch and open the wound before the suture;
and then touch the heads of the needles, so they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and I hold taut or drape on the heads of the needles to keep them steady, and let them be until the wound is sewn;
and this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for it suffices to sew with one needle or two.
The second stitching is common, and it is that you bring together the two heads of leather and the two heads of silk, assembling them into a needle where there is a strong thread in the middle; and when you will have pierced these two heads assembled together,
and when you will have pierced these two heads assembled together, then push the needle to the part where you started, in the manner that one sews the drapes;
and put a space between each stitch the thickness of a smaller finger;
This treatment follows the man,
and I treated a wound that one of my men had in his belly,
who was wounded by a dagger, and the wound was more than a palm's width deep, and let the intestines well .ij. palms of great,
and it was the wound in the midst of the belly. I returned the intestine then when it had been .xxiiij. hours outside,
and the wound was sewn up just to .xv. days, and it was cured, and it was healthy.
And the doctor had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and did not care for his ointment, because I was in a place where they found none, nor any medicine; and applied it above the wound with a cotton cloth many times a day, and washed it with warm honey water until he was healthy.
Now I will tell you the proper ways of stitching:
Take the needle, and prick the part that is defective just up to that spot within.
when it has pierced the right heart in a straight line, if there the head of the needle or you have pricked with the needle,
and make a piercing from another part of the defective area just up to that spot within.
and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew thus as the tailor makes the pelts, and you let one side of the siphac rest, and take it up again on another side, until the stitching is completely done.
The second way of stitching, which Galen properly describes,
it is like a fountain that naturally assembles the broken parts together, and applies one head of the siphac to another head, in such a manner:
insert a needle or a pointed instrument, and make it penetrate slightly. and let the heads of the juices flow; then turn the needle, and make it penetrate from the weak part just up to the dense area within. as the heads of the juices flow;
then make a perforation on one side and the other of the weak part just up to the inner skin, in other heads of wonder that are on the other side;
and it is the worst manner of stitching and the most common.
Galen said this in his book, and no one contradicts him,
one should sew up the belly with two needles, or have a thread in each;
and one must thrust a needle from one side, and another from the other, in the manner of those who sew up wounds;
and it is known that when the rupture is within the belly, if the stitching is more grievous than in other places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, thus the arrow has moved. if you put back in order the intestine, and sew up the cut; then apply the powder irritating flesh,
if you put back in order the intestine, and sew up the cut; then apply the powder irritating flesh, and the arrow has moved, if you put on some ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and pull out the thread, and sew up the seam, and the membrane; Then heal the wound as the others, until it is healthy;
and if you have no medicines, put them on, at once, so that they begin to heal the swelling, very much. and remove it several times a day, until it is healthy.
For you have no need of other medicines in addition to these dispositions when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not affect the principal members, if it is necessary that you apply a light bandage in oil of temperament warm, or in oil of rose, and put it around the angles, and below the spines;
and if he feels pain or prickling in the belly, and many times it happens, If they cauterize with black wine, and meanwhile the purification reaches just up to the intestine;
and it pierces within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine which is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded, and it is due to the abundance of veins that are there, and the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the swelling falls from the wound, reset it back as it was originally, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and has turned black or dark, it is necessary to lay the black spot that removes blood that comes from it, for there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligament, and put the indices of the head while parting the skin beneath the wound until it reaches to align the extraction when the nerves are severed, and the wound is swollen.
of the rupture from the swelling
When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in some ways,
because I saw that a man was wounded or pierced in the belly by a spear;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and turned into a fistula, and in this way the excretion and flatulence ceased;
I treated it according to what I knew, and did not cease from subtling until he was healthy, and the limb was sound.
And when I saw him sweat, I doubted that the patient had bad things in his belly; and there was no point of evil, but he remained in better conditions, and eating and drinking;
and certain experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied up in such a way: take firm holds on great tests, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the patient has opened his mouth, if he puts it on the two lips
then put another ferrum in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely closed;
and cut the wound. Although it settles in the intestine, and brings no harm to the patient,
and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is cut from the intestine of a beast,
in this manner: Take the head of this intestine thread that is very much disentangled, and then attach it to the head of this thread, i.e. the subtle twisted thread of flax, then push the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and reset it in the rupture;
and this manner of sewing the fractures is not beyond what is according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the gut intestines, so there is no engineer who can heal it, because of subtlety.
of a fistula or whether it is Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes swollen, is universally called a "fistula". and especially when it is split and has an open sore.
And a fistula is according to the true nodulation of a hard and white ulcer, where one does not feel pain. and it is also shaved like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes in clear and smooth skin, and other times thick; sometimes little, and other times enough;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not clean, and there is no flesh. it is not except by one of the seven causes:
it is to know, by the small passage of blood or flow; or by its wickedness; Here is the translation: where there is too much swelling; where the flesh is rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; where the medicine is not good in the treatment; where because the corruption is a type of plague; for the property in the region is slow digestion, and slow healing, and weak by nature; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already demonstrated all these causes, and the signs, and the medical treatments in the division.
It is fitting that I teach you about the treatment of fistula which is done by surgical operation with hands.
Know that a fistula occurs in all tender parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, where it is in the skin, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in one of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the ulcers that are in this manner are of grievous healing, and there is no remedy but labor, and ignorance;
and if there is no ulcer that does not approach just to the place that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you will recognize the signs, if you take a tent of iron or steel, the ulcer is straight, if it is sought;
and if the fistula is twisted, seek a subtle thread of probe. for the probes bend themselves inward towards the twisting.
and if the fistula has many passages and you cannot examine it well by probing, if you cleanse it through one of the passages,
because moisture flows from one part to another, and it infects;
then the wound heals at your power, that you know if there is a bone or nerve, and it is shaved away in the background,
and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it;
and when you truly know the place where it is, and whether it is near a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein; where among those places that I told you, if the head according to what I told you
where among those places that I told you, if the head according to what I told you and bone for the fracture and the corrupted cartilages that are within and then the treatment until it is healthy
and if the fistula is well perforated in the right place, then you must cut in a perpendicular direction, as much as you can then I have often used medicines in the treatment of fever, and applied them just at the head of the abscess.
then I have often used medicines in the treatment of fever, and applied them just at the head of the abscess. so that the medicine corrodes the excess which is accumulated at the bottom;
and then I have put ointments on the wounded flesh, so that it may be healthy;
and if it is not healthy through this, then cauterize it as we have said.
and if his bone is corrupted by the fistula, thus he copes. If a vein or nerve does not grieve or principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is decay and blackness, thus you should remove it until the decay is entirely removed, then heal the affected areas as much as possible so that they are healthy;
and if he is not sane, and render void thus as before, know that you are not yet healed just at the fountain:
if you uncover and search as long as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the joint;
and if he is thus healthy, it's good. If this does not work, know that the corruption is too deep-seated, so you cannot come to an end; if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can treat it with bandages, if he withdraws from an instrument suitable for this,
and if he has many bones, if they are drawn apart, do not leave one behind;
and the moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, if you cut and moisten and flesh, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot dislodge them within an hour, then place on the wound a poultice that induces putrefaction. and let it be until the abscess is rotten between the bones,
and then they will have more lightly touched bones;
and if it is a large bone, such as the thigh or leg, if you remove so much of the corruption until the blackness is entirely eliminated, then restore the wound;
and if there is a great part of the corrupted body, and it reaches just below the bone; if you want to sew and cover everything just up to the corruption, and then cure it as long as it is swollen;
and I will tell you of a fistula that had occurred to a man in his leg, if you take an example and help with your work.
He was a young man of about thirty years old who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body,
so that the matters came to the leg, and it was inflamed with a large abscess, and he had no way to cure it by opening;
but the mirror shows by their foolish work so much that the abscesses open, and they corrupt many materials, and become fistulas, and they come from many perforations that all go bad and moist in the body;
and many mirrors mirrored a cure for 12 years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands,
so that I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they cured him, and this which corrodes through the pores to a large body; and the body of the young man becomes red, and had a yellowish color.
I touched a tent in one of these pores, and then I searched all the pores,
and found that one vein came against another from all parts of the leg.
I hurried then, and cut into one of the openings as far as I discovered a part of the bone. and I found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came right up to the bone within;
I suspected that it was separated from the corrupted bone, and I thought that there would be no other corruption, except for that which I had seen;
and I began to restore the wound with medicines applied slowly over a long period of time, and could not heal it;
and then I examined him, and discovered the bone as it was beforehand,
and found the continuous corruption in the bone, and the putridity, and then I stopped it, and thought to reunite the limb;
but I could not do more than I cupped under a palm of the bone, and I pulled it out with all its thickness, then I restored him with medicines; and he was quickly healed and recovered hastily,
and it is no longer possible to continue the work because of the weakness of the patient, who cannot endure. and for fear of death that I have of him. For the evacuation of blood is often unsuccessful, but it was completely healthy,
For the evacuation of blood is often unsuccessful, but it was completely healthy, and a hard crust formed on the wound, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction in any way, neither to heal nor to come.
and hold the head steady, if you treat the corrupt flesh at the bottom, and uncover the flesh on the joint where you see the swelling, so that the swelling does not spread to the flesh; and put a splint or a table underneath the bone to support the corrupt flesh; and it is necessary to swell thus so that one can see and feel the corruption, and swell again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, if it discovers the whole flesh; then put the fire cautery underneath,
and then sew one part to the other against the corruption, and let the sewing be from the length of the corruption, a little, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the corrupted joint, and sew the bone or where it connects to the other part;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other anguish than to cover twice;
and if the corruption is a prick in the hand, or a prick in the foot, it is very strong that thing, but however it behooves you to investigate this corrosion, how it appears to you; and the Mondified in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve does not do harm to you;
and it is known that the surgeons and the wise men for coping with these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the wounds. and their thickness and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to prepare each similarity of work with his instrument;
and it is known that the workshop will show you the instrument which you will have need of, according to the knowledge of this art; and the testimony of the ways of illnesses; if you prepare the instrument with which you operate according to what it needs.
with fire The head protrudes either because of inward pressure or because of outward force;
and when you have medicated that corrosion through the treatment of medicines, it does not benefit. it is necessary to cover that member up to the place or where the corrosion comes from, if the patient escapes death through this, or through evil, which is a greater fault of the defect of the limb;
if the patient escapes death through this, or through evil, which is a greater fault of the defect of the limb; and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire. and then proceed after the bruise, then go those corroding members from member to member, and take hold of the entire body; if you hasten to couple,
and it is by the percussion of some venomous beasts, like a sea scorpion and viper and similar,
if the corrosion is at the head of the finger, then couple it, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes just to the hand, if the cope is at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach just to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, if the cope is at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and it does not deserve any remedies other than the quantity of its virtue;
and all thus done when the corrosion comes or falls: if it comes to the first joint, then the cope after another joint;
and if it comes to the foot, so cover the whole foot; and if it goes up to the leg, so cover to the joint of the knee;
and if it comes from above the knee, so there is no other remedy than to let the patient die;
and the way to cover or to soothe the limb is that you tie it above and below; and stretch out one minister's hand downwards, and another minister's hand upwards. and you separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments at a spacious interval, so that the bone may be uncovered;
then apply the dressing or bandage, and put a layer of linen cloth on each part, so that the dressing does not touch the healthy skin; and bring to the patient another lesion and abscess from the wound.
And if the flow of blood comes when you operate, then cauterize the place quickly. where you apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is accomplished,
then wrap the numb member with a suitable lien, and treat it until it is healthy;
and I will count how many steps he has in his own foot:
he had a blackness that seemed to be burnt by fire,
and that corrosion came first in his finger by the foot, so much that it took over the whole foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cover the foot, and was saved;
and long after that, the corrosion returned to the finger of the hand, and it came to me,
and I put him on things rebounding after the purification of the body, and cannot stop the corrosions;
and it is seen that I grasp his hand, and I do not want, that I had hoped to rebound the matter; and also doubted whether I cut off his hand, so that he would not die, for the strength of the man was weak; and he despaired completely, and returned to his land, and he grasps his hand, and was healed;
and I have not found it recounted that because of this they make another part, so one has mastery over it.
Never does an abscess come to the raw flesh, and stays for a long time, causing a great accumulation of pus; and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus jumps out, and the veins become empty, just like a vessel; and the skin which is above is also as subtle as the delicate sheets and do not rub against the bone, nor against the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy"
but if it is so enlarged that it reaches the bone in depth, then it is called "fistula"
and the curator is such that you grasp the whole circle, and similarly when it is subtle, just like a drapier. and do not be mistaken because of its corruption.
And if you find that the curators are hardened, and the corruption is not on the surface, and the curator is specially chosen for flesh, if the cure of the fistula is thus:
Here is the translation: then theclysterizer of Egyptian medicine which is thus made: take galena, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put copper into the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and to cleanse the wound, and hold back the pus; and let the medicine stay there for two hours, then strain it by pressing;
do this many times, until the wound is made clean, and the pus is removed;
and no time is cleansing done with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of wood from vine, and throw water upon them,
then boil, and clarify, until you know that the serum is well purified;
and if the patient cannot endure it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, if you clarify with water and honey, or it has a little bit of litharge broth; where you apply a mixture of honey and wine, which has the property of softening and cleansing. and the wine makes the wound dry;
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wounds are well cleaned, if you apply a mixture of what makes flesh grow in them,
and it is that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine; or you cleanse it with certain medicines and ointments, of which I have mentioned the properties or treatments of ointments;
and if the hole in the sinus is small, and the cane of the cleansing cannot enter; if you enlarge it with an iron a little, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment; for the application of basilicon, so that it may be enlarged;
and if the wound is too large, then sew and leave it slightly loose, so that the cluster or the poultice can enter,
and if the perforation which throws below is above, then cut or lower the level where it is. For when the abscess is in a deep place, then do not leave any flesh to rot; and if you cannot cover the seat below as if you saw, it appears in such a way that the bowel runs to the lowest place where it is,
and if you cannot cover the seat below as if you saw, if it appears in such a manner: that the bowel moves lightly downward, and does not leave anything of the bowel; and take consolidating medicines to put on the breast,
and apply to it a piece of linen that covers the entire breast; then cover the affected area around the breast, i.e. a little larger than at first, Then they are applied softly on the other scar according to the quantity of the given wound. and put it on the wound of the breast to alleviate the swelling, and do not remove the large dressing until after several days.
and that which is above the wound of the breast, remove it often to alleviate the swelling, and know this, that runs from the swelling, whether it is venom or poison or enough, or digestive, or indigestive;
and take heed that the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has been extended in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps upon the tender breast, if you know that the breasts are apart now, and approach the healthy ones;
and then dislocate it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you open the wound, If you change another dressing, and renew the bandage.
And if his senses are bewildered indignant after many days, know that his senses are not yet clear. And if subtle veins burst open after long tension, do not despair of the health.
For the health approaches. For there are men who delay in their cures for wounds and those that do the opposite;
and if the wound is indigested and swollen above the breast after many days, knows that the breasts do not heal.
and if the breasts are slow to heal, and are putrid, then apply medicines which are moist in substance and dry in virtue, as if applying ointment of diafinit, because it has a great part of vitriol, and it's the last resort medicine;
take ointment of diafinit, and make it with rose oil, and the juice of old wine equal in substance;
Then apply the confection and use it; and this same mixture makes a cooked, thickened honey. when we anoint with dyaphanie, it is not present,
where you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and powder them over the honey when it is on the fire; and then you glue the plaster, and place it on the breast, and never does one administer it to a learned physician; and roots of the sky-blue, which is also like flour of veins and hundred.
and roots of the sky-blue, which is also like flour of veins and hundred. and in use of simples or compounds: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use. and if the cure is prolonged, and it is not cured by this cure,
and if the cure is prolonged, and it is not cured by this cure, then know that the corruption is in depth, and makes an impression on the bone, or the hard members, or the ligaments. if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess on the finger
Panarice is an abscess that grows beneath the nail of the hand, or at the foot, or by chance grows in other toes;
and when it is inflamed, and no care is taken, if an abscess comes from it. and they run and pour until they reach the root of the nail, and perhaps they will corrode everything;
and there come the corroptions up to the bone, so that a stinking pain comes, and the head of the two long fingers is affected, and the color becomes dark.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit at all, Here is the translation: Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauteries are great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound;
and if the nail presses on the flesh in, and it starts to point, and the blister, then you must put the right remedy under the nail that points at the flesh, and apply the cautery high up, and gently touch the subtle and light flesh. and put on the remaining flesh medicines that are burning and corrosive to remove everything;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then touch it, and pull out strongly, because as much as the corrupted bone is, so it cannot be healed.
and if you see the finger decay, so cut off at the joint as it was said before. then treat until he is healthy;
and if it is inflamed and swollen, and he feels great pain, then you should cure him first; then cut off the finger at the joint with a sharp scalpel, cutting across diagonally.
and be careful that the incision does not reach just to the skin which is under the ankle, for the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it happens, then put something on it that soothes.
The two fingers that are born in the hands of some men by chance are completely numb, and by chance there is a part where there are bones, and sometimes there is an ankle.
and none of them grow at the root of the joint, or the growth is in none of our fingers. That which grows on a finger does not move. and that which grows at the joint of the finger, by chance moves;
the measure of him who is wounded if is light, in such manner: cut it at its root with a large spatula.
Those who grow at the root of the joint are hard to cure: if you hold them for too long.
In one who grows or falls behind, it is necessary that you cut around the round flesh just to the bone, then touch the bone with a suitable ointment for that, then heal it until it is healthy.
The sudden pains that come together arise from birth, or from sudden wound, or from burn by fire, or from similar things.
If it happens that you touch that pain, then you should repair it according to its natural forms; then put between two clean cloths or moistened with rose oil, so that they do not become inflamed. where you put between two subtle pieces of plank, as long as the joints are softened, so it is necessary.
they suddenly come together with the palm, if they grasp that joint so it is necessary.
Of veins
They are thick, swollen veins full of superfluous melancholy humors that come into the limbs of the body;
and they have more in the legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, than others.
It is necessary then that you administer sometimes purging of the intestine, and then the blood of the basilica vein.
The treatment with iron is in two ways: one is that they are burned, and they extract the black blood; and the other way is that you open the vein, and extract all the blood.
The cutting is done in this manner: raise the first leg of warm water very strongly, so that the gross blood is subtled. then stretch the diseased leg from above the hip down to the part beneath the knee; then cut into the vein in one, two, or three places, with a large incision,
then release and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient's virtue can suffer;
and then the thread, and command that it be dyed with blackening juice of juniper;
and restart the evacuation and the bleeding when the veins are full, and annoy the patient.
The elevations of the bone are in this manner: raise the limb of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in a bath, and raise the leg to warm water as hot as it turns red, and swell the veins;
and if you have no balms, heat it with fire, and then cover the affected area from the hollow of the thigh to the knee joint, or in the part below the rump.
then open the skin at the ankle, and strip the vein of each part, until it appears as one feels.
and it is seen red and black, and when it enters under the skin it seems like a white cord;
then push back the skin underneath, until it is lifted from the skin, and then apply it to the ankle more lightly.
then apply the iron to another spot, two inches away; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it to the root, as you have done, and bind it to another unguent, as you had done previously;
then cut another incision, or more if you are skilled in this task, then lift it, and apply it to the toe of the foot,
then pull and lift just up to the second incision; then extract the incision from incision, until it is completely free, then apply;
and if you cannot draw it back and lift it, then he pushes a strong double-threaded needle through everything. and the thread and the traction, and he pushes beneath it, and turns your hand from one side to the other, until it settles; and be careful that it doesn't slip, for if it slips, you cannot draw it back or lift it, and it causes harm to the patient;
and when you have fully drawn it back, then place on the wound a cloth soaked in wine and rose oil; and treat until it is healthy.
And if his eyes are contracted and twisted and enveloped together, and they are not straight, as we have said, it is necessary that you bend them straight, but do not uncover them; and pull them thus as we have previously stated.
it is necessary that you bend them straight, but do not uncover them; and pull them thus as we have previously stated. The shape of the iron with which one covers the eyes is curved, and does not cut, so it does not touch the vein;
and it is of large curvature, for if it were subtle, it would touch the vein, but it should be large as we have said, and this is the shape:
Of the civil vein
This vein is in the legs, in warm regions where no herbs nor tree grow, and in land where there is no moisture;
and perhaps it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that lies beneath the skin,
as it comes from within the body, snakes and worms, growing between skin and flesh.
And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great inflammation comes into the leg, then it changes the veins, and begins to bud forth, just like a root of a plant.
When the head is open, it is necessary that you envelop it with a piece of cloth, one and a half inches up to the nail, and the nail.
and let the cloth be on the leg, and every time it is not on the defect, if you envelop it with the cloth, and the nail. and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it at its root, until it is entirely straight; for if you cut it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess and putrefaction in the limb, and a bad disease;
because it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains in the body;
and it is not at all times this vein when it is treated with five fingers of length, or ten; and one vein comes to me, at which it issues from 10 fingers' length, and when you cut, if you stop .i. reason or pierced, and pierce just up to the bottom,
Here is the translation:
And sometimes at this vein many times, and likewise when it opens in the joint of the foot, or where the foot. and it comes from many perforations, and where it jumps many times; heal the wounds thus as we have said before.
From the worms that grow between skin and flesh
This illness is called in our land "ox disease", because it often affects the oxen.
and it is a small vein which grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the entire body, ascending and descending. and it feels like a good flow from member to member, until it reaches the skin or where it goes, and it jumps outside;
and it is an injection of some bad humors, if they come forth like worms and snakes and lice and ascarids or belly;
and doubt not of its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye; because of mischance, it returns to destruction of the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see that the curvature is treated and drawn, if one cannot be further than when it goes:
then it is necessary that you read the place above and below with a strong and tightly stretched bandage,
then cut above and the trailing flesh, and if the verse is embedded in the flesh, and you do not find it, if he cauteries with fire above, as long as it scars;
and the greatest annoyances that he causes, if it is that they run to the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the eye, hold your eyebrows firmly, then cover above, and pull back strongly;
and it is necessary to use the patient's mundification of bodily medications with dissolving medicines for the evil humidors,
and beware of wasting of foods in excessive eating.
Of the pain that comes from flatulence This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes into some members, and then moves from member to member; and I see this which I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered her arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of her arm;
and soon after, I saw it swell up like a worm at the shoulder, more painful than anything, just like lively silver when it runs from one place to another;
the pain departed from that place, and settled in the shoulder,
and then a little afterward it corrupts throughout the entire body, so much that it reaches the other arm;
then it tells me that it twists again inside the body, as I saw it.
I was very amazed at how it moved in this way from member to member, for I had never seen this illness behave in this manner. However, I had seen that many had wanted to move the pain from one place to another, but I do not avoid it, if as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins, and therefore it appears that the constriction of the veins is evident;
and I did not appear to consider this reason according to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and recovered veins.
And when you want to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, it appears thus as we have said. if the lying down and rising up suddenly, and then cope with it so that the constriction of the vein at the issuing blood; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
if the treatment of those who evacuate the constrictions, like foul pills, and pills of serpent's root, and similar others.
Of the arrows
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they strike.
Their diversity is that there are those which have large points, and small ones, and notched ones, and jagged ones; and those which have sharp angles, and those which have lengths, and those where there are fragments; and that which falls on any member if it falls according to seven manners: or on a principal member it will fall,
as brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls therefore on any place of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you about afterwards, appear: so it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in more dispositional ways; and when this bad symptom does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then extract it, and heal the wound.
and the symptoms of the brain when the arrowhead is in the skull and pierces the bone, and remove the splinters which are on the brain, it is when there is numbness and swelling and inversion of the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and perturbation of understanding, and vomits of bile; and perhaps it is without force in the nostrils, or in the ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and the swelling of the white moist wound resembling a poultice, and it swells also as if bruised by a cart;
and this is a sign that appears, if you hold back from the treatment, and extract the arrow so it doesn't remain.
The signs of the arrow when it falls into the body are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not loose. and by chance the arrow moves as if it were a poultice, and in short black blood, and brings cold sweat and fainting. know then without doubt that death descends.
And the signs of the arrow that never leaves the forearm are that without flatulence of scum bursts from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and seeks the cold region.
And if the arrowhead remains in the covering of the thigh, it is beneath the small ribs; and it throws great anguish and great pain and breathes; and moves all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrowhead remains in the stomach, perhaps it bursts from the wound some undigested food matter.
And if the arrowhead is in the chest or belly, and there is no escape from the intestine's route, then there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrowhead.
And if the arrowhead is in the bladder, and the urine flows out and comes forth, and the patient feels severe pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other limb, as with the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the forearm and the elbow and the legs, and the similar limbs, are safe according to several dispositions. When the arrowhead is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not venomous, thus I will tell you what happened to me, because that's how you should do otherwise.
It happened to a man who had an arrow in the root of his nose: I probed it, and drew it out from under the fat of the ear, and he was suddenly healed without any trouble.
And I drew out an arrow that had entered into the fat of the eye under the papery skin, and the arrow was removed, and nothing remained to be seen except the point towards the hollow of the fist, and it was the large arrows of a Turkish bow, with a very light iron tip without ears; the game was healthy, and no bad accidents happened to him.
And it pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was the Arabic arrow with ears:
I seized the barbs, and subtly pulled them out as much as I could, and the Christian was healthy.
And it extracted an arrow from that man, which had struck him in the belly or stomach, and I thought he would die;
and then when he has spent .xxx. days, he does not change his position; I cut into the arrow, and extracted it, and made a hole further in, and did not have any bad accident.
And if you see a man whose arrow fell or was stuck in his back, and the wound was swollen above;
and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change its natural disposition, One does not find harm in any of his natural works.
And I saw another man, who had an arrow in his face, and the wound was swollen;
and he lingered thus suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
And they extracted an arrow from the prince's hand, which had been stuck in his nail. and it was slightly leaning to the right side; and it was the arrow entirely removed
I was called to the cure after she had fallen, three days. If I found the wound very constricted.
I touched it with a subtle touch, and did not feel anything; and it felt numbness and pain beneath her right ear. I thought it was a point of the arrow.
I put on the loathsome plaster digestive attractant, because the wounds do not swell. and it appeared to me to be the wounds of the arrow.
and it appeared to me to be the wounds of the arrow. I put on the plaster in the morning, and resolved the wound itself, and thus relieved the patient of long-standing pain.
as long as he feels the arrowhead, i.e., a day within his nose; and it troubles him. I put on the wound medicine made from corrosive [substance] by mixing for many days, until it was opened up.
and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow which had adhered to the flesh; then I applied it to the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and he will pass well the terms within 3 months,
and then I will relax if the wound that I have treated with bandages, and the muscle on one side and the other, and cannot issue;
then I did not cease to subtily and ingeniously make devices, until I took it one day with well-made bandages, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, so that I will deliver it, and restored the wound.
And the surgeon judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot restore: I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was entirely healed.
Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, so that you put your treatment on what I do not say, for the books cannot take everything in.
but the wise masters compare it to a good small thing, and on this which is present and failing, they find new work, and new instrument, at the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that the arrows do not issue from the limbs or they are fixed unless according to several methods: or through the vein where they enter, or through another part;
and that which jumps forward by the thigh where it enters, it is an arrow entering into the flesh, and jumps forward many times now.
And if it does not jump now, let it be until the flesh is porous around, and the exit is relieved;
and also if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, let it be thus for some days, and move a little each day;
and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, pierce around thoroughly with a subtle probe, as much as the flesh around is enlarged, and then extract it.
And if the arrow is embedded in the body of the corpse so that one cannot see it, then seek it out with the entire tension; and if you feel it, then draw it out with a suitable instrument.
and if you cannot due to the narrowing of the wound, and due to the deepness of the arrow, and there is no bone or vein, if the wound is so large that the wounds are great; and extract the arrow if you can, and if it has in the arrow a little door through which it holds,
and extract the arrow if you can, and if it has in the arrow a little door through which it holds, if the bone is stuck with a fracture of .ij. parts to the muscles that you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, so that you can pull it out;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, so that you can pull it out; and subtly ensure that you do not break the arrow, so that you extract it more firmly.
And if you cannot at one time, let it remain until the surrounding flesh is purified, then extract it, for the extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood opposes you, then diminish what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of the incision near the nerve and the vein, and set in motion how you can best move the arrow without danger.
whether it is straight or crooked, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the shape he was in when the arrow fell on him. for it is the greatest aid that it can be, and if you cannot, then place them according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another part, or where it appears to have nothing to do with it, or the skin is swollen in a place if one sees or feels it.
Here is the translation:
And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then pull it.
And if it cannot exit, leave it still, and then restart the extraction until it comes out forcefully;
and if the fist of the arrow is there, push it to the entire fist;
and if the fist is quiet, and you want to administer a push, if it administers, it will break the instrument; If the point of the arrowhead enters into the hair of the instrument; and then apply force,
and if the arrowhead is hairy, he applies it to the instrument with a pointed entrance, in order to facilitate the extraction.
And if the arrowhead is touched, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can, then heal the wound as it converges.
And if the arrowhead is stuck in the foot or in the belly or in the bladder or in the ribcage, and it is close by, and you can reach it, then you can cover it;
and beware of touching the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, if that is your job; and treat it until it is healthy.
The shape of the tongs with which one extracts arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and you see its shape:
And there are many ways: large, moderate, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
of the veins of the common body Of the veins from which one bleeds are 21, because it has 16 main ones.
it is to know: 2 veins which are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech" veins; and the 2 arteries which are in the temples appearing; and there are veins that are in the eyelids of the eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose; and the small veins that are at the neck; and the small veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and they want those that are beneath the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
One is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the head, and the lay people call it "vein of the head"; and the median is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and they call it the "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and they call it the "vein of the belly", and it is on the paunch, and it is the one that is bleeding, which appears clearly on the pouch.
And the savatelle is the vein that is between the auricular and the angular, and if it has two roots;
and on the leg and where the feet are, there are three veins: one is beneath the curve of the left shin, and the second vein which is at the ankle of the right shin; and the vein called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side;
and on the other leg are three veins underneath those.
The knowledge of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines; and the qualities of the wound, as I tell you, and it is that you should raise the head of the patient,
and the qualities of the wound, as I tell you, and it is that you should raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are of a rough fabric; then constrict the patient's neck to a single gaze, so that the two veins appearing behind the ears in the two vessels depending on the head: where you touch with your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, it is a sign of an inch;
Then take the lancet, and insert it beneath the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand above the entire vein. and cut and open the skin and the vein well, you should make two traversing cuts, and make the blood flow out until you see it;
then hold it back and let it go, so that it becomes healthy;
and I have already spoken about incision and cautery in the first book.
The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it wants to migrate to an old pain, and swelling, and habitual eye trouble, and in the course of the watery eyes;
and the quality of the healthy person is thus as I say: and it is that the patient strains his neck, so much that the two veins appear openly; and let the hairs grow below your finger, and then sign with an inch;
then lift the heart onto the vein above your finger's tip, and insert the lancet below, and lift the vein above, and the cope, as you have done in other veins, and make the flow of blood according to your need;
then release the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place on cotton;
and then form a scab, and let it be until it heals; and we have already spoken of their coupling and their extraction, where the book begins.
The wound of the forehead vein is worth as much as the wound of the cephalic (head) vein, as ancient diseases of the face and migraine, and redness.
and the quality is that the patient strains his neck by twisting, so much that the veins appear; then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", whose shape is this:
And put the tip on the vein, and hold it with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; Then release the patient's neck, and hold the vein until it is healthy and never again will it be swollen with a large flame.
However, it is not necessary that the flames be too sharp; and the vein of the crossing, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flames when they are subtle.
The veins of the eyes that are in the temples help with their eyes, and to the forehead, and to the nose, and to the orbit in the eye, and with diseases of the face;
and the quality of their health is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting no ligament, as before;
then the vein, and let the healthy part of the traversed vein be a little thick, a little long, a little wide, for there is no flesh.
And if the veins are subtle, perhaps they will break; then make a correction of the blood, as much as you have mastery, and then place it on the cushion, and bind it well.
The health of the vein of the hand is worth little to the physician, and to sudden faintness, and to facial diseases. as if it were a migraine and redness that comes to the face, and especially when it is old;
and the quality of the blood is such that the patient tightens his neck, then stretches out his nose to his left hand; and take the subtle flame long, and insert it into the labium in the space that is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well enough, and the blood begins to flow now;
and do not go too deeply into the marrow, and make correction of the blood according to necessity, then leave it a night, for it is almost fully restored;
The knowledge of the twelve winds helps with the straining of the vein, and at the beginning of messeliness, and many illnesses, and impetigo, and corrosions, and herpes, and similar things;
and the quality of the knowledge is that the patient strains his neck from one side to the other, as we have said; and let the masters stand above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
then prick the vein of the loin a little widely, then draw out the blood temperately, or as much as the master is.
then make another incision in the other vein, then release the ligature, and hold back the veins moderately. so that the patient does not strangle; and let it be just until morning, so that the wound may be healthy.
About the health of the liver The health of the veins above the liver helps in the collection at the mouth, and corruption of gums, and cracks of the lips, and painful nose and interior.
And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck steady as I have said; then turn the liver, and examine the veins, of which one is on the right liver and the other on the left; and they know by this that they are black, and by this that around them there are small black veins: examine one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt,
examine one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, if you examine the largest of each part, and you do it in the same way for the veins that are above and below, because it is a similar manner.
From the vein below the tongue The health of the veins that are beneath the tongue helps after the health of the head, and it's at the constriction of the throat, and in diseases of the eye, and in diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the veins is such that if a patient's blood is between your hands before the sun, and you lift the tongue, and look underneath on each side for a black vein:
examine one and then the other, and do not push too much in depth, because underneath are the arteries.
The veins of the neck that one commonly examines are classified according to three methods:
where you prick everything, I flame strongly, or olive oil subtly as if cutting incisions, and it is called "anesil". and they are large and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the flame burning so is very renowned, and it is large as if you see:
And it has mastery over opening the veined plains of thick apparent blood, and that contains thick blood and turmoil; and it's the form of the flame olive oil:
and it's more subtly pointed, and is for clearing the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrus blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, aids the illnesses that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the stomach;
and it is necessary for the vein to be cleansed gently, and that it be wary of the artery that is below. And if he touches the artery, and blood flows out, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and one must not be pricking the flame, but rather cutting as one would with an anvil.
And if the basilic vein does not open clearly, it is necessary that you extract it, and change to another; where you want no rupture of it, or you cut into the vein in the arm: it opens clearly; and apply a flame to the anvil, as we have said.
And if you want to know the state of the wound, it is necessary that you stretch out the arm, that you touch the spot as much as you feel the pulse; then sign the spot of the wound, and then stretch out the arm, and apply a flame to the vein with an anvil;
and beware that you do not strike in the artery when you see the spot swollen, for it is an artery: avoid it then.
And if you see it swell up high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it's without an artery: Hasten thou then, and set thy finger on it for a long time, then lift thy finger if the blood is stagnant, which often happens;
Let the arm be still, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and be steady over fear, and do not move until he is healthy.
And if the blood is not stagnant, and it flows, and the medicine is not present, then cut into the artery so that it opens, for the head of the vein returns; and stagnates the blood.
And take a fistula of a fist, and make it, and take one of the emunctories and lay it well just up to the other side;
If the wound is stagnant, that's good; if not, then heal it, as we have said, with powders that staunch blood.
and the staunching agents are not grievously affected by multiple dispositions for the small wound of the arm, and the possibility of a good union of the arm.
The health of the vein in the middle is such that it helps to draw blood from the head below, and from the body below. because it is composed of the basilic and the cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to be careful because of the nerve that is underneath, and if he presses too hard, and he finds the nerve, and he inflames and the veins become irritated, and by chance he cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any homes because of its subtlety, it is necessary that you sound the instrument carefully; and avoid the nerve at your power.
And if he has a vein between the two fingers, then make it bleed far away.
The sanity of the head is helped, for it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
and it is better to puncture at the olive or martian vein, for it is the safest of all the veins, because it has neither nerve nor artery.
However, one must seek the lightest vein, and not grieve anything if it fails the first time, and one starts again. and by chance he inflames the eyes of some men, when they fail at first, but it does not harm anything. The quality of the health is according to your thought.
The first thing you must know about healing, is that health is not maintained except by guarding sanity,
and to avoid the diseases to come; and let the vein operation be done on one of the three veins that are near the skin: namely, cephalic, fasting, and basilic; and one should operate on the veins at the beginning of spring, and in autumn, and in winter after menstruation, when the signs of repletion appear;
and one should operate on the veins on the first or third day, after 8 hours or 10 days.
The vein operation that is administered for illnesses has no fixed hour determined, but only according to the need of day or night, at all hours and in every condition;
and it is not suitable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying fruit for four months until the seventh month. Nor should they be cauterized, the old who have passed 60 years.
And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever way it may be, then it is necessary that they evacuate the intestines with a light clyster. if he has much retained filth, then the veins do not attract the superfluous and noxious humors from the intestines to the principal members.
One must not cauterize those who are too full of food, nor those who are drunk, as long as they are furious or dropsical.
and beware of those who are sick after passionate anger, and vomiting, and discomfort of the stomach, and frequent miscarriage in a woman, and labor, watching and fasting, and this is all virtue, or by reason of the arm or good body.
then subtily purge the humors, if the blood is gross, by food and by drinks and by medicines, so you have little power.
then enter into a bath, where nothing is lacking, to subtly purge the blood.
and you prick the vein of the foot above the ankle, as we have said;
and you beware of that day of work, and of puncture, and of dislocation, and of similar things;
and be gentle and joyful, and let the healers be higher than the one who is pricked, and rub the arm two or three times;
then stretch the ligament above gently, for when it is too stretched or short, it cannot correct the sinew;
and then rub the limb with hands until the veins swell, and feel them;
then anoint the sinewy part with a little warm oil, then place his right hand on that vein below the limb where he wants to heal; so that the vein does not flee and fails to be pierced. For there are veins that flee as if they were cords in the sinewy part, and there are some that are full of windiness; If when one puts on the flame, one pulls it back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus one is of those.
and if he opens the vein, it is the wound too narrow, because thus it is necessary that the surgeons be advised in these things.
And if the vein opens for the first time, it is good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or at the joint, so the veins are not inflamed.
And if the veins are inflamed, and the patient is in a hurry, let them go for a day or two, and do not bind the arm: Perhaps it will come to abscesses wounds; do not enter where there is no bath, then recommence the health as it pleases him.
and if the perforation is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not issue as much blood as you see, then insert the entire flame directly into that small opening.
and operate with a little haste, so that the eyes may be inflamed; for this happens many times, when the wound is small.
If you see the eye inflamed, do not recommence the health, and put a little of the oil of oleum, for it alleviates the body's pain, and is mixed in this oil the lie that the oil;
and then administer the oil of olive in every healthy place that you anoint the veins, to staunch the flow of blood;
and this same thing makes a triangular and bulbous swelling, when one places it on the limb; if one subtly reduces the excess and separates it when it is too large.
And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, similarly when it is not healthy unless at that time or the opening of the vein is small, if you hasten, and place on the limb a damp sponge in water and in a small hot container, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood issue from the vein, and if it remains in place after several days without any black or green color, then it does not harm him; and if you see, put on some thing of aloe or myrrh remedy in juice of calendula, master, or similar.
And many times there is an abscess and appearance at the wound of the basilica: put your hand on it, and if you find the soft spot at the pressure of the hand, then it is that bad appearance. Avoid then that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for by chance it will cut short without deartering; but make the wound a little deeper to harden the spot, then apply another treatment, until it is healthy.
And bleed each one of blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it issue forth until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is suitable for one who is full and strong, and has mastery of blood extraction, that one makes a larger wound, and the flames are large.
and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is suitable to bleed less often and more gently, and one should bleed in a crosswise cut, not by pricking.
and this manner of health is free from decay of blood and coupling of nerve, and is worth more than the health that gives long life or wide life.
And to him whose body fails in health, it is necessary to give a millet porridge with juice of green apples; if he is exhausted, take away three or four times the blood.
And if he is of a cold complexion, serve before health a millet porridge with muscat syrup, or with aromatic honey syrup and spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and well-fragrant syrup.
And if he falls ill in health, after the issue of much blood, it is necessary that he drink broth of beef, and subtle fragrant syrup.
and it is one of the other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of a vein.
And if he wants to relieve his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when it is weakened by great bleeding, that he be bled little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
And he who wants to relieve his arm after the first bleeding, and it has a strong course, should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And he who wants to bleed from another part, should be bled on the second day or the third.
Because there is much blood inside the body that is already heated, and it causes fever; if one must treat a large quantity, and widen the wound so it bursts into pus. then you examine all the conditions of health, and place your hand on the pulse when it throbs, so death does not come into the body. and this happens often, when the healers are negligent;
and you must not delay when you see the arm being dislocated, and make the blood issue a second time, and the wound is closed, so you press firmly on it. If he is curved, he stretches out his arm quickly, for this would be bad.
but let him stretch out as long as it takes to heal the second time; or you prick at the tip of the flame, as much as the blood that is congealed at the mouth of the vein issues forth. and put it on the small piece of silk, and press on it lightly.
And if the vein is inflamed, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
And if it is necessary to bleed twice, if the vein is in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is bled in the place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the manner of bleeding is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so that the veins become red.
Then it should be tied moderately, so that the vein appears well, then bleed now through the crossing, neither too wide nor too long.
and be the wide perforations, and be well pressed close to the joint of the hand, and if you cannot issue from it, then put the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow in the water, until you have enough;
and if it is in this state, do not put the hand back in warm water, for they put it more in winter than in summer;
and the health of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The health of the little finger on the right hand is good for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
Here is the translation: and if the vein is across, and if you cut it completely, do not grieve anything;
and do not go too much in depth, for the nerves are then quickly denuded of flesh,
and then put your hand in warm water, if the wound is frozen, and cannot issue forth.
And when you have drawn out blood as much as necessary, then put oil on the vein and sew it up quickly, and thus make a remedy for each wound.
The health of the hand on the left side is worth it against the disease of the thigh, and do everything just as I have told you about the right.
The health of the spleen is worth it against all the diseases that are below the body, as with diseases of the liver, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its health is that the patient's pain is alleviated by warm water, and rubbed on the vein until it feels better. and he places it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they go many routes;
soundly then where the vein is larger, or at the ankle, which is more useful.
And if you soundly above the foot, beware of the nerves that are underneath, and the vein that travels also like a boundary; and so are the flames anaesthetized.
And if the sensation cannot emerge, reset the foot in the water, and let the vein be well cleared.
And if the surgeons fail the first time, they recommend a second attempt from above a little, because the joints are salty; Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make equal the wisdom of one foot with the other;
The veins of the sciatic leg are at the junction of the thigh, and their surgery is worth the pain of the hip, when it's due to hot blood.
And the quality of its surgery is that the patients either get better or worse, and extract from above the thigh .iii. two twisted tendons.
for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then you should bleed it in all ways that you can, and across. and it is necessary that you touch it, for the blood vessels are dry, and it is much responded to by many people at home.
and it is necessary that you touch it, for the blood vessels are dry, and it is much responded to by many people at home. And if you do not find it, then bleed some blood from the one that opens or gives two drops, and towards the little finger, and beware of the tendons.
and let as much blood flow as you see fit, and then loosen the bond, and put on cotton and bandage; it is now healed.
The applications of cupping.
Cupping is made of horns, or of copper, or of glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by burning and attracting blood, or without burning.
And this non-fire cupping is done in two ways: either it is with full fire, or without fire;
and others in the sides of the neck; and the swelling beneath the chin; and the swelling of the shoulders; and the swelling on the knees; and the swellings in the arms; and the swellings of the legs; and the cuppings of the .ij. veins; and the cupping does not draw blood, except from small scattered veins that are in the flesh,
and for this reason one should not be afraid of it, as one does with healthiness of vein; and it is not suitable that it be administered, nor to any fire that does not sense fire, in any illness that comes from excess, as long as the body is evacuated.
And if by necessity of illnesses one must ventilate, or by habit, if we administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at every time;
because there are those who, when they have the task of bleeding, weigh heavily on the head;
and there are those who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and there are those who experience a flow of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and spit out blood; and there are those who swoon, and see nothing but blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we command to evacuate after three hours of the day.
The health of the nose helps with the greatness of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not appropriate that it be after the evacuation of the whole body;
and this evacuation is in lieu of the health of the cephalic,
and it is not suitable for one who has a cold complexion in use, or who has a catarrh, because this causes them great harm;
and because of this it is not suitable for the weak who use it, nor those who have cold heads or bad illnesses.
And he who often feels dizzy, becomes oblivious, and therefore it is suitable to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the fear of oblivion.
The cupping on the neck is in the place of the healthy head and the basilic, and therefore it is suitable for the stretching of the foot. and to the fracture of the channel of the arm, and to the bruise, and to the replenishment;
and it is necessary to poultice, for if it holds too firmly, thus causing an inclination or stomach ache or heart pain.
The windings are like the ribs of the neck if they bring pain to the head, and obstructions, and migrations, and to the straining, and to the pain at the roots of the teeth.
and it is in the place of the health of the basilica; and it is necessary that you instruct the healer to express his hand in putting, so he does not touch the artery, and does not see the return of blood.
The windings beneath the chin are a sign of disease of the mouth, and of corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the health of the .ij. lips.
The ventilations of the ribs are worth an illness that comes from heat and fullness.
The ventilations of the sides are worth as much as those of the veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins;
and instruct the surgeon to not make too many deep holes, for the flesh is nourished by blood, and knows of its own nerves and arteries.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And if the wound is large, it is necessary to cauterize twice: the first time to subtly clear the way for the large blood flow.
And if the wound is very deep, it is necessary to cauterize a third time; and when we want to draw out the little blood drop by drop, it suffices to cauterize only once.
And if we want to remove a lot of blood, we must recommence frequently; and if the wound is deep, we must cauterize deeply, and the limit is that the heart should be perceived suddenly.
and it is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin, and who have stubborn pores, that you open the veins of the oily aperture and dissolutive. Here is the translation:
and it is in a poultice, of oil of cress, or of lilies, or of chamomile, or other similar.
And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of anise, and similar.
And if the skin is tender and has large pores, it is not suitable to put oil on it.
but it is suitable to wash after the ventilation of rose water, or cold water, or water of morelle, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or other similar.
And he who has much moisture, if he raises from aniseed, or from aqua of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
And those who have great excesses raise themselves from old wine, or from water of rue, or from a decoction of aniseed or chamomile, or from other similar things.
and do not consider it healthier to apply a cupping glass before the bath, but rather after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the cupping.
and it is necessary that he be warned when he should be cupped and when he is being cupped. And beware of those who are choleric, and their blood is too sharp and inflamed; It is fitting that they take cold things, such as apples, pomegranates, and lettuce in the shade, and similar things;
and eat little peas, and flesh of young pigs, and damp meats.
And those who have a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine in the morning, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat little peas and small birds and pigeons;
and on the day when he will be bled, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some men triple or muscat before bleeding, or afterwards, to comfort the main limbs; and let the blood be subtle, but it is not suitable for those who are hot when they drink.
The bleeding points that are not painful are those on the liver, and on the spleen, and on the podagra, and on the belly and the bowels and the loins and the thigh, for these members do not suffer from pain at those places.
and do not perform it unless you have to extract blood from limb to limb, as we place them on the limbs when they are not healthy; to reduce the viscosity that is in the limb, as we place cupping glasses on the belly and on the bowels to diminish the limb;
and remove the pain, when there is obstruction or stone, if it removes by its attractive virtue by chance the obstruction, or clears the stone from its place;
and thus it is done when one places it on the liver and on the spleen, when there is retained viscosity,
and these cupping glasses are administered empty for suction only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water,
as in bad illnesses of the lungs, and in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with hot water or hot water in which herbs conducive to coughing have been cooked.
The shape of the cupping glass administered with fire is thus:
And it has two fingers' width and half a palm's length of profundity, and it has or is surrounded by the middle .i. small hole, just as if to put in a needle,
and let it be of a gentle nature, soft beforehand so that it does not blister the patient when putting it on the limb;
and have in the middle a rod of across of iron or fire, to put a bandage in place,
and let them be large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
for the bloodletting of children is different from that of the old, and of the thin from the fat.
And one must then put this cupping glass on the limb:
take the candle of wax or oil and apply it to the cupping glass across the vein that is in the cupping glass, so that the brightness should be at the bottom of the cupping glass so it does not burn the patient;
and then put it on the limb, and you should be at the opening that we have spoken of, so that when one looks, the vapor goes out, and one removes the cupping glass;
and take hold of the limb as before, and start again, if you are a master.
In the application of cupping, which is administered in diseases of the lungs, at every acute stage, there is neither a rod nor a tube, and it is not administered except when it is full of air, and is placed on the limb as soon as possible.
and that is the method:
Without them being administered except on limbs where cups cannot be placed because of their smallness, such as the eyelids and cheeks, and similar places. and in the uselessness of flesh, as if it were worth nothing or worthless, and other similar things;
and the quality of the use is that when you find tender areas that are in sweet gentle nets without porosity, if you take them;
and put a node in a sweet gentle spot, as long as they are familiar, and have nothing in their belly; and then be healthy from vein and from cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the bandages;
and when they are flat, and they will desire, it is whether one can put a ventousa, if one puts, for it is worth much afterwards.
If not, then lift the lever of the axis, and then of water, very well, and then sprinkle;
and if the healthy veins are too far afterwards along the course of the sinews, if it bothers, I mean to drape with linen in cold water, and put on, so that the vein may be stretched;
and if the vein is multiplied, then put on a broken glass vial, or galena, and similar things, so that it may be stretched;
where you put on the hand many small peeled feathers, and let them adhere to the skin, then it will staunch now;
and if you have more of this kind of thing, take other swallowings.
And if the swallowings do not want to be taken, rub the skin with fresh blood, or you stick a needle in so that the sanus comes out. and then put them on, and soon as they feel the blood, they adhere;
and when you see they are falling, powder on a little of aloes wood and of burnt hooves, or of ash, now they will cling.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Know, dear son, that the foolish physician departs from this chapter, who did not find anything in the ancient books, nor did they read any letter about it.
and for this reason is estranged the knowledge in our land, because I never found any good.
and I knew nothing, except through the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habituation of my life;
and I have described to you here in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are needed, as I did in those three chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where wisdom places its understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or bruising comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient from one part and another, so nothing hinders you completely, as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age;
or the tension is not very strong, or too cold; and avoid cold foods, it is to know that frozen joints are cold, and flesh of birds and goats, and do not drink any wine, nor eat rough and fatty meats, and do not fill oneself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, so you do not have doubt about hot abscess, or expansion of matter in the limb; if you restore the patient to their first government that they had used.
And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or they have viscosity, as if they are strengthened in water, and rice, and bread, and pies, and pork of a calf, and eggs, and fresh fish, and old wine, and similar things. For the nourishment represents itself in muscles and soon repairs the fracture.
And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well reset or rejoined according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, like the bones of small children;
but there is no cure, reset the broken bone, that is, the large tendons which are torn and join the limb together, so it enforces as it was before; and do not touch any part of its work, and therefore it needs to be nourished with thick broths, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. Because there is a break that goes to the armpit, and another in adjusting, as the handle of a pen for writing.
Because there is a break that goes to the armpit, and another in adjusting, as the handle of a pen for writing. And if it breaks with a wound, and breaks into a small crack entirely.
And in each manner it has its own engine, and its own proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory returns to its place;
and it is known that the break of the bone occurs because the joint is twisted, and opens well by force, and sounds to the pressure of the hand;
and when there is no twist in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no point of breakage;
but it can well have a twist, or crack, or small breakage. It does not seem that you move to the hand, but put on medications that come here afterwards, and then hold it subtly now.
And know that the breakage that goes to the joint, and are the disjoined parts, it must now be put in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not come to life.
and if boils come, they will come, if he lets it be for a day, until the boils are calmed; then put it evenly on the muscles so that you can lift gently and easily, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restorations of that which has pieces; then hold steady, as it will be afterwards.
And if there are broken pieces in the bone, if it is dislocated in two or three parts, whether it be hand or foot, or one of the small members, or with two strings, or with a string and your hand;
and put the limb in its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are disentangled, you reset them by adjusting the joints to their proper places in the muscles where you can lift, and be careful not to cause harm or injury to the patient with your work.
and adjust well the joints of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel well with the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if you straighten it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press as they do who come through their work on abscessed and contracted member, as we have wanted many times.
And when the limb is in a point, so chasten well the patient that they do not move it, neither while awake nor while asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and take care that the limb is so well-assured that it does not feel any pain. Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: and you guard that it be set straight, lest twisting comes not when it is restored;
and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
For there are small members, thus arms and fingers and similar: thus it is necessary to envelop with gentle and subtle touches;
And those that are large, like the hip and leg: one must envelop with a large and hard bandage, for large bandages encompass the entire limb, and hold it steady on all sides equally, so that there is no unevenness.
Then the bandages are light, 2 or 3 turns, according to the limb, and hold the hand a little on all the bandage, then go above the break and hold it less, so that the break is slightly loosened.
and soften the bandage a little and a little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy limb, then take another bandage, and turn it again above the broken limb.
Then return to the part below the break, and hold it moderately, neither too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first chapter above.
Then put between the swollen lymph nodes or abscesses, so they are all equal; then tie everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made stitches above, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
And if there is inflammation or abscess, then put above something that soothes the hot abscess, and which reduces the inflammation, and leaves it thus for some days;
Then stretch above your stitches, and be of a moderate size cane rod, or a stick made from the wood of which one makes clubs, or palm branches, and be according to this shape:
But it is necessary that the stitch that one puts above the break be a little bigger and wider than the others;
and let it be as long as it needs for a small or large limb;
then hold steady the staples as you did at the first bandage, then tie above with a thread smoothly, as at the first bandage on the fracture;
the more tightly it is bound, the less so; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, neither too large nor too small, and be of soft linen;
for if the threads are large, as I have seen foolish people who make their bandages with twisted linen cords, and this is a great error, for the bandage cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it is not necessary that it should have between each staple less than two fingers' width.
And if the patient is injured by the heads of the stars after being tightened in their healthy places, put beneath them a poultice of linen or a piece of cloth, so that it does not become black.
When the wound is with the fracture, and the courses are broken, I will tell you the treatment hereafter.
And know that it is not fitting to tighten the stars all at once on the broken limbs on the first day. For when the limb is large, it is not fitting to put the stars in place until after 5 or 7 days, or more according to the severity of the abscess that occurs subsequently.
and thus you will see the manner of ancient plasterers to restore fracture, dislocation, and sprain: and it is that you take flour that holds as in a mill's walls, and mix it with plenty of egg white, and make this confection, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it's the common manner of restorative plaster for restoring fracture to many dispositions, and likewise for women and small children, since it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of restorative plaster for restoring fracture and dislocation and sprain: take abrasives and ladanium and enula and asa fetida and Arabic gum and mugwort, in the amount of 10; myrrh and aloe, in the amount of 5; alexandrian iris 8; and make powder, and mix with plenty of egg white; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is suitable for many men.
Another manner of plaster that is suitable for sprain: take mugwort and vismalve, in the amount of 10; myrrh and aloe, in the amount of 8; acacia 7; Armenian bole 10, and crush well, and mix with water or plenty of egg white, and apply it.
Another way to apply a poultice to joints and to those bones that are dislocated from their places, and to ease the sudden pain, and the wound is swollen, and the fracture: take new wine, and milk in oil and in cooked lard, and put it on the wound. This poultice does not restore at all, but it is good for easing the aposteme's heat, and properly alleviates the pains.
Another way to apply a poultice that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and earthy peony leaves, and crush them together, and make an application.
Another way to apply a poultice for the restoration of a bone fracture and to reduce the remaining aposteme. Take roots of vismalve, chamomile, violet flowers, veal flour, each part; and crush, and mix with wine, and if the limb is inflamed, mix it with moist coriander water or water, and use.
Another way to apply a poultice stronger than the first, when the aposteme is hard and comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of vismalve, and seeds of flax, balauste, mellilote, and sansuce, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each one part; and crush, and mix with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Here is the translation:
And it seems that one should apply warm things to the broken member, to restore it, such as a warm poultice, if it is like myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of applying poultices that is good for lesion and pain: take mugwort and decapitate the heads of men, or feathers of a bird, and vismalve, and let it steep, and crush, and make a poultice and apply it to the affected limb.
And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone out of its place; if you do not loosen it for many days.
And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, without rest or inflammation, hasten, and loosen it, and remove the poultice now; and take a lighter dressing, and a moist sea sponge, and dip in water, and lift up the limb, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is appeased. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply a dry or moist compress, either with water or rose oil, and place it on a nut, until you are sure of a warm abscess;
and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and soothe the pain, then resume the subtle treatment, and a bit of emplaster, and do not strain it so forcefully as before; and continue subtly until it is healthy.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you have need of emplaster and bandage, then resume it, as you did initially in equal measure.
And if it does not come to the limb in accordance with what we have said, do not delay it further than three days or four days or five days or six days; and never leave it twenty days, according to what one sees, until the breakage is evident, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh above.
Then the restraint is more than at first, and the patient's flesh grows, as I have said before; and if you see the dryness of the limb more than usual, know that it cannot come to a cure. apply the warm water treatment then, every time you dislocate it, and let it be so each day, and slacken a little the bandage;
by this work then, the patient's health is cut off from the limb, and it hastens what the foolish doctor does, that twists the limb wrongly: it's evil, and if these are the painful operations, I do not see anything else but to ease and open it correctly.
of various ways of fracture There are many kinds of breaks, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinguished;
for there are breaks that are made by percussion of a spear, and the neck bone is broken all the way to the syfac which is beneath the bone, as if made by a hatchet or a staff; and for this reason this kind of break is called "hatchet-break".
Where the spear's point breaks the bone from above with a downward percussive blow, and this kind of break is called "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two kinds of great or small breaks.
And if there is an embedded percussion, or a split or fracture of the collar bone, or a fall onto stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a penetrating wound that approaches just below the skin which is under the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is the wound whether large or small.
And if there is a wound that is embedded in the bone as subtly as a hair, and it is a small fissure, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary".
and if the wound is made or caused by a blow of stone, or by falling, or by similar things, and makes a piece of bone enter downwards, and it is as when they make a hole in the cauldron when they strike against the cauldrons; thus between the stones within.
And those who have bones under them that are moist, like a child's head.
and there are all these ways of breaking that small pieces are disarticulated, as if they were such; and I will speak of them in their place.
And we recognize all ways of breaks through the withdrawal from them, and the inquiry into their tendons, and by the rotten flesh that is on them.
The capillary similarity is known through this: when one discovers the bone and rubs against it, then the black break appears.
In the treatment of breaks, beware of accidents that harm the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and palpation, and ague fever, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in various dispositions, so that one cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see a sudden accident, and you expect health, thus begin the treatment.
And when the nausea comes to you first, and it is in winter, thus you should open your bowels before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
And if it is in summer, thus hasten to open your bowels before the seventh day, lest the intestine under the bowel be corrupted, and come the accidents that we have mentioned.
And if the breakage of the bowel comes just to the intestine that covers the brain, thus you should divide the divided part in this way: and it is that you take hold of the chief of the patient's ailing head, and uncover on the bowel in all the ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound most soft that you can.
and if the flow of blood comes to discover the bone, or a festering abscess, it is aided by that which is suitable, and it is that you fill the hole with moistened cloths soaked in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the festering abscess is calmed, and you are assured of the flow of blood; then begin to cut around the bone, and it is done according to .ij. manners of work: one manner is that you cut with a narrow taillement in front, and this is the form:
And then I use another, larger taillement than the first one.
And the second manner is that you have a number of diverse taillements, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron indeed; and in working lightly, so that you do not blister the head.
And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce around, so that you administer small blows with tar, not too deep so they do not penetrate beyond the bone, and must have above a point or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have more, if each one returns to its place on the thickness of the bone, so that you have small blows for every test; and this is the form of the three manners of tar.
The quality of piercing around the bone breaks is that you put a small blow on the bone, and turn your two fingers so that you know the bone is pierced; then replace the small blow elsewhere a little later, and do it all around, then make an incision in the space of the bone which is between the pertus, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone with your hand, or with any of the instruments that you have as tenails, pincers; and beware that you do not touch the brain or the syfac.
And when you have pierced the bone and extracted it, it is necessary that you restore the aperture which was closed off from the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more subtle and more delicate than the other incisors.
and if it remains nothing of the small bones, no bad scales, if they break lightly at the edges; then heal the wound with tendons and ointments that we have said.
And another manner of surgery is that which Galen says, which is more wise; and he praises it highly, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, where the break appears, so when you have discovered that part, then put beneath the head of this curved incision the shape:
And do not cut on one side, and the part is bent in two corners, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently tap all around the bone, and beware well of the web that is beneath.
Here is the translation:
And if the break of the bone does not pass just to the membrane, and the bone is covered so softly above, and there are small pieces, if it behooves to reassemble that roughness, and to remove the scales with a subtle rasp that you must have diverse quantities, in order to prepare each place as conveniently as possible, according to the work and shape of the break.
If you use large rasps first, and then more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing this until it is well.
In each of the other hair-cutting and subtle breaks, it behooves that you prepare the cause according to its direction; and this is something that is not readily available to one who has put his study into this art.
And if the wound is discovered, it behooves that you take a dressing of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and the softness in rose oil, and place it on the wound. then take another double-layered bandage, or two or three, and the marrow in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first bandage; and make it as light as possible so you do not aggravate the wound, then apply above another layer, and do not constrict it more than necessary until it holds the wound sufficiently.
and leave it like that for a day or two, until the abscesses are calmed down, then remove it, and apply medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of violets, and powder of incense, and aristologe, and similar things; and make a powder from these things, and put it on the wound, and apply gentle medicines without sharpness.
and be careful that the wound is properly clean, so you do not leave any residue, nor allow it to gather pus, for when pus gathers on the cloth of the brain, it corrodes and putrefies, and brings great harm to the patient; for when you apply something sharp to the wound, it becomes inflamed above.
Take care then, lest some bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, and it is doubtful without a doubt.
And if it becomes worse due to the fire that one has applied, so that the virtue of the medicine is not there, then you must take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and glue them together in a plaster; then heal it with various methods of cures that are suitable, so that it may be healthy.
Know that the three parts of the nail are broken above, or one breaks off by itself, because they are three bones; and this cartilaginous part does not break, so it does not make a fracture or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the three parts is broken, then you must put your small finger or fingerless nail beside the broken part, and set it equal to the fracture in your index finger, and in the pouch by default, so that the nail regains its natural shape. and do this lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
And if the break is in the upper part near the nail, and cannot be reduced to its place, then it is necessary that you put it even at the head of a straight finger, a little thick.
And if the break is in two parts, then redo it similarly, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can;
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscessed swelling is appeased, then bursts at the head of the nail, stretching out with strips of linen, if the break is in one part.
Where you set another apart from another part, it breaks there is; and let the tents be so large that they fill the holes of the nose.
And they say that one should soften the tents in broth, and change every day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be softened with a concoction of egg whites, and powdered millet; then let the tent, until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
And sometimes set on where there are no eggs of oil in place of tents, and if a swollen drapery is inside, and it holds the breakage, and soothes the patient within; or do what you see fit.
And if abscesses come to the nose as you operate, then put cerotate or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in a pouch of dyakulon.
And if abscesses do not come, apply an emplaster made from flour of sesame, and powder of incense, mixed with egg whites, then place light bandages on top, and do not bind it tightly;
and if the break is small, and it breaks into minute pieces, then extract the fragments with suitable instruments, next sew up the fracture, and treat the painful wounds with charm, and suddenly, as with suitable emplasters and ointments;
and if there is no deep wound, then treat with tents, and I put on a poultice of soft cloth, so that it may be healthy.
of the fracture of the jawbone
When the jaw is dislocated below, and there is no sign of wound above, and the break is above only slightly, and it is not broken in two, because of the corrugations within, if one recognizes it lightly.
It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left jaw, then put your right index finger, and adjust the break gently, and hold it with the other hand above, and make it even.
And if the break of the jaw is dislocated in two parts, it is necessary that you administer extension in two parts, so that they are even.
And if the movements of the teeth occur, or a fracture, then strain with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put on the broken jawbone a cerote, and put on it a double bandage; and put on the bandage a well-made steel instrument, or a piece of equal leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and bind it to the mouth that you can hold, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see the figure changing, so dislocate it on the third day, and then set it in place where it changes; and apply a poultice made of mill dust with abundant egg whites or flour of six grains, after you have removed the crust; and apply a light poultice, and if the poultices are effective, and the patient's condition does not change, let it be until they are healthy; many times it is healthy in twenty-two days.
And if abscesses arise, so administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, remove the useless piece of bone that has been broken off; if you subtly remove the extraneous bones with concealed cavities to this.
And if the wound is constricted, so enlarge it with flame according to the necessity.
And when you will have gathered all these pieces, and it does not stay in place, if the wound is large, and put on it suitable dressings to heal the flesh, so that it may be healthy.
of the violent one The violent one breaks many times beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the breakage is in two ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two places, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or there is breakage with wound.
And the treatments are when the breakage is without wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the violent breakage; and the other stretches out the neck towards the part; then put equal the breakage to your fingers, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance nor movement.
And if you have mastery of extending further, then place under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or leather, and let it be large according to your need; and hold steady and gently the force, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you put even the fracture, as it is necessary.
And if you cannot manage the head of the fracture at the forefront, because it comes in deeply, then it is necessary that the patient leans on his shoulder, and place under the shoulder a small pillow, and push the ministres down below, so that the bone of the fracture is lifted.
And then adjust the fracture with your fingers, and if you find it broken in pieces, then it is necessary that you join them together; and lift the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot be joined by any manipulation, then take one of the instruments you have; but put under the fracture this instrument, to ward off the swelling.
and it seems like a spoon, and it is not a cheat, and let it be as large as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the possibility of the wound; and have .ij. skills, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the routing of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
and when you are sure of a hot abscess, if the wound is small, or you doubt it's a hot abscess, then fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
And if hot abscesses come, if it softens, put a dressing in rose oil and in vinegar and in wine, and apply it.
The treatment of the bone, when it is without wounds and without fracture, is that you put on the bone a plaster made of powder from millet and egg white, and apply light poultices, and put a splint underneath, if you are skilled in this. then take a very wide bandage of a palm's length, then put a double layer of dressing on the poultices and the plaster; then take a subtle steel strip of two fingers' width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage remains suspended. and put the stallion on the bruise, and turn the bandage around the neck, and beneath the healthy spine, and beneath the affected spine; and adjust each part accordingly, and when you see that the bandage holds the bruise firmly, and you clearly see that the stallion does not move above the broken bone, if you reward it every day, and when the ligaments relax, if it restrains;
and make the patient lie on his back, and you measure it when he sleeps; put a small pillow under the joint, to lift the shoulder high; if you adjust the break of the clavicle by adjusting the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not release it so that bad accidents do not happen, for twenty days.
then reapply the poultice, if you see that it needs it, and hold it in place and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is restored within twenty-eight days, and in less for some people.
of the break of the shoulder
When it happens that the shoulder breaks or dislocates out of its place, and you cannot set it back in place by touching; then prepare according to the shape of the break, and reset according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can; then put on the place powdered millet with plenty of water, and light bandages, and put on a double layer of cloth; then put on a large and subtle splint, a little larger than the shoulder, and if the splint is not fixed in any place on the shoulder, use an application of linen thread, so that the splint is held firmly; and then hold it all together with a strong bandage, so that the splint does not move out of its place, and check the ligature every day; and all the times it becomes loose, hold it in place, and adjust the splint if it is out of its place, and ease the patient on his side; and the shoulder is restored within twenty days or twenty-five. And when this number of days is accomplished, then release it, and be sure, for it is not good to set it back lightly.
And if a piece of bone protrudes beforehand, and does not below the heart, if it swells up, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the strong force to calm an abscess down.
of the breaking of the strong push
The bone is not always broken in the middle, but it often happens; but it breaks most often at the end. And when it is broken within, it declines below, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and numbness, and sometimes vomits blood, and opens the passages in the broken bone, and the sensation becomes well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and you put a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs with your hands, and subtly adjust to make it even in all ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on emplaustres and stoups of subtle salt, or another light powder, and wrap it in a drapil, and tie it to the broken bone, so it does not move; and turn the round bandage around the back, and bind it strongly, and rewrap every hour the linen, and if it becomes loose, then bind it again; and if it seems to dislocate, either by corrosion or by pruritus that comes from the body, or pain or abscess, hasten, and loosen, and remove the emplaustre, and address what has come in ways of cures; then reset the emplaustre, and bind it until it is healthy.
of the breaking of the ribs
You know that the breaking of the ribs does not occur except in large ones behind the back, and at the inner head, and they do not bend except because they are slippery; and one feels it well during the inquiry into the two.
And the resettings are that you put equal the break, as it is fitting. And then put the plaster, and hold it with a star, so you have mastery over it.
And if the breaking of the ribs declines inward, the patient feels very great pain and puncturing, just as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and it causes a sharp point, and a great planteful of blood, and it is a grievous wound, and the old ones have put great ingenuity.
And if there are those who say that they need to administer food that swells the belly, in order to cure the fracture by blowing.
We do not make this, that hot abscesses do not come to life, if they have not arrived. And if it has arrived, then it is healthy.
And some of them said that one puts ventouses on the limb, to suck out the putrid matter, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the ventouses do not attract the superfluities from the limb by the disposition of weakness.
And they direct that one should cover the limb with a warm ointment in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the interlining equal, then let it be cured of the treatment for pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear through the skin which touches the cloth, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision on the broken rib, and it is necessary to put underneath a instrument to guard against the swelling; and then one must cut into the bone, and treat lightly, and then close the lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure with plasters, until they are healthy. And if apostemes come, then put on warm dressings in rose oil, and put on the limb; and cure while the limb is subject to aposteme, and be constantly watching over the rib where it should be, until they are healthy.
of the break of the neck
Sometimes a break comes to the bone of the neck, and soon it will collapse; and also to the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take care to see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that they are mortally ill in many dispositions, and if they die and seem well when one holds them steady and firmly, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and that the patient's illness is cured, so apply treatment.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, if take warning because the feet are numb, and if the accidents that are in his hands, and on the back there is no voluntary movement and excretion without will; and when one has swooned onto their belly, then there is no voluntary excretion. And when it is swooning onto their back and they want to sit, then they cannot. Know that it is mortal: then do not labor in vain in their cure.
And if this accident does not come to them, then it is the thing most lightweight.
And the cure is that you apply heat if there is a hot abscess, if put on the spine oil of rose or oil of musk, so that it be appeased; then put on one of the comforting and drying plaasters, and tie with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel the pain, until they are healthy. And if some bone is dislocated, then it is necessary to put on the heart of the back; and take out the bone, then assemble the .ij. levers of the wound, so that it is large, to a bandage, then the cure of ointment in January, until it be healthy; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the knee", you put your pouchet in your left hand, and place it equally with your right hand at your power, then put on the plaster and the staple above, so that you have mastery; then hold fast, and if there is a dislocated bone, then make an effort, and take out, and cure the wound until it be healthy.
of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Because the bone of the thigh is fractured, and if it is, then there is not a small amount of diminishment at the head; and it makes the long part short, and declines towards the parts, and comes to the patient's pain in the thigh, and point tenderness, and inflames what is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are above the fracture; and know what the fracture and its shape are; and if the fracture is at the head solely, set it in accordance with that fracture, so that it may be in its natural shape.
And if the fracture is of the long part, or it declines inward, then place the patient on their stomach, as long as the restoration of that fracture may be apparent. And when you have set it even, put it on the plaster, then put it on a straight stick or beam, and hold the break steady, so that it does not move; and apply the poultice below the ribs, until the ligature is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if the abscesses come to the surface, do not touch them, until the abscesses are calmed, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the treatment, and hold it steady as it is necessary, so that there is no bad accident; and this is the method.
of the breakage of the shoulder joint
Here is the translation:
And the patient's head is bent, and the threads are high, and thus the patient sits on his seat; then he puts his arm broken on the stick, until it reaches the axle, and has in the middle of a curve of wood, then hangs on some heavy thing or the ministers extend downwards; then put the mirrors with equal breakage to their hands together, so that the breakage returns as it should.
And the other way is that one supports the patient on his shoulder, and ties the hand to his neck, then instructs the ministers that one should hold what is on the breakage with their hands, and the others should hold underneath all the threads, and each extends to its own part.
And if you see that the extraction is too forceful, hold the thread underneath the breakage, and on the breakage, and each of the ministers extends to their own part. And if the breakage is close to the head of the shoulder, then it is necessary to put the thread gently underneath the axle, and another towards the side, underneath the breakage; and also if the breakage is on the side, then it is necessary to put the thread lightly, without effort, so that the breakage is equal on the limb, and on the side; then put the breakage in place, as it should, and hold it steady, lest abscesses come.
And if abscesses come, then do not hold it back for seven days, and put on a soft cloth in a warm oil and rose oil, so that the abscesses are appeased; then hold it steady, and the manner of holding it steady is that you put the plaster on the breakage, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put on the bandage, and hold it steady on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in a straight line, lest anything deflects it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a probe, and place on the break a probe larger and stronger than the others, and have between each probe two fingers' breadth of space, and let each probe be as large as it passes over the break; then hold steady against the probes, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter about the break, more strongly and less in alignment.
And if you see the position of the probes, and the holding, as we have said, in the process that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it be tied up to seven days, as we have said; then look at each .iij. days the link, so that it does not swell with life coming into the limb, or the nourishments cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted. If you direct, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, do not untie it until after .iij. days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and place his hands on his stomach; and put underneath the joint a plain cloth of equal length, and look at each hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or the bonds are not loosened; if you direct it by the power of medicine, and give the food that we have mentioned before, in such a way that the food is in the first subtle; and when it begins to take hold, let it be thick. And it is customary that the joint and leg should be taken back in .xl. days of all; and then one must untie and administer baths and medicines of ointments to heal the limb.  And if the structure is lazy and numb, let it stay tied for .l. day or .ij. months.
of the break of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "radius" and "ulna", where one is small and it is the one that follows the pouchet; and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the little finger; sometimes the large radius breaks solely, or the small one, and sometimes they break together.
When the small radius is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are broken together. If it's the small radius that's broken solely, then you must extend it gently, and set it evenly.
And if it's the large radius, then you must stretch it more strongly; and extend it on a cushion, and hold the pouchet of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed on himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient suffers no labor; then extend the ministers as an arm to the part below his hand, or to the ligament, and one minister to the other above. And then set the mirrors evenly, according to its best form.
And if it breaks into pieces, set each one in its place, and if there is no dislocation that grips the heart, you cannot restore it to its place, do so according to the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the breakage of a wound, I have spoken of it to the singular chapter; take the treatment.
And if at the beginning of the restoration, apostemes chaus appear, apply .i. a dressing made of oil rosset and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and lay .i. the dressing subtly on top, so that the apostemes chaus are appeased. And then remove the wax, and put the plaster of powder from the mill with abundance of egg whites, then set the staples, and let the staple of the breakage be stronger, and a little larger than the others; and know that it should have five or six staples or arms in different positions: either the breakage is in one of the bones, or in .ij.; and hold more on the breakage than other parts, and twist less in aligning, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the dressings that are on the breakage be soft and moist, and not hard nor dry; and let the thread, which is strained, be of linen, not too large nor too small, as we have said. And rewrap the limb and the bandage afterwards for several days. And if some evil accidents come to the limb, as it is bruised and comes to the limb, it is fitting that you warm the limb with hot water, so that the bruises are appeased; and let the limb not be tightly reposed. And then restart the strapping, and if the bandages are softened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, adjust them.
And if you take precautions that the nourishments cannot come to the limb, because it is too narrow, then it is necessary that you soften them a little, and let them thus for some days, until the nourishments are corrected, and then hold steady.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not loosen until 20 days. Or in the meantime, then he puts his hands on his neck, and his neck is even, and beware of movement and degeneration, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two fingers having a little fracture, and it does not come but to bend many times.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient should be seated cross-legged, and sits straight ahead evenly; then he puts his hand on the extended toe, and extends the ministers the broken bones, and sets them even with the mirrors, so they are well-jointed; and applies the plaster and the bandages, so abscesses do not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the injury; and is wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the breakage is in the palm of the hand near the belly of the plant, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to hold it against their broken hand; and then bind with a long bandage, and let the splint be of soft leather as big as the hand, and bind, so that it holds as necessary.
And if the breakage is in the finger, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the hand, so that the hand is covered and straight, then tie everything around the hand, and tighten the ligament between the two.
And if the breakage comes to one of our fingers, it is a pouch, set it even, as necessary; and bind with the hand, and see if you put a small straight splint to lift the breakage, and do not move; and if the breakage is in other fingers, like in the index or one of the others, set it even, and bind with the healthy finger that follows; or you bind them together in a holder, which is worth nothing, or you put on a splint, as in a pouch; and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of the abscess, and beware of what comes, as I have said.
of the broken hip
The bone of the hip is often broken, and it is clearly seen when it twists in front and back; and the restoration is done by tying a ligature above the break, and another below. And the patient leans on his face, then each minister stretches out his ligature to his equal part; and it is when the break is within the bone.
And if the break is close to the root of the hip, then one of the ligatures should be towards the thigh, and the other below the break. And also if it is close to the knee, and then the ligature should be at the knee, and the extension downwards; then put the mirrors on the bone equal with its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, so that abscesses do not come there.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down and then return to your work and your treatment; the remedy is made in such a manner. It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture .i. a double bandage in two or three layers, and remove the excess, then twist the leg so that the ankle bone reaches the root of the nail, and put .i. a long thread between the thigh and the leg, from underneath the knee, and make the head of the thread above; then twist around the leg and the thigh the bandage, then place around the fracture these things, and place a stick on the bone of the leg; then fill in the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to tighten evenly, then start to bind firmly .iij. turns or three turns around the fracture; and as you go further up the fracture, and loosen less; then take .ij. heads of thread that you put between the leg and the thigh, and untie .iij. these things that are above, then return underneath to the head of the thread, until you reach beneath the foot; and the binding, so it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that no abscess or swelling occurs again.
And if it happens, then dislocate it, and address what comes next, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, then it is necessary to extract them, if one can; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to break the bone, and make a new path; and the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
And never is the thigh broken in such a way that it is placed thus, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration made thus, it does not shut off the evils.
And it is known that the pulse is restored in a day, or almost less or almost more, according to the diversity of the complexions.
of the gutter of the knee
It is known that in the gutter of the knee there is almost a break, but it often splits. And if it breaks, it's only a fissure, or a perforation, and it has to do with all wounds, and without wounds, and this feels very good.
And the restoration is when one puts together what is broken in its joints, so that it is assembled as it should be; then apply the plaster, and you put on a round stave, if you are skilled in this, and hold it steady as it is fitting, then review all the arrangements that we have said about other breaks, like hot abscesses and similar things; apply to each accident what is fitting for it, so that it may be healthy.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "straight" by right, and the other is called "oblique"; and it has all the same fractures as those that come to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the works are all the same.
And if both bones are fractured together, then the leg turns awry in all parts.
And if the subtle bone is fractured, it turns forward.
Here is the translation:
And when you have completed your work, take four pairs of fig tree sticks that overlap the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee to the ankle; then wrap them in four layers of bandages above and below, and bind them in the middle, so the leg does not incline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and nobody should disturb the length of the leg, which is of wood, and one puts it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly make a splint for the fracture where there is pain; and remove each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident; so cure until he is healthy.
of the fracture of the bones of the foot
At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot sometimes come with a break and two poisons, and there are only four dispositions for this.
And if the bones of the foot are broken, and you see them overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if they wanted to walk, and then place your foot on their shin, where the bones are lifted, then press until they return to their place; then apply a dressing and bandages above, and put beneath the belly of the foot a small tube with four flat heads, then hold it firmly to the foot afterwards, then you have wrapped drapels around, and other things that you need.
And when ten or twelve days will have passed, you should loosen the bandage, because you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken, whether they are dislocated.
And if there are any broken fingers, restore them, as we have said about the fingers of the hand; then put a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little larger, then put underneath the foot of the table that I have described, and hold it firmly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken fingers, put a splint on each finger according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and hold the foot underneath; and let it stand on top of the foot of the table, so that it holds the belly of the foot well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, as we have stated; and take care of each accident as it requires.
of the break of the bone of the thumb
Here is the translation:
And when the bone of the thumb of the man is broken, or of the woman, if you restore it thus as we have said in the bone of the shin; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study and his use, and intend my book. For the break signifies more dispositions the right way of restoration: then give it.
On the rod, when it is broken, take a girdle of egg and bind the rod; then envelop it with a cloth, and leave it two or three days, and it will be healthy soon.
of breakage with wound
It is fitting for him who has breakage with wound, especially if it is great, such as the bone of the thigh or of the shoulder or similar, that he be healthy now, so that the healings that we have said testify to this.
And if the wound is healthy, if the vein of glass, if you have nothing else, then recommence to restore the bruise in the same hour, or that day, so abscesses do not come.
And if abscesses come, let the restoration wait until the ninth day, until the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, for you would bring about a bad accident.
And if the broken bone appears on the uncovered heart, it is necessary that you put it in place lightly with your hands, with a small extension.
And if the extensions are not adjusted to fit in your hands, then reset it with this instrument made of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary to take .iii. or iiij., according to what is needed in each cure of fracture; and let it be rounded and a little thick, so that it does not slip under the compression on the limb at your work, and let it be smooth beforehand, and thicker from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "paleinche", because it requires that the curved head be placed on the apparent bone of the joint; and it takes hold once, so they come together, and are equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it requires that you take hold of the bone of the joint, so the instruments have possession of it.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then take hold of an instrument suitable for it, whether incisor or saw, to your power; then reassemble what is broken in the bone with asperties and minor scrapings.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do so that it is in its place, then moisten it with a black wine dressing, and properly apply it if it is in this state; and do not put anything on the wound except oil, lest it cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer these things when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the fracture; and many times fools have done this, and have caused death or corrosion on several occasions; and may the treatments be more gentle and softer than the other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents may occur, as we have said, and you feel pain in the place, then it is not necessary to put anything on them; but envelop entirely around, in the place of these things, rough dressings, and bind them. And when you see afterwards, on the third or fourth day, a bowel movement towards the wound, then remove what you have put on everything, and apply ointments healing wounds, as one applies tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
And it is necessary that you anoint the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is sound and healthy.
And it is necessary that the limbs are wrapped in such a way that the bandage does not press too tightly.
And if many days pass, and it cannot heal but rather becomes worse, know that there are small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you touch the wound with a probe, and remove all these separated pieces that cause that pain.
And if fistula comes to the site, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in this chapter before. And when the bone is broken, and opens into the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not touch it, for many times death comes from it; but let it be until it purifies; perhaps it will fall by itself after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
the bruises that come upon the skin
We come many times after the health of the bruise, especially when it's near the joint, and the ugly thing is to see the deformity of the limb; and by chance one cannot make the limbs do their natural works.
Take warning then that it is fresh: if you administer stippling medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acaice, and similar others, so that you take none of these things, or all together, and mix them with wine stippling or with abundant water or with oil; and put them on the affected area in poultices, and hold it well, and do not dislodge it for many days; and then dislodge it, and start another, until the nodations are removed; or you hold onto a piece of well-made plaster; because the property of the plaster is that it removes all the inflammation from the limbs; and if the nodation is already converted into hardness like stone, and it needs to be removed, so lift it off, and make the superfluity apparent; or take it away with any rasp, until it is removed, and the treatment until it is healthy.
When the break of the bone is restored, and it remains afterwards with weak and subtle limbs, this happens for many reasons: one is because it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should be; or because there were too many bandages, and they could not bring nourishment to the limb; or because of multiple abscesses; or because of too great movements, not at their time; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient's body thin, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and give him a warm bath, and give him joy and happiness; then apply poultice to the limb, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the abscesses are often watered, so that nourishment flows to the limb; and it returns to its natural shape.
because of a twisted limb after the injury
When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, it does not return to its natural function: do not believe those fools who say that one must break the limb all over again, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and these works are blamed, and great evils come from them, and sometimes death; however, if the nodations and torture are fresh, it is necessary that they be risen with warm water, or softening herbs be applied, such as leaves of vismalve, and roots, and mellilot, and similar things; and make a mollifying plaster, as one does well, and take the poultice of vismalve, and mix it with fat of geline or oil of sesame, and apply it on top; or take greased figs, and crush them with fenugreek powder, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
And sometimes the node is removed by constantly and continuously rubbing with moist hands. And let the member be adjusted in its movement each hour.
And if the twisted area is inflamed and hardened, like a stone, and it needs to be burned with iron, then it should be covered just to the bone, in a subtle and gentle incision; and put caution and study into the cure.
Here begins the book on dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to none, if it is necessary to now bring back into alignment.
For if it is delayed, the limbs become swollen, and perhaps it is reset to its place; for that reason it is not advisable to move it at the hour when it is swollen: often it brings spasms and other pains.
In any case, when this happens, make the patient healthier, then leave him alone until the abscesses have subsided; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each limb as they will return to their place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the limbs from head to foot.
of the jawbones
Sometimes the jawbones are dislocated and swollen, and the dislocations of the jaws occur in two ways: either they are slightly out of their place, and softened a little; or they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so it cannot hold it, nor close its mouth, and entangles its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns to its natural positions more easily.
And if it is entire and complete, you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
and in this manner that the ministers touch the head of the patient, and put their fingers as a pochet in one of their hands at the root of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth, if the dislocations are of two parts; and let the other fingers be deft, to set even; and instruct the patient that they should relax, their jaws, and move them from all parts.
And the fingers put it even, until it returns to its place.
And if the resetting is difficult, meanwhile it is the two jaws together, if they are warmed with hot water and oil, until they reset lightly; do not delay the resetting, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without numbing, then place a moistened cloth wrapped in a circle made of oil rosé and wax, and tie it lightly with many threads.
and the patient should sleep on his back, and his head should be between two cushions, so that he does not move either to the right or to the left, nor does he exert himself too much, but takes light food, until the pains are eased, and the jaws are relaxed.
and then chew what he wants lightly, and does not strain to open his mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well relaxed and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be adjusted to a point at one hour, and are not converted to their proper places, then fever and excessive sweating come, and by chance a loose bowel, and by chance a vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of impending doom; and many times he who has had it dies within eight days.
of the force
The force cannot dislodge the rib from its continuity and from the breast, and it is often dislodged at the fracture, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient places himself on his back, and stretches out his arms; and then presses the limb firmly with your palm, and it will return; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place.
and the joint that is near the joint cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it is dislocated at any time, reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until he is healthy.
and thus the same is reset the head of the shoulder blade, when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in four ways: one is when it is dislocated at the part of the joint below; and the second is at the part of the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated at the top part, and this happens rarely;
and it does not dislocate backwards for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inward for the nerves; and many times it dislocates below towards the joint, especially to those who have little flesh, because to those who have little flesh, it suddenly becomes dislocated; to those who have enough flesh, it dislocates slowly, and returns slowly.
And by chance it happens to some men that they receive a blow or fracture, and the shoulder is inflamed with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
It is necessary then that you examine them, so that you are certain of them; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that the dislocation occurs when it falls towards the armpit, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a clear diversity. and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the armpit touching the head of the shoulder, just as if it were an anomaly; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move with any movements.
and thus, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly at the toucher;
and this type of dislocation does not need to be reduced, when it is new, or if the patient's limb is diseased.
And the method is that the ministers raise the patient's hand up high, then place their fingers beneath the shoulder blade, and raise the joint with force upwards to its place; and the ministers raise the hand, and stretch it upwards, then put it in place; if it will quickly heal.
And if it does not heal as we have said in the next few days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and the minister should apply soothing and softening remedies, such as a decoction of alder, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and so be soothed.
Then the patient should be laid on his back, and place a straight stick under the shoulder blade, not too soft nor too hard, then put the mirrors at his heel on the stick, and lift the head of the healthy shoulder gently, and guide the hand of the sick person;
and another minister holds the head of the sick person, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder returns now, and if you see that you reset it in this manner:
and it is that you make a man present who is larger than the sick person; and he stands upright towards the side, and puts his shoulder under the shoulder blade of the sick person, and lifts the shoulder high, so that the sick person hangs in the air; and another minister guides the hand of the sick person downwards towards the belly. And if the sick person is too lightweight, then weigh with him something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And you reset it in another way: and it is as if one fixes a long stick in the ground, so that the head of the shoulder is also just like a pestle, neither too big nor too slender; then place it beneath the patient, but so that there are soft drapings above, and the patient is standing long and still; then extend their hand below in another way, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
and if it does not want to return among all these things that we have said, so make this treatment: take a stick of three feet in length and four fingers in width, which has the head bent to enter obliquely beneath the joint, according to this form:
then place it beneath the head of the stick with soft drapings, so that the stick does not touch the patient, then put it beneath the joint of the patient; and extend a stick on the stick of the length, and attach the shoulder to the stick, and the arm to the head of the hand, then put the arm on a small stool of a chair of the same width, and extend the hands below, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will now return.
And when it is in, whatever way it may be, it is necessary that you place under the seat a layer of even linen, then put on top the plaster made from powder of soft millet, with incense and album of egg white, across the entire shoulder and around, then hold under the seat firmly, and turn the ligature on the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that you massage a little, as much as the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then massage more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is strengthened and not softened, it is healthy.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has entered, or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cauterizations at three points, as it is described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is injured or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Here is the translation:
And after the healing comes numbness to the limb, and later on it has difficulty in movement, if the patient bathes many times, so that this numbness is alleviated, and it returns to its original nature.
of the dislocation where it hurts
Know that the joint where it hurts is dislocated at points, and at points returns; and it is dislocated in all parts, and mainly before and behind, and the dislocation is not repositioned, for one sees it well and feels it well; and dislocated according to each shape. And when you join the hurtful joint with the healthy one, then you can see it openly. For the joint is crooked, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it thus so that the abscesses do not grow, for if the abscesses grow, it would be grievous to reset; and by chance they cannot be reset entirely, especially when they are at the back; if it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration is, when it is such that you can reset it, that you stretch out your hand with your two hands; and its arms are expanded, and the hands of the mirror according to the bend inside, above and below, and bend the joint to its thumb, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and fixed from the root of the palm the bend that was dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold the two ministers, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer of cloth, long and wide.
and when the doctor joins the joint to his hand, if he anoints it with no oil to soften the joint, then he forces the joint strongly, until it returns;
and when it is in its place, if he puts a dry plaster on with an egg white, and forces strongly, and bends the arm at the neck of the patient, and leaves it for some days, then he disjoints it.
And if the joint is closed in its place, he disjoints the bandage, and leaves it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, he restarts the plaster and the bandage, and leaves it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then he disjoints it.
And if it feels grieved after the re-setting of the joint, and it moves, he bathes and rubs well, and presses until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a fatty woolen cloth of a sheep, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make him enter into a warm bath. and when he sweats, rub the joint immediately, then put the nail above, and then between in a bath; and thus do it two or three times, until he is healthy; and if you see, set on a warm, moist cloth with butter, and hold steady; if it returns to its condition.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is easy, more than the other joints However, it is necessary to reset it quickly, at the same time that it dislocates, so that the limbs are not swollen, or an abscess forms there.
And the reset is that you put the sick hand on a table, and extend the fingers of the hand, and align them equally, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and presses until it returns.
However, it seems that the output should be the translation of the provided text only. Here is the translation: And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand on the table, and the mirrors put their hand on the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
If not, then hold the compresses of warm poultices gently on the ulcerated wounds, and let them thus begin to heal again.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in its place after several days, then the twisted joint remains.
and do not annoy the patient further than necessary, for as long as the hand is numb, and cannot stretch out anything at all: then know that the nerves are affected, or the arteries; if there is no other remedy than to cauterize in this case, and by chance it is of no use.
And when the hand is on the spot, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and leave it thus for a while, then remove it and leave it so.
And if it cannot move well, and there is no grinding, then soak the swollen area in warm water, and rub it so that it becomes healthy.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
The fingers of the hand are sometimes dislocated at each part, sometimes on the back of the palm or in the belly.
Then they are the fingers, and push back the dislocation into your shoulders as far as it returns, then hold the head of the finger, and bend towards the part where it is disjoined.
and let it be still for a while, and then put it in its proper place; and do not let it slip, as we have said, and relieve the joint, and make it mobile, and reposition it; and do this repeatedly, until it is straight.
and do the same, if it is dislocated at the wrist of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy; and do the same, when it is dislocated from another part.
for the dislocation of the spine of the back
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are multiple dislocations, if there is no point of healing, because death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations suddenly occur without will, cannot be held back, and many times some member becomes numb, or the two knees or the two arms.
And many times the spine changes in four places; the one that changes at the back is called "gilbositez":
The treatment is that you recognize that the gilbositez has come from childhood: if there is no point of healing or salvation for the entire body.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cures through grand words, where it does not have much great benefit;
but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed remedies in diverse ways.
I say that in the swelling that comes on the foot before, no one is healthy;
and also that which comes directly to the ribs, and one cannot cure it unless it is that which properly comes from the back, as I say;
and it is necessary that the patient be stretched out on a bed equally, and have a straightening behind him, so he does not become crooked;
then fix a stick to the ground firmly at the head, and another at the feet, and tie a bandage behind the sick person's buttocks, and another at the thighs, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two attendants should tighten the bandages, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two sticks;
and they should be well fastened, the stick as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine firmly, until it is reset.
And if it does not return with this treatment, take a tablespoon of three fingers' length, and shave underneath the affected area, and let the patient be in a comfortable position, and put the tip of the tablespoon underneath the affected area, then place the middle of the tablespoon on the spine; and place the mirrors of his feet on the other tip of the tablespoon, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, do it at the turning point that turns towards the hand.
And it is that you fix three twigs at the head of the patient's arm, and towards the feet three others, and have between each twig, above and below, a palm's width of space;
and have in each twig a small hole, where the turning point turns, and let the twigs be firmly fixed to the ground, so that they do not move; and between each three twigs have one turning twig, on which the turning point turns, and have in two turnings two small twigs of a palm's length, to turn the turning point;
and then the ligament which is among the tendons at the turning towards the head, and the other tendon towards the feet at the other turning, and each of the ministers turns its own turning to all the ligaments, and the masters put the spine equal as we have said.
And when it is equalized, then put on an emplaster of desiccative with a lot of egg white, and then the poultices, and then the stellete of a tablet of .iij. two inches long, which should cover the part of the gibosity and the sound part of the spine, then tie it with a ligament, as we have said, and use subtle nourishment for the patient, until they are healthy;
and if something comes at the end of health, then one must administer soothing and assuaging medicines, with the stellete that we mentioned before; and no time should one administer on a piece of lead,
and no time does the appearance come in the rear of the spine behind the back, and think that it is dislocations; and it is the bone that opens, because one should not have presumption: for by chance death may come.
of the dislocations of the thigh
It is known that the joints of the thigh and the joints of the shoulder only come out of dislocations suddenly, not like the other joints; and the joint of the thigh is dislocated in four ways: within and above, and before and behind; and more within the hollow, and a little dislocated before and behind.
And the recognition of its dislocation within is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the patient's knee than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee at the fire. and it is the limb that is affected by a hot abscess, because the head of the hip joint comes there.
And the signs of the one who is near death, if it is that these accidents are contrary to those beforehand.
And the signs of the one who is ahead, if it is that they stretch their leg according to the accomplishment; however, do not double the knee without pain, and if you want to make him walk, if he cannot go forward, and retains his urine, and inflates the groin, and when he wants to pass, it passes above the ankle.
And the signs of the one who is behind, if it is that he cannot stretch his knee, nor double, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the level of the ribs beneath the costs.
The reminders of this similarity of dislocation are that you should beware that the dislocations are ancient, and they remain according to their disposition, if there is no cure; and it does not seem that he has a presumption.
And in that case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of the three manners of dislocation, if you hasten to turn the joint, and steady it inward and outward, and move it to the right and left; by chance if it returns, and there is no need for another cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you apply a strong minister, and steady the leg strongly with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand above in such a manner that he puts his hands beneath his haunches, then tightens with a soft bandage on the thigh; and another holds the head of the bandage;
and they stretch above and below all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This manner of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
If not, then it is necessary to put a cure on its similarity. When the dislocation is in the paretioned, then it is necessary that you soothe the patient on their healthy side, then place the bandage at the root of the thigh, and the place that is under the groin, then extend the bandage above towards the groin, and towards the forcele;
then take another minister by the arms, and embrace the large place of the thigh that is injured, and extend it to the straight form: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the injured person together with a strong and soft bandage on the two heels, and on the two knees, and so the injured leg is extended two inches more than the other;
Then be hung from the top of a beam, and be two yards above ground; then instruct a minister to embrace the head of the thigh, and another minister hangs with the patient, who firmly embraces the thigh, for the joint returns quickly now.
And when the dislocation is at the thigh, thus guide the patient, as we have said in one who has a similar condition, and stretch the cord against the affected leg properly, and against the foot also.
Then put two irons, one at the head and another at the feet, then fix the iron between the thighs of the patient in the proper form. and have moist cloths applied around, so that they do not harm the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the mirrors place their hands evenly on the dislocation.
Here is the translation:
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the injured leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and place the mirror of pain on the injured ankle, then press with the other hand, and hold steady below the knee.
And if the dislocation is behind, it is not necessary to extend the injured leg below, nor to raise it from the ground, but rather it should be as if the joint were dislocated behind, just as we have said about the positioning on the hip joints. and it should be on its face, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table.
and it will be a point when the injured person stretches their legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hips, and place the splint, and hold with a bandage, so that the joint does not move.
and rest .iij. hours or .iiij., then disengage, and put the plaster on; and if you see that they are even, hold steady, as before, and let it be .iij. hours; then disengage, and make the limb comfortable, so that the member is comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knees are dislocated in three ways: that is to say, within, below, and behind; and not at all in front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg to their thigh, and if it does not adhere to their thigh, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and put your foot against his feet;
then take his knee in your hands, and draw it between your two, then bend the two joints of the knee firmly; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he has his leg at his thigh lightly;
and put the plaster on, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together firmly for two or three days, then remove it; and do not disturb the patient's suffering, until the limb is comforted.
And if the limb is not in its place, administer extension strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the ankle, until it is healthy.
of the dislocation of the ankle
The ankles are sometimes sprained and sometimes completely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it pulls forward to the part where it is dislocated:
The reset is easier, and one must extend it gently with their hands when it is only slightly sprained.
And when it is completely dislocated, then you must make the patient sit upright, and hold him firmly in place by the leg, above the knee;
then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with the left. Do it twice, then stretch upwards, and beautifully bend the foot upwards;
and do it twice, as we have said, bending and pulling the foot; if it returns to its place, that's good; if not, start the work again, for it will return;
and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix the pillow firmly in the ground between his thighs, and wrap the dressing around, so that it does not hurt the patient;
Then place the minister's candle, and another minister extends the foot to his hands or to the string, so that he places it on the neck of the foot; then each minister extends equally, and the steps should be between the hips of the patient to hold the patient still when one stretches them;
then place the mirrors equally at the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation returns hastily.
And when it is at a point, place the plaster and padding on top, and hold firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and beware of the nerves that are on the back of the knee, so that the ligaments are not too stretched.
then let it be for three days or four, and hold the bandages in place, then loosen them on the third day or the fourth, and delay informing the patient by three days; and if he goes beyond this term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses or wounds come, it is necessary that you touch them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
of the two
When the fingers are dislocated, it is necessary to stretch them nicely without strain, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any of the upper or lower back, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat bed or on a straight table, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns to its place.
and when it is equal, and there is no opening, then put under the sole of the foot a table at the head, then hold firmly, and let it be for two days, then disengage it; and make it rest, until it is healthy.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with a dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often it happens that the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in the cure, do not be wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not piteous and merciful and slow, not at all hasty.
and take in the beginning of quieting down an abscess that is hot, and leave the patient in the hands of God, if you do not see hope of health. and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place now, so that the hot abscesses do not come to life.
and when the limb is in its place, then administer quieting things to the hot abscess, and treat the wound, as it is fitting, with ointments of dried herbs.
and it is with a dislocation to a break, and you will often despair, if the bones, and do what we have said in simple illnesses;
and beware of entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worthy of you according to your Creator, and for the salvation of your arm and your body. Amen
