Here is the translation: And it came to me in a vision that I would accomplish this with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is unknown from top to bottom, thus the science has perished and decayed, and nothing remains of the fathers except small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have changed. And from this has come the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is alienated.
It seems to me that I would revive it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I would bring together the forms of remedies for cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, it is the art of medicine that is neglected. And it is necessary for him who undertakes to master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of bones, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of joints, and their movement and rest, and the course of their issue.
And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name is not much with the name, and little with the work; and similarly in the art of hand.
We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, if he does not take care, he will fall into error and harm people; thus I have seen many who undertake this science and abandon their sense and experience.
Here is the translation:
And I saw another marvel that treated a stone of a man's age, and the stone was large; if he carried with him a piece of bladder, and the man died within 22 days.
And I had already been called by the surgeon, and I saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and if one touched it well he would die soon.
And I saw another marvel who took in care the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the marvels blamed ignorance for holding the break against the wound as they were strongly tied, and did not let go of the wound at all, and they left it thus terminated; and he commanded that he should not loosen it; and thus the leg became entirely swollen and the foot came to perdition.
I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come and release the leg; and when I had released it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But all corruption was already confirmed in the member and could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the entire limb was almost lost.
And you see another case which bursts out an abscess that had become entrenched, and then becomes inflamed due to the evil of its dominance.
For cancer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not seem that one should touch it with iron unless it is in a place where one can utterly remove all that is corrupted.
And for this reason, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into three divisions: namely, to avoid, to cure, or to alleviate the danger in various dispositions; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary for you to take care of yourself, so that evil people cannot speak badly about you.
Take your arms in crosses, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and salvation; and leave the troublesome diseases of grievous sanity; and remove your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galien says in some of his warnings: "Do not take care of a bad illness, lest you be called a foolish doctor."
I have divided this treatise into 12 chapters.
Here is the translation:
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is organized and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized according to the top of the foot just as the feet, and the forms of instruments.
Thus we remember the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of each aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of aid, and the harm, are the longest discourse and subtle science and secret responses; and from this they speak more to the wise ones, and agree with them; and I suffer little for their words, because I reduce lengthiness.
I say that cautery helps universally in every temperament where there is matter, few temperaments: it is to know that warm temperament lacks matter, and dry temperament lacks matter.
In warm and dry temperaments, they found matter in abundance, and some said that cautery is of great aid; and the others said the opposite: that cautery is not effective for diseases that come from warmth and dryness.
For the nature of fire is warm, and it should not be used to cure warm diseases by heat, nor through dryness; and he who says the opposite that cautery provides great aid for warm and dry diseases that come from the bodies of men. For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it many times through experiment.
And thus, one should not interfere with those who have experienced it, and who know through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the events and the space of the ten; we do not fear other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses. And all the mirrors assembled and agreed with the cautery.
And know, son, that fire cautery is one of the secrets of treatments, and of greater goodness than medicine's burning cautery.
For fires are simple, and do not come except to the member that is cooked, and do not harm another member if they can.
The burning medicines come from one member to another by transmitting, and bring about diseases of grievous wound; and by chance kill the patient.
The fire, due to its highness and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, if there is no excess.
Here is the translation:
And know, son, that they agree on what time the cauteries are to be done, and choose the right moment.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries are quickly alleviated by the aid of cautery; and also if the cauteries are for necessary pains and swift ones that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
And do not think only, dear son, as the foolish doctor does; for the disease that is healed by cautery has no relapse; and they say so; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not just medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors that are cause of pain, and is more effective than medicine through the hastening of its value, and through the virtue of its work and its sign.
And it is possible that the disease comes at some time according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue; and there are gathered in him the superfluities through the acquisition of foods and similar things, so it is not cauteries administered in the place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauteries are dense for pain, and similar things, and that pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauterization comes after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we have administered ways of cures to any disease and they do not work, then we administer cauterization, and it works. Then it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
The ancients said that cauterization with a golden instrument is more effective than with iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the iron of cauterization does not cause putrefaction, but it is not true as I have experienced it, and found that it is true in some homes; and cauterization with gold works more than with iron, just as they loudly declared.
And however when you heat the golden instrument, you do not know how it is heated by the color of gold, and it is immediately cooled down; and if you heat it too much, they put it in the fire; and thus there is enough of an impediment.
And for this we use fire cauterization because we have made it suitable for our work.
Now you have ordered this chapter of the lofty chiefs just up to the feet, because it is easier to find the way.
with the olive oil cauterization
These cauterizations are good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and in it there are two things that are done because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors which descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for a multitude of songs and pain of teeth and pain of throat, and also for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, and sodic and apoplectic and similar diseases.
Here is the translation:
Then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands on the soles of his feet; afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes; and where you will take your two fingers, if it bleeds from the notch, then heat up the cautery which is called "olivare", because this is its form.
And put it on the marked place of ink, and make it descend and extract your hand little by little in a twisting motion; then lift your hand gently, and rewind the place so you see the small bone; and if you do not see it, start again with the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take a little silk thread, and put it in soft and wet cotton inside, and put it on the place, and leave it for three days; then put a warm poultice on top; and leave it on until the inflammation is gone away; afterwards cure the wound of the joint which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
And the old ones said that when one leaves the wound open for a longer time, it purges more; and therefore it helps many.
And some of them said that one should leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
And one must leave the cautery so long on, and press hard if one abates from the bone as large as the vertil that women put in their fusee because the humors issue forth; and one must leave the wound uncovered for a long time; afterwards one must cure and soothe.
And these two manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some homes where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I would leave them; for the head is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we testify in other members; and similarly when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more saving and mending for me, and thus I often assemble salvation.
of the ancient pain of the head
When the head comes with chronic pain, and lasts a long time, one must use the remedies of yesterday and pills that are called "cochie", and of purging the head and eyes and of emplasters; and if one makes the cautery that we have mentioned before, and it does not work.
Here is the translation:
After fire cautery on the corner of the head just to the bone, as we said before, and do a cautery where it is called "vasselz"; and it is placed where one puts ventouses; and lift your hand so you do not see just to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it is necessary that the cauteries on the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the softness of the head, and that is the form.
of the cautery of the head When in one part of the head sudden pain comes, and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is purged by Mondifian medicines, and we have done the other treatments that I said in the division of diseases, and all this does not profit: then you do cauteries according to eight methods, that is to know medicine ague and to make iron.
The cauteries of medicine ague are that you take a dozen of hazel, and remove the bark and recook it in eight parts, as for the head; and then make the temple where the pain holds in such manner that you can replace the dozen of hazel under the skin; and when it is replaced, tie it well and leave it thus for ten hours; and then disengage and draw forth the dozen of oil, and leave the wound thus for eight days or nine; then put on a cotton cloth soaked in balm so that it penetrates into the wound.
After the treatment of ointment as long as it is healthy; and if you see that it makes use of certain burning medicines that I have written or described in the treatise on burning medicines.
The iron cautery is according to this method. Heat the cautery of the material that is its form:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a hook or it has a little curvature, and in the middle there appears a small opening; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that the majority of the thickness of the skin is raised; and lift your hand so that the artery is not touched, which is deformed, and an abundance of blood flows out.
After putting cotton in the opening of the wound, and placing it on the spot for two hours; then I put moistened cotton in a poultice, and then treat the spot with ointment as long as it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", at every point, and be careful not to touch the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
of migraine
When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not profit, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned in medicine do not suit it, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" so that it becomes white; and mark thus on the aching eye a line half a finger long, and hold your hand once, and hold steady so that you do not touch the artery and do not go beyond the bone; and beware of the mandible that moves when one chews, and the veins have regard only for the movement and that spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the disorder of blood in the artery when it will be touched, where touching has great fear and trouble for him who does not know himself, and is not a studied and experienced person; and leave the vein in its way; but I will tell you how to restore blood when the artery is touched, and I will show you on the eye where it appears in this book.
And if you see that these cauteries do not suit the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize in the same way as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. cuts; and these are better cauteries than that one and more helpful.
of the pain in the ears from coldness
When pain comes from cold, and one has applied solvent medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pains do not move, then it is necessary to use this cautery which is called "points", because of its form.
After pointing all around the ailing ear, or around the eyes, where the pain holds in both, and you detach a little below the root of the ear, then you have signed the place of the injection; and have ten points around each ear; after treating the place until it is healthy.
from the torture of the mouth
Torture that must be treated by cautery is not fierce except for those that move with flux, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cautery on the similarities that come from scorching and spasms of nerves.
When you treat this type of torture that moves with inflammation and purgations of the head and gurgling, and it does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little above the temple, and the third in the setting of the lips; and put the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery on the head of the ear above a little below the horn of the head, and another on the temple just as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery as long as the middle of the heart is at rest; and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is similar to the scalpel that we have presented before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the incision be a little larger; after treating the patient as I have said before, until they are healthy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauteries: one on the horns of the head, one in the head, and one at the vessel called "vasselz" as we have said before, and place the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and treat as we have said before.
of the sluggishness
For this illness it is necessary to give the patient large draughts and mondified pills to clarify the brain; afterwards raise the chief of the patient entirely, and place on the occiput an emplaster of sinapi which is written or treated in the book of emplasters; and that is the manner of cautery: if you do it as I have said.
If he is thus sane, it is good; and if he is not, do it three times: three cauteries on the skin of the head descending just to the neck, and have a space of two fingers between each cautery; and cure him as the others, and if you see that he needs to be treated, and the patient is suffering, do it in the middle; and if there are others on the horns, and cure until he is sane; and let the cauteries which are called "olivare" be done as I have previously said.
of the coldness of the head Here is the translation:
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cautery unless they are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to modify the treatment of years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the patients are great and suffer from taking medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot suffer, make them gargle and modify the treatment of the brain often with good meat; afterwards take the chief in a thousand, and do as I said before, and do fire cautery according to what we have said beforehand, and fire cautery on the vessel, and on each corner; and if the patient is strong and suffers, make them undergo fire cautery as I said to one who has paralysis and mollification of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and thus do olive tree fire cautery according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is an infant, make them undergo subtle fire cautery in this manner:
Here is the translation:
And if by reason of melancholy the superfluous fluids are declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then they give to drink something which causes the brain to be purified, according to what is written beforehand in the division.
Here is the translation:
Where you want to cauterize, make points everywhere on the cautery. This way of cautering moistens the brain immediately; and then put cotton wool in a burrow and in grease of geese.
of the warmth of the eyes When warmth comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient things warming the head, and ward off all moisture, and make them sweat or take a bath many times a day.
After the command to reheat his head, and make him cauterized within the head, and make two cauteries on the temples if the descent of warmth is in both eyes together, or in one; and cut all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then staunch it with a piece of powder as you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incising the cautery how you will proceed; and no one has ever made cautery or hastened beneath the two eyes behind.
at the course of the tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that appear at the front of the head in the appearance; and one sees that it is superfluous cold humors, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the work descending from the eyes: one cautery in the head, and two cauteries on the temples, and two cauteries or hastening beneath the eyes; and if there is need for more, then they cauterize gently above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
at the course of the tears through the depths of the eyes
When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit him, then give a drink to the sick person .iij. nine cups; after he raises his head, and you make a cautery or a thousand good cauteries of olive oil; and make .ij. cauteries of the cautery that is called "clavilis" on the .ij. sorcis, a little beneath the eyebrows; and beware of the artery that you do not touch it. And this is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
When the skin of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then apply the cautery of this cautery that is called "olivare", because it is the form:
And if you see that you make .ij. cauteries on the .ij. sorcis as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave your hand there unless the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
where hair grows to prick the eye Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyes is converted into pains, and pricks the eye, and one makes cauteries in several ways: namely, with fire or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then place the patient in a healthy state; afterwards, sign on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as if the foil of a mirror, and let it be the beginning of the sign of the hairs; then put moist cotton in the glare of an egg and musk perfume on the eye, then heat up the cautery according to its form.
Here is the translation:
And after the hairs grow, and the skin is softened then recommence the cautery on the same place, as you did before; and if the hairs are sparse, cauterize until the skin is lifted to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
The cauterizers of burning medicine are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even as possible, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and lively chalk, one ounce each, and mix well together; and apply it quickly, so it doesn't cool down, and spread it on the shape you made like the myrtle leaf, and put it on the skin of the eyes; and if the disease holds in one eye only, one should operate on one, and also anoint both similarly; and put underneath the eye a soft cotton cloth moistened with egg whites; and let the head of the patient be in its natural position and show your finger indicating the medicine, and press it gently and move it all the times that the patient feels burning sensation from the medicine, for they feel burning sensation also like fire. When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine with your finger. And when the burning sensation has passed, lift up the skin of the eye, and look if you see the skin lifted as if it had been lifted by constriction of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good. If not, then put more medicine on the skin where the medicine did not take hold, until your operations are even, and your eyes are at a point; then put soft cotton cloth in a poultice so that the bitter humors are drained, after curing the eye of the affliction which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
And if it is necessary that you take good care of your work with great caution so that no point of the medicine escapes from your eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, recommence the medicine on the one who is softened by the proper paper, just as you have done before; after the treatment until it is healthy; and this is the form of the leaf of the dead mirror:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and adjust your constrictions accordingly; and do not misplace the direct way for him who is studying this art.
of the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this method.
Here is the translation:
After pressing the fistula is opened, and extracting the pus, and the dryness; and if it is closed, so operate, and extract further the bow; after putting fire cautery in the form of a hot iron, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nail from which the eye is affected, so that your hands do not cause foolishness; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrodes.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, it would be good. If not, if you recommence the cautery once more, and another time you have mastery over it, and leave it for three days; after I put on cotton wool in a poultice, and the cure of the ointment is desiccative until it is healthy, and if ten days pass without it being healthy, I put on medicine with corrosive ague so that the bone may be uncovered; and you reapply according to what comes into its chapter.
And there is a manner of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. Then I touch the fistula, and feel the vein; after I put in the fissure a subtle camel-hair brush, which is the form: and they make the quantity of an ounce of lead; and hold your hand or camel-hair brush firmly, and do not move the patient's point, so that the melted lead does not run to their eye; and it is suitable to put on the eye a cotton wool poultice in a veil of egg whites or in water: the lead if it is well attached to the vein of the fistula, and it heals marvelously through miraculous health.
And if the fistula is healthy due to the cautery that we have mentioned, it's good. If not, then one must administer poultices to the nose, and bring the fistula back to its proper place in the nose according to what it needs.
cracks in the lips Many times cracks occur on the lips that are called "pilis", and similarly on the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks with what we have said in sections, and the treatment does not benefit, then scorch it. I. a small cautery scalpel according to this form:
And then hastily apply it to those hollows until life reaches just up to the fount; afterwards cure the arm of the scabrous one so that it be healthy.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess forms in the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth, afterwards it makes putridity and rot and becomes fistulous; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit at all: then it is necessary that you apply cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; afterwards boil or pierce the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron reaches the font of it, and behind the limb; and do it thus once or twice, afterwards curing what we have said in cures, so that it be healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the limb and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not work, then put the patient's head in a healthy position; afterwards heat the cautery to the shape that will come afterwards in such a way that you place a chain over the tooth; and insert the hot cautery hastening, and hold your hand so the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards release your hand and restart the cautery according to your volition; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and hold it for an hour and spit it out often.
And in such a way the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupt moisture is dried out.
from the pain of the teeth
When tooth pain comes from cold, or there is cold or vein, and the treatments of medicine do not work, then it is necessary to use cautery in two ways: and cautery of borax and cautery of fire.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
When the scrofula are of a humid and cold nature, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the fire cautery from that place where it comes after; and make openings for the fumes to exit at the cautery of the other part; and apply the hot cautery on the abscess once, or where the master is, until it reaches the source of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then apply cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and apply a cotton cloth moistened with bursa so that the wound may be closed; after healing the limb with ointments and tinctures until it is healthy.
When the moisture gathers on the channels of the arm, and similarly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by solutive medicines; afterwards, perform fire cautery at the root of the throat, and beware that you do not come too close to the throat, and do not burn the skin but just a little. Afterwards, perform another cautery at the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and it is the cautery that is called "clavile" from which we have the form before; and heal the limb as we have said before, until it is healthy.
of the thumb When all the diseases of the forearm are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever nor shaking, and it is an old disease, then apply two cauteries on the wrist in their voids; and another cautery between the two marmots; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form mentioned before.
And if you see, apply cautery by pricking the whole cautery which is called "poins" because its form is thus before in the disease of the ears; and let the poins be just below ..., or wherever it hurts. After curing the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be at three joints according to this form:
And because they are the lighter cauteries, because you make them in three parts at a time.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, soothe the patient on their back and side; afterwards, lift the heart which is within the titillation of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery which has .ij. nerves that it is in the form:
and cauterize the heart until it penetrates just to the side, and the figure of the cautery is assembled with .iiij. cauteries; and because it is made with the cautery which has .iij. nerves, therefore the figure of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tent and that is the form of the cautery which has .iij. nerves:
And often is applied on this same nerve because it has seven cauterizations.
After applying the fire cauterization with a willow stick; after make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little thing happens soon, then do cauterization on the thick part of the clavicle, or many cauterizations while pricking. For the joint is re-formed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
of the cauterization of the lungs
The ancients said that one should make full cauteries of root aristologe, and in this manner: take a long aristologe root, as large as you can find it, dry and thick like your fingers; and grind it into oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize. Then, between the shoulder blade and the neck, make small cauteries descending slightly towards the area under the beard; and between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining slightly backwards; and one cauterizes in the pis, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and one as the ribs of the pis defeat the cauterization which is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, instead make a gentle opening as if smelling.
And they said that some ancients used a fire cauterization similar to a razor, and heated it and placed it between the ribs, until it reached the abscess; and suddenly the pain was gone, as we have said in the case of liver abscess. But in this work there is fear where the patient now dies, or fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
of the left hand
When you treat the disease of the meadow that we have said in divisions of treatments, and it does not profit at all, then they apply three manners of fire cautery that are good.
Since one manner is that you make three or four fire cauteries in a line according to the length of the meadow, according to the figure of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the fire cautery, and let the patient be comfortable on their back.
and another manner of fire cautery is that you heat the fire cautery which has three nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart that is near the meadow, or where the stitches of the patient come from the left side, and let the elevations that you lift the heart according to the length of the body, and the fire cautery be according to the width of the body.
After that, blow on the three nerves so that the heart is perceived from the other side, and then remove the fire cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see, if you cauterize all the fire cautery at three nerves. After the treatment, when it has been done for a long time, and this is more than the other treatments mentioned before.
of dropsy
Cautery is not suitable for the dropsical person, because it has a method called "asclytes". When you treat according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you make three cauteries around the bowel, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in the area of the pis; and let the cauteries be well close to the affected skin.
After that, let the cautery be opened by gently piercing the long thin tension, and do not leave the treatment of the patient's disease after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the three intentions will be assembled with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be a clavele, which we have previously shown; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been previously written.
of the inflammation of the feet When the feet are inflamed in one who is dropsical, and are full of citrine water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricularis and the anularis; and hold your hand with the cauter steady without turning. And do not enter too much inside, lest the citrine water would burst forth, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
After doing so, make two cauterizations on each leg at the point of the cutellaire; and let the cauterization be from top to bottom, one above the knee in front and the other behind, within the leg; and leave the cauterizations uncovered for a long time without curing, so that the water exits; after curing with other cures that we have said.
of the swelling
When the solution of belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are afflicted, and cannot be cured by methods of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong virtue, if you do. Then make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken before or cautery of the stomach, to the circular cautery; and three cauteries around the subtle bowel to each subtle cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the finger, and one cautery on each eyelid, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is profitable when it has good aid.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, one or more, and are ancient and consist of gross cold and moist corrupt humors, and are cured as we have said in divisions, but it does not profit, if you make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, which is all deflected downwards along the almecdate point and a little in triangular shape, and one cautery below the bowel, two fingers.
and if you think that the stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face inflating, then one should apply great cautery to the stomach, as it has been said before, and another to the liver, and another to the spleen with all the clavile cautery; and let the cautery remain long enough. After curing the limb until it is healthy.
of the skin condition named "thelul"
When you cope with thelul, if you heat the cautery that seems to be a rasp, and then place it all ablaze on the affected thelul area; and leave it until your hand feels the cauteries reaching the origin of the vein, from which the blood flows out; do this once or twice, and if there is much of thelul, then cautery each spot as we have said; after the treatment of beneficial ointments, they will be healthy again; and if you cautery with a large cautery on the affected area, it will provide greater aid.
of a badly cured wound
When the patient cannot suffer tailoring or surgery, which we will recount in its place, if a disease comes that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Here is the translation:
of the kidney disease When pain from cold comes to the loins, and of great windiness, and does not take hold of a woman, then it is necessary that you apply cautery on both sides of the loins at the cautery claw which we mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in line, and they will provide greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is numb and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you must apply cautery on the upper part above the bladder, where the hairs begin to grow, and one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery as long as we need for a poultice; and make three cauteries above the back, or two if you have no need of them; and let the claw-shaped cautery be according to the form mentioned before.
of the marrow When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends delayed; and when they come, it feels great pain: then one must apply three cauteries around the belly, just as we said about the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries below the back; and let the cauteries be gentle, just as we said.
of the hip
When the moist vapors descend to the hip bone, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the places of the division are visible, then one must apply a cautery to the patient on the hip bone with a cautery similar to a circle, and mark beforehand the place around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
And if you are not present for these cauteries, make three cauteries of the olive branch, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the wounds; and heal until they are healthy.
of the pain in the ankle When pain comes in the ankle joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is not cured by what we have said in the division, and the treatment does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
After making the cautery; and the manner of doing the cautery is in three ways: it is to know how to assemble medicines boldly, and cautery by fire. Cautery by fire is in many ways, one of which is such: that you make three triangular cauteries on the ankle joint in this form, and make them deep and large, and leave between each cautery a space the width of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive branch; never has one made a cautery in the middle on top of the ankle joint, because there are three according to this form.
And if you see, if you cauterize with a circle of fire that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the thigh; but do it in such a way that the circles encompass the entire thigh, and all the spaces of the skin are burned.
And it is the manner in which one makes a sciatic, when the pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach just to the knee or just to the leg. And if it reaches to the knee and the leg, make two cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds, and three cauteries above the ankle on the left side a little; and let the cautery be cutellaire, and let the skin be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends just to two toes or nearly there, cauterize at the point where they feel the pain .three. times or .two. at the cautery which is called "points".
And if the mastery is, make more of it; and if it is known that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery at the cutellaire or circular cautery, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause more nuisance and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who made a cautery above the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot also, and was pierced and corrupted to the point where the foot was. Afterwards, a purging of the belly occurred which led to their death.
And if the pain is in two parties assembled, make cautery on one and the other, according to this method. // And the wise men say about the cautery of the hainch, that it is the manner, make a sharp iron point thus big as a small nail of a finger, or a little less, and let it be between the interstices and also from one interstice to another in the width of a thumb's nail; and let the interstices be above two parts, and let them also be like new ones, and have a well-made iron handle; and this is the form.
And let it be heated until it is totally red hot and gives off sparks, and then place it on the diseased hainch's boil, and turn it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with a round cautery and leave it for three days; and then apply a poultice of butter, and let the wound stay open for a long time; after the treatment of ointment until it is fully healed.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its effect, and we see few who use it; and however, this is one of the good cauteries, which can alleviate suffering, and there where it is effective.
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by fall or percussion or by too great an evacuation, or by similar signs of cold expanded matter, none of these signs is worth cauterizing, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
It is fitting after this that the patient is emptied of filthy pills or other similar things, that one makes on their back, there where the pain holds, three marked lines of an inch, and in each line 5 or more cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the cauterization be made according to the cauterizer called "poins"; and if you see, make 3 or 4 cauterizations at the cauterizer claw-like middle according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a contracted limb when they lift themselves up, and fear; and you find in the upper part of the spine of the back and in the appearance that comes upon the other vertebrae.
When you see this and you want to cure it, if you cauterize at the cautery of that according to this form.
If the cautery should embrace each part of the spine equally. And if you want to cauterize, do it around the spine at the poignant cautery .ij. lines or .iij., and let the points be close to one another. After curing the limb so that it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not misapply the cautery in a nervous or spasmodic state that is near a nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When pain of the joints is from moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes on foot, which they properly call "podagra", and when it is from cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make a mound of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-like according to this form.
And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then you should make cautery at every point they claim "point". And if the pains come just to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then you should make cautery on each knee, two or three cauteries for each part, all the way up to the olive; and if you have a task of more, do more, but hold your hand firmly until the space of the heart is at rest.
And if the pains descend just to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have spoken of in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the finger .ij. lines; and if there remains any pain in the two, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come just to the sides or just to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and make good government for the patient and prepare medicines. For if you make good government and you purge flux, it will be healthy with the help of God.
of the rupture of the syphac
When rupture comes from anger, and the belly descends to the hips and it is newly formed, then you must ensure that when you want to cure it, it does not harm anyone on that day; and that it uses things that ease the belly, so that the filth descends from its belly; afterwards, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his flanks as long as the belly is being repaired, and reset them with your fingers, and sign underneath the rupture on the bone of the thumb, and at all a sign that resembles half a circle above the body; then apply the cautery in the form that it is.
until it is white and it casts a gentle shadow. Then reset the boules to their place; and the minister holds his hand so they do not return back; and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put under him .i. cushion and .i. sergeant on the thighs, and .i. another on the foot that holds the hands; then put the cautery on the sign at all your hand, and the right hand and the left hand as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, so recommence again until you come near to the bone; and be subtly wary that the bouil does not burst when you perform the cautery; that you do not burn them; and that by this the patient does not die, or another evil.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauteries for children be subtle according to the measure of their age, and for great people also great according to their measure; after .iij. days cure the limb with a warm cautery so that the numbness is removed; after curing other ointments until he is healthy, and let the patient .xl. days on his back so that the wound is well sucked; and it is necessary that their nourishments be lassatis for a long time, so that the bouil does not burst when they prepare to go to chambers.
And after .xl. days, when he wants to get up, have a well-made litter prepared for him, and the porse .xl. other days; and let him have good rest, so that he is not too tired and beware of too great repletion of drinking and eating, and of too high excitement; and when he follows this teaching, he will be entirely healthy. And I will tell you afterwards about the cure for cutting in his chapter. of the route of the belly
When routes come into other bellies and are constricted, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make them .j. cautery of the cautery wound according to its quantity, and be careful with the third of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at the cautery angle according to this form:
but first mark the place of the injection and make a line for the width above the route, and another below, and hold your hand in all the cauterized places. But the first cauteries are more gentle and moderate.
of ancient pain in no member When pain comes to a limb, whether from a fall or a blow, and that pain lasts for a long time, and the medical treatment is of no avail, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and let the cauteries be according to the length and smallness and weakness of the limb and its virtue and location of twists and pains. If it is well-done from the first cautery, that's good; if not, recommence another cautery on top of it, for such is the custom that it must be moved to the limb that is adjacent, because it needs to be cauterized until the patient is healthy.
of sickness
The sick are often helped many times by cautery with great aid, and especially the illness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see the cautery, take care that the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor delay, and you fear that the corruption may spread throughout the entire sickness, then make .v. cauteries on the head: .i. emmi the head anew, and another towards the forehead at the end of the veins; and .ij. on the .ij. horns, and .i. behind on the temple; and leave so much time that the cautery comes just to the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the gross humors can come out; and cautery on the mouse according to what it is beforehand.
And if the sickness is scattered throughout; and it appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you make cauteries of these cauteries that we have said on the head, and .i. cautery in the soft part of the nose, and .ij. cauteries on the spine of the neck, and .vj. cauteries on the spine of the back, and .i. great on the chest and .i. another on the ribs, and .ij. on the shoulders; and .ij. on the hips, and .ij. on the tendons of the foot, and .i. on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the rear calcifying, so you do not burn them; and many times make a cautery on the bone of the finger, and .i. another on the bone of the stomach, and .i. another on the liver.
And know that when you make a cautery more often, the more it helps, and it profits; and know that the sick do not feel any pain from the cautery if they are healthy, because the body is already somewhat corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the fevers. After curing the wound with flour and honey and other cures until it is healthy.
of inflammation
When inflammation occurs in a member and is treated with medicines and ointments and emplasters, but it does not heal, then make cauterizations on the member according to its size and smallness of the member; and let the cautery be a little inside the skin of the heart; then cure it with ointments until it is healthy. And often one makes cautery at the hand and foot and back, at the issue of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if the inflammation is removed; and never intervene if it does not concern the members and issues of moving nerves of the body.
of abscesses
When the disease called "abscesses" is inflamed, and the engines of medicine are of no value, then cauterize with a cautery a little deep, according to the quantity of the skin of the heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes; then cure with flour of veal and lentils with oil of rose and leaves of plantain, and blood of colon and blood of almond, each one part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a dressing, and apply it to the wound until it is healthy.
The treatment of cancer by cautery.
When cancer begins, and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with the cautery that seems a circle around the entire tumor. And all the wise men say that one should make a cautery also in the middle of the cancer; and I do not think it is good, because I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted to come across this before; and the more correct thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
of the inflammation that cannot heal
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it delays healing or because of the superfluity that it does or because of the weakness of the patient when they are decrepit (that is to say, too old) and they have little blood, or because of their tension; and you want to hasten healing: then cauterize around with many small cauteries pricking; afterwards let it be. For it will hasten healing.
And if you perceive the fire cautery to be entirely burnt, heat the cautery of wood that is its form:
And put your hand in the middle of this disease that is called "adubelati" so that the cautery has perceived the heart, and be such the cautery that the patient feels relief in some manner that the course of the purgation is alleviated. After the cure, as long as it is perfectly healthy.
The cure with fire by iron
Another manner of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a mangling of members, for it eats away the members just as fire devours dry wood. If you see this disease in the patient who can suffer cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries carefully, very small and great, according to what is suitable for the patient or the disease; after cauterying all parts so that you eradicate all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted may be removed. And then let it be for three days, and put on the cauteries suffering burning with oil until the fires are extinguished, and all corruption. After the cure of wounds engendering char.  And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it is good; and if not, then recommence the cautery on what remains of the corrupted members. And this mangling has often been cured by medicine applied to the fire cautery; but all cauteries of fire are of great aid, and I have already said the cure of medicine applied in the division: take as much as you need to master it.
the pores that come to the feet
Many times it happens that the feet are afflicted by a disease called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a large faulty thing that whitens the foot. And the cauteries for this disease are in two ways. It is to know fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is when you heat a cautery iron as if it were a pen of violet, and make it from good iron at the measure that it can penetrate the nail on all sides, and have subtle margins; afterwards put it all hot upon the nail, and turn your hand entirely around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and let it stay thus for three days until it begins to rot away; then make a poultice of wild savages bruised with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be disrooted from its roots. Then cure the foot of ointment in the morning as much as it is healthy.
And if they are converted by faulty flesh, and many times it happens in the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you apply hot water cautery; and it is in such a manner: take a cane of iron or a pen of violet, and put it on the nail and around it, that is to say pores of warts; and put the cane thus that it penetrates all around, then you put a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand while turning so that the margin of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and then finds the hot water way deep into the root; and let the patient suffer a little the biting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will disroot all at once from its roots. Thus do one after another, until you clear those that are in the body, then cure with ointments that engender health.
the cure for trembling
When some people shiver with cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you apply three fire cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one fire cauterization between each vertebra; and one fire cauterization or foot, and one on the stomach for olive fire cauterization; if they stop shivering, and hasten the healing of the cold disease.
of pus-filled pimples
No time appears through the bathed body, or pus-filled pimples, which come from gross corrupted matters. It is necessary at first when they appear that one applies fire cauterization on each head of the pimple: a subtle fire cauterization of mistletoe wood, of which the point is taken in fire, or root of aristologite long, or lentricular fire cauterization. And no time are they cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow worse afterwards, but are dislodged from the superfluities from which they come, and are healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Here is the translation:
And whenever this happens to anyone, hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it so much that the blood is pacified beneath your finger, and does not issue more; then apply fire cautery, small and large as much as they are all red; then take into account, whether great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is located, and apply the cautery on this vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery so that the blood is restored.
And if it happens to be when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take quickly another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is stanched; and beware that you do not harm the nerve that is nearby, and that another evil does not come upon the patient; and know that when blood flows out of the artery, it cannot be well stanched unless the artery is large, so it is not by one of the three ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines applied that have the power to stanch blood; and thus it will be tied and held in place.
Whoever administers the stanching of the blood closely with cloth or puts things tightly on, or similar things, it will not be of much use.
And if this happens to no one and there is no better medicine present, then you must put your finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well so that it rests above the wound and above the vein; and do not move your finger, but let the cold froide moisture penetrate so that the blood is congealed and thickened and rested; and make an inquiry beforehand about what he needs of cauteries and medicines.
We have said in the first chapter all about the disease where it is necessary to use fire cautery, or burning medicine, and the tools and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I placed that chapter at the head just below the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method because one finds it easier to follow what one desires.
And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one of the cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake foolishness. For many kinds of people come for cures. Some come who hurt themselves so with their illness that they die easily from the fierceness that they find in their disease, and from the greatness of their wickedness; and one should have fear of this. And of these there are those who give you their sense, and say: "wait, I am cured"; and the illness is despised. It does not become you to consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of that which you are certain, and of which you can take and loose; and use prophecy and indication in the cures of your illnesses where salvation may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good renown, and glory, and long memory.
Very dear son, Our Fathers give you good understanding and direction, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And I never saw this disease except in children, and of those that I have seen, death hastens them; and therefore it seems to me that it is worth leaving the work on certain treatments.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head swelled every day so much that he could not hold it up; and the moisture was so great that it became mortified, and this moisture is assembled beneath the bone under the siphac, between the heart and the bone; and the treatments are such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and let it be as long as our, until the moisture runs; and see there the form of the spatula:
If the moisture is more increased, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the signs that you observe the commissures of the head overcome by each part, and the water flows out when you press with your hand inside, and it does not respond to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this method:
And after the incision remove all moisture. After hold the edges of the wound together with drapings and powders, and apply wine and oil, and let it be until the fifth day; then disjoin, and treat the wound with tents and with ointments, and let the head be straightened, and give meat to the patient in small amounts, dry food without much moisture, as long as the limb is comforted and healthy.
And another way of incision is that you look to open the greatness of the abscess, and assemble the water; for it is never in front; never behind; never on the right; and never on the left.
Cut then where the abscess opens, and fill with water, and do it according to what you have the power; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and let flow blood, so that the patient may die from the corruption of blood and evacuation of moisture.
of swelling
When there is a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or at the foot, and the disease is chronic, and the medical treatment does not benefit, then the last resort is cauterization with fire, which one will cover the .ij. arteries.
It is necessary then, when you cover the eyes, that the patient makes a movement with his head; afterwards rub the skin of a rough cloth so much that the arteries appear, then stretch the patient's neck to the entire cloth; then look where the veins are good, and the eyes of one and the other are after the ears, and little are responded; then mark the eyes of the notch, then cover one and the other with a sharp pointed instrument .ij. inches long, so much that the vein touches just to the bone, and it should be by the width of the head.
And if you see, insert the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cover above, cutting thus as .ij. two fingers in width.
And when the vein is covered, then the blood flows back continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not open to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of two fingers, then sign from the notch and make just to the bone; and this requires putting fire underneath if it is six inches, and by chance a little more or less according to what the patient can suffer, and the repletion of the artery; then examine the wound: if there remains upon the bone point of the siphac, if it seems that apostemes come from nowhere, then hold the wound and bind it, and the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
of the migration
When the ancient migration comes, and catarrh arrives, due to the moisture of the tears and the warmth in the temples, and the old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is treated by methods of cures of medicine and all that does not profit him, if we extract the arteries from the temples and the cauterizations, as we have related.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs of their temples fall, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is little restored unless in some homes which are too cold; and if it is restored, then extract from the neck of the patient some drapels, then scrub the skin with some rough cloth, and raise the skin with warm water so that the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula made in this form:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
For fire cautery is aid to finish the swellings: because it is of great aid against swellings. Where it is necessary to extract the arteries that one fills the old cotton with a lot of cotton and places well-made tents; and when they are removed, if they are treated with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with tents, until it is healthy; and if without cutting the artery so much as you observe, if you hasten to cover with cautery, or you fill the old cotton with vitriol and hold it in your hand so the blood is stopped; and if you do not have this present, place your finger on the spot until the blood is congealed, and raise the cold water spot so the blood ceases, and be steady as necessary; and what is more gentle and easier in extracting the artery is that you cautery the vein of this trenchant cautery, but the trenchant should be well spaced to avoid longer delay. For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less their warmth. And you should have between the .ij. knives .i. a thickness of a finger, and then when you have signed to engrave the .ij. veins, and you place the hot iron on them so much that it reaches just up to the bone, and covers the vein in .ij. veins; and they should be spaced between the .ij. joints because it is not necessary to cauterize all of this cautery throughout; and this is the form of the cautery:
of tears
When the tears of the eyes are overflowing from veins that are on the top of the head, and it does not profit from any medicine that one makes, and you see the face of the patient become red, and feel an uneven walk as if of a tremor; and since they are tense and moist so that the hairs of the papers are bent, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the heat of the tears, it is necessary for this treatment.
And they call it the "confused cure", and it is that you make a row on the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then you make three incisions or cuts on the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be so, three digits deep into the forehead downwards to the nose, and the others three digits costal by the papers above, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are costal by the papers above; and align your hand with the continuation of the mandibles, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers at the joints.
Of the incision that is to be made at the temple just up to the second incision; and scrape off all the crust that is between the two fissures to the entire skin that is on the bone, then make another cut of the middle incision just up to the other second, and then extract this spatula-like thing.
if you put in the first fissure the instrument that is called "scalpel", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is its shape: And place the cutting edge towards the dry skin at the bone, and the blunt edge towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle fissure. And collect all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as much as possible so that the incision is continuous up to what opens into the bone, and then make another cut in the middle fissure up to the other defect; and then extract the blood evenly, and press on the bone for the taken blood; then put in each fissure a piece of old cotton, and put on moist drapery soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and beware that apostemes do not form; and on the third day remove the bandage, and apply a great deal of lukewarm water, then cure with ointment basilicon with rose oil, and other cures for wounds, until it is healthy.
of the eyes' humour
When the veins are customarily cauterized, and you see the eyes clouded and small, and the vision is obscured, and the papers are burned; and the hair falls out, and where the head aches in front of a painful spot, and the patient is stunned; then know through these accidents that those materials and that cathartic do not come from many veins, and the wound cure is what it is, if it is this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the forehead, and another of equal size. I. poco. And begin from the incision on the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be just up to the bone; and separate your hand from the nerves of the temples that move to the marrow; and when the bone is uncovered, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then swab between the lips of the incision and put cotton much, and tie with linen; then spread over it moistened drapels in wine and oil, and guard against hot abscesses; when it is removed, you must rub the bone so that the flesh begins to grow, then apply the cure of exciting things that make it inflame.
In this manner: take three parts of flaxseed flowers, and of colocynth three parts, and make an emplaster; and apply it to these wounds to inflame the flesh throughout.
of the swelling of the ears
All that falls into the ears is one of four things: either grains, or beasts, or stone dust or similar things; or seeds, like jasmine, beans, peas; or flowing things like water and oil and similar things.
When it falls into the ear, stone or another kind of thing that does not stick to the ear, and does not grow in the ear, then put the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, if you distill a few drops of violet oil or sesame oil, then you will make an extraction; and when it is sternly done, and the nostrils are blocked when the stern things come, and you place pieces of cloth or wool over the ear; and the ear is above. Many times it comes out through this cure; and if it does not come out, then you will make an extraction with subtle pincers, for that is their form:
If it comes out with the pincers, that's good; if not, then you will make an extraction with a subtle hook of small double curvature; and if it does not come out through that, then you make a reed cane and insert the head of the cane or perforate the ear strongly, and block what is inside the cane so that nothing can enter with the cane; then you pull it out forcibly, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, then you take glue from where you take the ears, and put some instrument that is pointed for doing this, and put a piece of cotton inside; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull it out. And if she does not know how to do all these things that we have said, hurry to open the ear thus, so that an abscess forms and spasms; and the manner of opening is that you first make the patient's head healthy, and extract blood according to its strength, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends on the fat or flesh; and let the incision be like a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it with your power, and suck hastily into your mouth; and cure until they are healthy. And if it is a grain that is in and swells, administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer a spatula with subtle strokes according to this form:
and administer an incision of that grain. But do not do it when you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, so much that you have made many pieces; then extract with subtle pincers and suck, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.
Here is the translation:
In the extraction of the beast, if it is small in body, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large in body so that one can feel it, then gently extract with pincers; and this is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where you treat distillations, but the cure does not profit, then it is necessary that you examine the ear in the sun: if no worms appear, take them out with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, take the candle of which this is the form.
And be narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle instrument in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck out completely with the candle; do this as often as all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, stop up the cotton candle as I have said in the stone; and if they do not come out as we have said, gently administer distillations that the old men have experienced in the extraction of worms, and you will find them where you treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, from which this is the form as you see.
And be of silver or copper, narrow below at a small pertuis, and above cover for distilling; and to press within the distillation with a well-made instrument of copper for this, and if you see take the rasp and envelop it in cotton thread; then pour your oil or juice, and what you have of your medicines in the candle, and the candle is in the ear; then put within the rasp all the cotton, and press your hand temperately so that the oil is distilled or removed from the ear; and feel the patient's sensation within, and be the distillations not too cold, for the medicine would not be good if it were; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
of the swelling of the ears
No child is born with no holes in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through swelling of a wound, or a boil formed inside the ear, and these swellings sometimes form deep in the ear, if one cannot see them; and sometimes it happens that the hole is nearly closed, and one sees them well.
That which forms deep in the ear, if one cannot see it, is of grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in that which one sees, you must place the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see apparent opacity, if the work has all this spatulation from what its form is.
And let it be smooth and clean before and behind the entire plain, so that it does not block the ear; if the opacity is from a boil or abscess of the ear, if you hold it as pinches subtly, and lift it lightly, until the boil is entirely removed.
And if the operations are too deep in the ear, take a subtle and light razor and gently warm it by fire, then place it in the curve of the ear. If you feel the operation where the patient feels great pain at the hearing, perceive it lightly, and be careful not to hurt the nerves of the ear; then put a tent in the ear according to the width of the perforation, and apply the Egyptian ointment.
Here is the translation:
And if the flow of blood comes, one plunges a sponge and wraps it in cold water, and places it on the ear, and uses other treatments that stop the flow of blood which are or deal with distillations.
of the flesh of the papers
It is the ulcer that comes from papers of eyes when they are moist and dry, if it happens that you treat them with tongs and tweezers, and cut off a spatula-like instrument from their roots; then put on the eye a glassy balsam.
And if they do not decay, then the cautery of a subtle lenticular fire is good, and the cautery operator afterwards makes incisions wisely; and many times they repair, for nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not grow back.
of the sprain
Many times they come to papers about the eyes some things that seem like sprains in their form and hardness, and therefore this disease is called "grandine", and it's a gathering of gross moisture above and below; the work is such: take care if the grandine moves from one part to another, and it's an easy thing to know; make a large donut, then lightly scrape each part, then take it with pincers, and cover. If you cannot cover without piercing a little the paper, do not hurt the patient; and if the crack is large, assemble at a costure, and cure until it's healthy; and if it's small, do not make any force, for the joints restore themselves soon and heal.
And if the grandine descends to the depths of the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper, and hold the grandine with pincers, and cover and press from one part to another; and if the paper is separated by incision, do not hurt; and when the grandine is covered, anoint the eye with salty water, and cure the place of what causes harm until the patient is healthy.
of the fatness of the eyes
Here is the translation:
And the manner of the operation is that the patient puts their head in a healthy position; and then takes a piece of linen, and arranges a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that the extremity contains, then places it on them; and presses with both hands on one side and the other, so that the extremity is gathered within the circle; then makes an incision at the midpoint of the moisture with a sharp instrument, and does not make it larger than the wound made for opening a vein; and makes the skin fold over as far as you reach the extremity; and in many dispositions the extremity emerges from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then extract at once a piece of charpit cloth between your two fingers at the defect, and turn your hand to the right and to the left as far as it is spread; and beware that you do not press on the incision, that you do not reach the entire spatula up to the eye, that you do not bruise it.
And if the extremity does not appear at the beginning of the incision, so slightly enlarge the incision gently until it appears; then extract as we have said, then wrap in a veil and in water, and place on the limb, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who break their own and put on to corrupt the moisture that is retained. Then heal them as long as they are healthy. And if they come to a hot abscess, then heal them by applying poultices soothingly until they are healthy.
of the hairs of the papers
When in papers hairs grow unevenly other than naturally, and are enveloped, if they harm the eyes, and bring about ways of diseases such as customary tears and softening of the papers and albumen, so that it is cause of destruction of the eyes; and there is a cure in three modes: either by cautery with assembled fire, or by medicine agreeable according to what is before or chapter of cautery, and is made either by incision and stitching or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your healthy one, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, then insert a needle at all .i. fil above; and be it on the margin of the paper where the hairs grow from those hairs, and pull .i. fil above all the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the uneven hairs, all the spatula coping, from the great tearer just to the small one; then extract .i. fil, and put under the paper a small piece of cotton and drapery, then sign on the paper an image of an inch, like the leaf of myrtle, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevate the paper which is divided into twelve.
And if a part that has been injured is treated with a great quantity of paper according to how much the paper is softened; then apply the entire spatula along the lines you have marked, and begin with the large scraper just a little; and let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the onion in one of the angles of the circle, then scrape everything; then assemble the entire lips at the seam of a needle with all the subtle thread of wool, and suck out the blood, and make the superfluity of the threads on the entire eyebrows to all things sticking, if you want to do this; and if not, if you have no cure, then leave the seam and the threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without a seam of dry and constricting things, for the paper relives at the suddenness of the wound and its assembly, but the seam is useless (as the ancients said), and it's work without fear.
and if another manner: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have told, at three inches from the edge according to the form that is here:
then take that which overhangs with small equal forces according to the form that is here:
And if you cannot hold the tourniquet, and the thing is not even, take a needle or thread .i. fil, and put it in the figure; and put .i. another thread of the large larder, and the second thread of the small one, and assemble the two threads evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, calm it with cerote and similar ointments soothing.
and often it happens that the hairs of the parchment are converted: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the suture on one and the other is more artificial.
The cure of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the parchment and make it deep according to what I have said, and then make .ij. wounds by art, and .ij. subtle threads as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula is; and cut as .ij. heads of .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above what rises from the parchment of the eye, and extract the .ij. wounds of the .ij. parties strongly; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin which was stretched will die and putrefy and fall off, until it separates on its own.
If it delays, if the head is strong, then cure until he is healthy; and when the wound has been sewn, and if the paper has been lifted, and they will no longer prick the hairs; and this is the form of the twelve canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width.
The operations are such that you take a subtle needle, and insert a fine silk thread; then assemble the heads and tie one to another subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then order in the hunt another fine silk thread briefly, and tie the two ends of the thread; then place the patient's head in your healthy hand; and let it dry in the sun so that the operations are clarified, for this is a subtle and minor operation; then insert the needle at the root of the hair, and make it pierce through the paper hastily as much as you draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the head, and put it in the head if there is one or two or three or more; then extract your hand as much as the hairs come forth entirely in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the head is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then pull the head back to the entire thread that you had ordered, so that the head comes forth entirely through the opening above and that you see it by the vision of the eye; then pull the head and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed for twelve hours or thirteen, until the hair is rooted in its place and grows on the flesh; and if the hairs are small, then accompany one long hair from the natural whiskers, and let it grow with that which you left, so that it is elongated and then set free.
of the porridge of the eye
When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the porridge comes in the eye, it has two forms: one natural and the other unnatural. And it occurs suddenly from a wound, or a cut, or a cauterization, and similar things.
And the manner of operating on it is that you open up the sore, and separate the eyelids from it, and put in threads of linen, and bind it so that it may be healthy; and it is not suitable to use in its treatment things that dry and restrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before; but it works with softening things, such as fenugreic; and the rose water or attar of roses and linseed oil are soothing, and apply a poultice, and envelop it in a cloth, and thus is its treatment.
And the treasure of its treatment is that you take heed not to let it settle according to the form it had before; and these operations that we have mentioned are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form it had before.
of the flesh that comes in the eye
This disease that is beneath and is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and fractures and cauteries and similar things; and the way of working on it is that you take a needle, in which there are two threads, and prick the flesh, and make the thread pass through the left eyelid as far as the right, so that the thread forms a knot in the flesh; then the flesh is sewn above with the entire needle, and covered with a large spatulum.
And if the figure of the papyrus returns according to what is desired, it is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the wound, and turn the papyrus, and make two wounds or cuts within the papyrus; and so are the heads of the two wounds at the angles of the incision that you have sewn, and be made an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is as if it were the figure of a letter that has no "j" curve; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity whose sides are gathered beneath, from what follows the papyrus, then reassemble the two separated parts, and sew with a thread of wool; then heal with medicines mollifying and tightening, until it is healthy.
And if the disease comes from a wound or cut or cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain wound beneath the hairs of the papyrus, and according to what is before; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to have the skill to make the figure return to its natural form; and the same diseases, according to what is necessary for the work and instruments in various dispositions.
you should apply a poultice of paper
When this application has to be made by men in such a way that the paper on top is soaked with white oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to put the point of a razor underneath the paper, and lift it high; and hold it as pincers, until you catch what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too rough nor too cutting, so that the patient may not suffer from the spatula being too rough or bleeding the oil; and make your incision, gently scraping off the assembled one, so that the paper regains its natural form; and it is all healthy, and never becomes watery or salty in the oil, and raises a gentle and calm tone; then put between the paper and oil a linen thread, and put on the oil a soft and abundant ointment; and after three days use sweet cologne and soothing things as long as it is healthy.
from the corner of the oil
You know that the corner of the oil is in two ways: it is nervous and seems like a hard, rough surface, and another which is not nervous, but seems like a soft, congealed moisture, that when you touch it with iron and cut it with pincers, it cannot be overcome; and one and the other seem to enclose towards the great artery, and gradually contract until it covers all the vein and all the light and movement of the oil.
Here is the translation:
And beware that the spatula does not touch the raw flesh and breaks it, and that the pruning is not perceived; and after the incision pour a little warm broth into the oil, and make a dressing of litargy, and leave it until the next day; then cure what needs to be cured so that it may be healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the uncines cannot enter, often this type of nail is cured with medicines; and grows as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, if you open the oil of the patient, and take the lighter spatula according to this form:
And lift the nail subtly, and if you see that it is diminishing and the reason appears, then distill from your mouth into the oil a dressing made of litargy and red collier and warm broth, and stop up the oil until the next day; then recommence the other work according to this same method of opening, so that it may be entirely restored.
If nothing opposes you in the oil, then as an abscess forms, afterwards milk it, and first cure the hot abscess so that it may be healthy, then recommence the work as before, so that it may be healthy.
And if the appearance of the flesh is harmed by great injury at night in the eye through great nuisance, if it suspends on the onion, and covers one part but not entirely, that the course of tears does not come; then distills in the eye a red collier made from litharge.
of the flesh which grows upon the eyelid
His eyes of certain men grow a red flesh, and cover the eyelid and restrain upon the papers and turn to the defect, and seem a rose of balsam; and the works are that the patient puts his head in your healthy state, then opens his eyes, and gathers all that flesh as uncines convenient to that, and holds it with force; then covers the first flesh, and goes entirely counter to the razor until the end, and takes care that you do not blister the eye at the work; and thus is the incision of the spatula which we have said in the incision of the ankle and small forces of what one uses to clean the sepulcher, just as the form appears after this chapter which demonstrates.
and when the incision is accomplished and all the flesh is removed, then anoint the eye with silk broiet or where you distill red collier and seem to be corrosive medicines, and put on the eye a piece of cotton with a little water, so that it may be assured of aposteme heat; and if there remains nothing, and the blood flows freely, and you doubt aposteme heat, then leave the eye and cure the aposteme with soothing things that calm aposteme heat; then return to your work as long as it is healthy, and thus make several flesh that is adjusted in the eye by this resemblance.
But however it is necessary that you lift the treatment of each oil from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in work with iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
the veins of the eyes
There are red veins that are covered on the eye, and they obstruct the view of their work and weaken the eye every day. It is necessary then at first that you examine the eye, in which there is a blockage, it is strong, and there is no other disease worse than this blockage; then you should coil it in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head in a healthy position, then suspend those veins all around according to their wisdom, and be subtle double threads according to this form.
And let there be two threads by degrees in the body according to this form:
then you should coil the forces of those veins subtly, and extract the blood hour after hour, until you see remove those veins from the eye; and beware that you do not blind the eye at the points of the instruments, and perform this work at midday in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not grasp anything but those veins; and when you have done this, then distill in the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what is remaining of the blockage.
And if you cannot collect all of this in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of things appeasing the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pains are appeased and assured of hot abscess, then recommence according to this manner which is before until he is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
of the fistula of the eye
The mirror is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with fire cautery and burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not yet healthy, if it is engendered in the eye that you open on the abscess, there where it must be drained, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and blackness, if you take out all the instrument of which it is the form; and it is called "asper chief", and it must be made from iron indeed a chief reont, and it must be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put on the diseased limb of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little so that you feel that the corruption is relieved; and do this several times, then restore the limb with exciting medicines.
If the limb is swollen, and there is an abscess, and the body of the bowel is swollen, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not heal and is not apostematous, and a bad accident happens, know that it is healthy; if not, if there is another engine than to bring back the fistula to the perforated nose according to this form: and it is that you discover the bone for the second time by iron, and by bitter medicines, and when it is discovered thus take .I. forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and let the fistula be attenuated until the head as you see here:
Then put it on the bone of the forearm, and withdraw your hand from the eye a little, then turn the entire forest so that it pierces the bone and the patient feels it by this means if he holds his hand against his nose; and then restore the limb with dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh becomes abscessed and endures the limb, the matter goes to the nose; if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the discharge from the eye
When the hairs are open everywhere and do not disturb the nostrils, nor diminish them, it is necessary that you bind the patient; then apply a poultice, then put on suction cups or heated irons to suck out, then place over the eye; make an ointment of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolle, and then hold the eye steady, and bind with bands and drapes; and the way of the drapes is that you take drapes quite soft, and double each in three, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the hairs have most need; then hold it steady with a hard bandage shaped like a circle, and restart the suction cups to suck out without making a wound; then remove the suction cups and let the eye be held steady day and night, and if they are not inflamed, it is good; if not, then restart the binding and drapes and the suction cups until it is healthy.
because of the tearing of the web-like membrane
When disruptions come to the web-like membrane, then open, and come from papers as if it were a grain of resin, and it is astonishing to see; then if you want to cover it, the operations are such that you put a needle in the root of the upper part just below the edge, then put another needle where there is a double thread on the part of the eyelid; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its disposition; then cover the upper part with the double thread and tie a part of the membrane around, and hold it well, then remove the needle and place it over the cloudy eye in abundance of water; and let it be until the threads adhere with the membrane, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healthy; and often the wound is held back by the membrane each part of a circle of drapes, until it is healthy.
And if the eyes take on a great appearance, so he perceives at the subtle spatula which comes in front of the eye, and corrects the moist albuginean and descends the eyes, and goes between them immediately; then he restrains it until it is healthy.
of the socket of the eye
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but the socket of the eye that is assembled in the eye, appearing to be descending and not really descending; and the manner of appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat, upright and straight, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move it so that you see the socket come into view above your eyes; then be steady, and do not let the light be scattered, and see if the patient sees things as they should; and if it does not descend below, know that it is a real condition, and the descent of the socket is not arranged as we have said. If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and apply it to the corner of the conjunctiva with the corner and the cornea, until the socket is set; and when it is done, distill into the eye a warm mixture of honey and milk, or honey and fenugreek, which has been boiled and mixed, then be cured by another treatment until it is healthy.
of the humors of the eye
Here is the translation:
After rest, the patient rises a second time, place the fire with the instrument, and when it is thus fixed and does not mount, then extract gently in turning your hand little by little; and then put back into the water a little of the gemstone, and lift from that the eye within. Then put through deficiency the oil estoupe or lanolin ointment, and bind with the healthy oil.  We, and those who are of our team, put on common broiet with abundance of eggs.
And if the gemstone cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard eyes, so it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", whose form is this:
And pierce then the conjunctive subtly, and do not go too deeply in, but make the gentle movement, then put in the gemstone, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, appear to the patient .i. sleeping, while he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be aware of all movements, and take light food, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be bound according to his disposition until the third day; then unbind him in that same dark house, and test his vision, and make him see certain things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day; and it is necessary not that you do this during the time of the treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate this, because the fire mounts hastily.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And these are the similarities of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them go astray; and they should be properly arranged.
And the head of the bone is from this same subtle refinement, and the rear is in three angled points.
of the flesh above the nose
No birth or nose flesh is joined diversely, because there are some that seem like scorpions with many feet; and if it has flesh of fixed color, and if it has soft flesh of bone color. In this case of these flesh that is soft, and not fixed, you should make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open his nostrils, and cast the onion at those flesh, and let them be treated; then take what you can sustain on the subtle spatula with one part, so that you know that this flesh is all cleared.
And if there remains something that cannot be coped with, open everything .i. of subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and without swelling above, or abscess appearing, drain it as it is fitting; and if it's malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is burned, then pour out or apply cold water or wine.
If the nostrils are stopped up, and moisture comes up to the palate, it shows that they are unhealthy; and if the moisture does not pass as it should, it shows that there is a new flesh growing in the bone above, which the instruments cannot reach: then it is necessary that you take .i. a thread of linen, somewhat thick, and be guided by our hands, and have an interval of about one or two inches; and put the patient's head on the thread in their nose as if to draw, and pull it out while drawing it through the nostrils; and many times children are treated thus in schools, and it is a light thing for him who wants to do it; then take the head that comes through the nostril with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and guide them one after the other as we do with the thread. Do this until you see that the nostrils have corrupted that flesh, then pull out the thread, suck out the blood, and apply the thread in Egyptian fashion, and put it back in the nostrils as before; do this .iij. days or more, until the applications corrode all that remains of flesh; and then put a pipe of lead for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need of medicines afterwards, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, where one distills the oils and medicines in the nostrils.
And let it be of silver or copper, resembling a lamp overturned, like a pipe, and guide them thus; and if you see, make a closed pipe, and let the instruments be plain for purging the head; and have .i. a handle on the head to hold it while one heats the oil or some liquor.
of the flesh above the nose
Many times a disease called "telul" appears on the head above the nose, and grows and becomes large, until it is visible to behold; and therefore you should apply a hot iron at the beginning, and remove everything fully, then place above the hot cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay in applying it until it is large, take care lest it be hard, of dark color, of poor sense: if you do not touch it with iron for it is an enchanted abscess, for when you apply it many times, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of dark color, and you see that you can fully remove it, then behold the patient and apply sense without fear, and cure the head of things drying and restraining.
when the nose is burned and scalded
Be aware that when a solution of continuation comes into one of these cartilaginous wounds, it profits little, for in some homes. Therefore, you should take care that it has not come to nothing, if you see that the wound is fresh and full of its blood; and then apply the .ij. leaves to a dressing, then cure until it is healthy; and if the leaves are somewhat dislocated on one side and the other, you should scrape all parts of their root until they heal, then assemble the .ij. leaves into a dressing, and restrain, and powder with dragon's blood powder, and incense broiled; and put on the powders a piece of strong or other soothing plaster, and let it stick by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healthy.
The method of the treatment is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the treatment of the belly wound; or by thread, as I have made you know.
of abscesses of the lips
At the hands of men who have dense abscesses on their lips, similar to grains of peas, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut into each wound, and take them as pincers and cover each part; then apply the remedy of vitriol ointment after the incision, so that the blood may be staunched; and then leave it to heal, and cure the wounds of dry things until they are healthy.
of the flesh of the gums
Here is the translation:
of the ulcers
Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and bitter; and sometimes the black, citrine, and vers teeth, until the corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become putrid; if it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands, and their heads be in your holy, and take out the teeth or scabs that appear, until nothing remains; and thus do with the blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other stains, until they are cleaned; and if one removes what was at the first root, it is good; if not, then restart on the second day and the third, until you have everything taken out; and know that teeth have need of diverse forms of instruments to reinsert, according to what the work demonstrates, because the roots that one takes out from the teeth have other forms than those that one takes in between the teeth; and these forms and others are equipped with you.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay doing so for as long as you can, because this should not be done hastily; for it is a very high substance just up to then that one has no excuse to rush. Then when the patient is constrained from delaying, it is necessary that you be certain of the aching tooth. Often the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is in a healthy tooth, and makes them delay treating the good tooth; and meanwhile the pain does not depart for this reason, until the bad strain, because we have already wanted to do this for these healthy ones; and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth in every spot; then you take your fingers or subtle tenacles at the first joint and joint, so that they are well loosened, then you firmly affix the tenacles; and let the head of the patient be in your holy between your knees, and hold them well so that they do not move.
After extracting the tooth straight ahead without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and gently push it into each part lightly, and remove it as you did before. And if the teeth are pierced and mangy, it is necessary that you fill them with drapels, where the roots are; and if you hold it subtly in the tongs, so it does not break while holding it; and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And be careful not to break it, and leave a part behind, and return to the patient through the malice of the root, causing greater pains than before. And beware that you do not act like ignorant surgeons, who in their haste and hardness often break the cartilage, and do not amend what we have recounted; but they often come back because of the questioning of this great illness due to the roots that remain, or because of the cartilage that breaks, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is decayed, wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood flows out, which often happens, apply the vitriol ointment; and if it does not work, cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, which are used to extract teeth first, should be long and pointed, with large handles, so they do not slip when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
And let them be of large limbs so they do not bend in the pulling, and let them be of iron well made, and let them be strengthened by muscles to hold.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains in the pulling, then it is necessary that you place on the soft cotton wool in a burrow. On the eighth or ninth day, as long as the limbs are numb, then you insert the clamps called "algefri", of which the head seems like a beak of a sieve; and let them be made thus as a file, and that is their shape:
And if the roots do not want to issue from all these clamps, then it is necessary that you uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and you put the instrument called "althali", which is to say a polisher, of which this is the shape:
And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps by itself, that is good; if not, then aid with all the instruments, from which the forms come afterwards.
And if one aids with this instrument that has ten inches, from which comes the form.
and other firm instruments that are presented in the ratio of the teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large pincers, from which comes the form.
And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break, and know that many of the teeth's instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtly find their own instrument, according to what their works and the patient shows them, because there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach about instruments for diversity of wounds, and it does not break at all in the cartilage or in other bones, or it rots, if one searches for the instruments that they need, as I have told you, and aid with gestures, from which comes the form. And let it be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, so it does not slip away, but can hold and remove; and then restore the limb with suitable medicines, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, if you take all this instrument.
When the tooth appears not according to its natural form, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, if it happens that you know the teeth are not after the tooth, and it is not in its right place, and one cannot straighten or file: then take the file; and if it is sharp with the tooth, take this instrument which has a small iron point, and is similar to a little beak, and let it be of iron made into a point.
And take the file little by little in your hands daily for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file a part as it is its natural form.
and it is also like the file of which one makes the needles; and in filing the tooth little by little in your hands daily gently, so that it does not move until it settles; then smooth it out at the end without any roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, if it happens to file the asperity until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
when the tooth falls out
when the front tooth falls out, whether by percussion or by decay, and the patient cannot chew on it so they do not eat, and you treat them with astringent medicines, but this is of no value; if they need to be restrained with a thread of gold, for the silver thread turns green and rotten, but the gold does not move at all; and let the thread be neither too large nor too small, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you want to adjust the teeth, take the thread and double it between the sound teeth, then place the heads between the bad teeth, if there is one or more, until you reach firmly to the sound tooth on the other side; then restart the covering up to the part where you began, and hold your hand subtly and firmly, so that it does not move at all; and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then cut the heads of the thread with a pair of scissors, and assemble them, and put them between the sound teeth, and place them so they do not obstruct the tongue; and then leave them thus constricted as long as they can remain, and if they come loose, or the thread breaks, hold it in place with another thread; if it stays in place and serves thus all its life, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the adjustment of the sound teeth, and of the bad ones, as you see.
And when the tooth falls out, put it back in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said; and do not interfere with those who are not wise and suffer, and never make the form of a tooth of ivory from a cow, and put it in the place where the defect is, and hold it in place as we have said, and it will remain and serve thus for a long time.
of copper the thread of the tongue
At no time is the thread which comes from under the tongue or naturally, that you were born with it; or by accident of a wounded vein; and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold their head in your healthy hand, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous thread of the large one, so that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is hardness or numbness, and it is suddenly wounded, if you apply the uncinate and cut the large ligament; and beware that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which is underneath; and when you have done, lift the lever of rose water and of hazel, then put under the tongue a strip of linen; and every night, tie the patient's bandage, so they cannot sleep. And if a flow of blood comes, apply vitriol ointment on the wound; and if the blood does not stop, cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for this; then treat with another treatment until it is healthy,
and if you see the color of fusion, black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it declines to a bluish color, and there is moisture, then apply the uncinate, and make a subtle spatula-shaped instrument, and deliver from one part and another; and if the blood does not stop in your operation, apply vitriol ointment until it is staunched, then return to your operation until you treat everything fully; then lift the lever of hazel and of seed, and treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
of the abscesses of the throat
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, take a candle flame, because it is the form:
And be cutting on one part, and name on the other part; and when you have cauterized one of the armholes, cauterize the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and hot and easy, and if there is an evacuation of blood, gargle the patient with hot water, or scorchings of green pommes so they are cooked, or leaves of myrtle, and similar things, until the wound is stanched; then cure until it be healthy; and no other time grow in the throat other abscesses than the two armholes, if you cauterize them thus like the two armholes immediately.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was in her throat, it is to say a small abscess of little sense; and she had almost completely closed off the whole throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the conduit which was blocked, and could not eat or drink, and would have died if she had remained thus .i. hour or .ij. hours. And the abscess was so swollen that it had made .ij. rivers through the .ij. pertuis of the nose. I hastened to do something, and inserted a .i. onion, then poured in some fluids, and poured in a large amount of broth; then I did another treatment on the other pertuis of the nose, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards I inserted the onion into those abscesses, and cauterized one part, and only a little blood came out; and thus was unblocked the conduit of the woman's throat, and she began to drink hot water and then wine, and did not cease from cutting away at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess recurred again, and filled in the void I had made, so much that it became very large; afterwards I deceived her and cauterized within her throat: thus it remained uncrossed; and I parted from those parts, and knew only that God did with her after me.
of the grape
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
Many times it happens that the gullet or spine of a fish, or something else; thus you should treat what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun in every instrument, so that you can see the thing; and what does not appear to you and is returned to the gullet, you should make the patient vomit thus so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if it casts out the thing through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread; and there is the sponge with its filament, and then it transpires; and when it comes to the place, thus it will be; and then you will treat further; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take the instrument of ponching in this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that they can enter more lightly into the gullet, and hold the head high lifted; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest it does not come to life, nor does it push the bone within; and it is of value that the patient pushes the instrument, because it is seen or the thing is cast out; if it casts out below, or it treats further throughout all the instruments equally, until it is cast out.
from the sound of the gullet
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the wound, if it is, when one can see it, resembles a curved tenaille for entering the throat; and it has the appearance of a beak of a sign, and it has the roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot leave; and see here the shape:
the lancets for abscesses
Many types of abscesses are, according to what the memory brings hereafter in this book, and they differ in perforation and in size; and it is in .ij. ways, one of which is in its own resemblance, and because of the moisture it holds. And the second way is through the eyes or where they are on the body. For abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and abscesses of the flesh are different from those that come into joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if abscesses are not to be pierced, as long as the swelling is mild according to its accomplishment; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their accomplishment, like abscesses that are in joints. For when abscesses come from joints, and one leaves them until they are fully formed, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is in a principal member, and you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; or if it is in the foundation, one pierces it so that it is ripe; and it is not necessary to pierce an abscess without complete digestion, except for that which is in the foundation, so that it does not putrefy within, and becomes fistulous, and cannot be healed in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the hole of the perforation of the abscess which is according to its completion, and it is when the pain is appeased, and the departure from fever, and the diminution of the pain and of the redness, and the debate and the settlement of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation or more depending on the abscess, and where it opens mucus; and so the perforation of the long body, and if the abscesses are in hands or feet, or in joints and in veins, and in all equal places where there is no putridity.
In these cases, according to the member. And when the abscess is in the fatty flesh, it is worth more that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce beforehand, then the body of the venom will be along, and it will be full of much filth; and perhaps the lips and the deep parts of it will harden. And if there are abscesses that are pierced according to the size of the body, according to the members that need attention.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And it is necessary to cauterize completely in the treatment of abscesses: for you have said how one should proceed beforehand in the treatment of abscesses, and see here this chapter.
of wounds
Where you have small abscesses, and are ways to treat them when they are in the skin, just like a blister, and there are many similarities. There are fat and suchlike things where there is moisture, just like a pimple; and if there are hard and rocky ones that require cutting, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act contrary. And the work of the surgical operation is that you try everything, i.e., an instrument called "entromissoire", from which the form comes afterwards, whatever it contains. For if it contains moisture, then you feel it from above down to the length. And when the moisture is evacuated, then scrape off without leaving behind the skin that contained the moisture, for it returns again when you leave nothing; then apply cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; otherwise, in water and vinegar, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until another day; and this cures what has remained of the nit. And then reapply the cotton as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain behind; then treat the wound with ointment in a convenient way, so that it is healthy. And if the abscess holds .i. much fat, then cut according to this form, down to the length; and scrape off your fingers, and remove everything from all parts, and apply all your cure to extract the pus from where it lies; and if the artery acts contrary, do what I have told you afterwards. And likewise do for the abscess if it is rocky, and for cutting and curing as I have told you.
And the cutting into the rocky abscess and moisture, is lighter, for they are of little blood. And if there are any of these abscesses or wounds where there is no moisture, and of those that were .i. abscesses that I treated on an old woman; and found the abscess just like a sour, rough, and whitish stone, and could not break it; and if one had made any effort, one would have done as much harm as to a stone. In other abscesses coming or wounds, because those that come from children and roots of the ears, the operation should be so dependent on the length, by issuing a bow; and the cures are as necessary.
of the tumors
Many times these tumors occur at the neck, and beneath the arms, and in the groin, and sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body, and are numerous, and are entangled with each other. And each tumor is properly located on its side, just like the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these tumors are many. There are those that contain moisture, and if there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health. In this case, you see good disposition in the body, and it seems like the color of the body, and changes from each part and is not airy as the nerves of the neck or the artery or conduit; and it is not deep; so you must cut above, and scrape off each part, and stretch out the .ij. layers of the heart as you were working, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and take it slowly, and be sure that you do not cut into the nerve or vein, and do not let the spatula slip, lest your hand fail, and do not proceed too far, so you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut into the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to operate, then put vitriol powder on the wound, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound; and let it be until the abscess is pacified, and the wound is softened, and begins to heal. And when the bleeding is stanched, return to your work, so that you complete it; then inquire about your duty if there remain small tumors, whether to cut them out or treat them. And if there is a large vein at the root of the tumor, do not think that you should cut out that tumor at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself without harm; then fill the wound with much cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
And if you cut out the entire tumor, it is necessary that you reassemble the .ij. layers of the wound, and sew them now, so that there is no superfluity due to the size of the tumor. It is necessary that you understand how to cut at its root, and treat further, and sew as we have said. Those tumors that hold superfluity, pierce it where it appears dead; and pierce it thus as previously stated, depending on the situation, then mix it with ointment and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well treated, cure it with Egyptian ointment, so that it may be healthy.
of scalping
The old people said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and it is the writing of their words.
For those who have scalping, it is necessary that the fissure of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be cleansed; and one must not do it by aid of this, because all the veins and the pormon of the patient are at risk of having an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the mandrels. When the disease is in the channel of the gullet, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss which comes from the strangulation.
Here is the translation:
and they let it be accustomed to the section of the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, and the veins are long and inquiring.
And if the masters are fearful, it is necessary that they stretch the skin of the throat to the whole onion, then cut the kernel as far as it reaches the cartilage; and clear the veins of blood, if you see nothing, and then couple the siphac, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the tube of the cartilage which jumps forth by the place that is broken, and by the default of the voice.
and let the wound open up a piece.
And when the hour has passed in which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with good care, and sew it whole without sensing the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, so that it be healthy.
One must not do this just so long as the throat is completely stuffed, and the patient is judged to be mortal, and the defect lacks wings. Then one must operate on the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death.
and for this reason the wise man commands to leave the wound open so long as the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four days. And then they will command to bind the wound and cure it, until it is cured.
and I will tell you what I have seen. I saw that a young woman took a knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the sinew of her arm.
and I was called to cure her, and I found her almost dead.
I discover the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and I saw well that it had not been covered with a bandage nor conducted further than the throat, and the veins were issuing forth through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and cured it until it was healthy.
and I had nothing against the maiden because she was rough from voice, and returned afterwards to her disposition;
because I saw that in the cutting of the epiglottis there was no fear.
of the large gullet
These abscesses are called "gullet hernia", and they are large abscesses of a yellowish color, and are very common in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural and accidental; or natural does not have any obstacle.
And the accidental is according to two manners, one of which is similar to a fatty tumor, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery. and it has fear, and does not dare to work with fierce fires except in the one that is small, and it tries and searches throughout the entire internal structure: if you find it thus, as I do not grasp, and does not penetrate to any vein, if it stops, just as one stops the nose, and draws it out of its entire sheath, if there is a point in it; and examines everything well, and cures it as it is fitting, so that it may be perfectly healthy.
of the nose
Many ways are ours, which I will describe all the similarities;
and it is fitting that I say all the differences that exist between us and them.
I say that the illness is heat and fever, as long as the inflammation has passed, and it completes the purification; then restore the fever and the heat.
With the patient having no heat nor fever nor pain, and containing a syrup, which is its own sap, and is according to the color of the body, and begins thus like a jest, and becomes large;
and they are according to similar appearances, whether grey, or moist, and much of the color is as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the wound, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to what its shape will come or chapter which follows.
And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of the wounds is that you take or make a more moist hand than you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, so that you know that the instruments have pierced the heart, then according to the size of the abscess.
then extract the "entromissoire", and take care in that which is about to burst forth.
Here is the translation:
and after the swelling goes away moisture, knows that it is fat, if they do then in a cross, and take hold with pincers, and lightly scrape each part and turn the coat where it lies that you treat it healthy with the knife.
and if you cannot treat it healthy, then treat it in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if there remains nothing, it will come back to us many times;
and if it remains a little, and the wound does not grieve you, then apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and hold the wound steady, and put on soothing abscesses that are hot, and treat with other treatments until it is healthy;
and if it is severe, then cut away the edges of the wound, and treat those who are injured in the char.
and if the vein is beating strongly against your hand or another, and you hasten to employ the virtue of broken vitriol, and let it stay two or three days, until the wound suppurates, and then restore the ebullition of blood; then return to cauterize what has been left behind.
Here are the forms of instruments for making incisions, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are four types which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula.
and they are also like the needles with which one cuts the sorrels, and they are of citrin iron, or of iron, or of silver, and those that are yellow are worth more, and are more experienced in cutting through black flesh to encircle the ulcers of fistula.
and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the pores.
The forms of the onions are very similar, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are onions that have three curves in three kinds also.
and if there are onions that have three curves, and they are also of three kinds; and if there are onions that have two curves, and onions with a single curve only, and they are of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their place.
The heads of these onions are cutting, and of such there are those that do not cut more than one part, from which we remove the nails, because one does not cut the vein nor the nerve.
and of these internal treatments are the poultices applied to the joints, so that the patient does not feel themselves at the opening of the abscesses;
and they are of three kinds: large, small, and moderate, as you see;
and do not employ any of them more frequently than in the clear skin, such as legs, and arms, and limbs, and similar places;
and never make another small instrument, resembling the scraping of fisticules, according to this form, whereby one stains blood;
and he puts it back into its place that joins the veins, and the arteries, and it does not return according to this great form:
Sometimes the breasts of certain men grow when they start to become corrupt, so much that they seem like female breasts;
and they become fat and swollen, and those who want to cure them, if it is necessary to operate according to this form of this line, just up to .g.: then scrape off the fat, and apply the plaster of medicine in a circle, then assemble the .ij. leaves of the wound to the suture, and the cure so that it may be healthy;
and you will make the shoulder blade smooth below, and it is anointed with its greatness as if it had women, if they do it in the same way as the ribs above, through similar fissures; because one is held to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line B to the line G; then scrape off the skin that is between the ribs, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about bandages and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, so that it be healthy;
and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, so you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil; and let it grow as long as it consumes the remainder and fat, then heal it until it is healthy.
of the abscesses of the sitting bones
These abscesses that come from beneath the sitting bones are kinds of hard scrofulous tumors or they have ribs, and if there is only moisture in them.
Those therefore that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g. And when the entire abscess is emptied, fill the wound with much cotton, and let it be until another day, then remove all the cotton, and heal by applying ointment so that it becomes healthy.
And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, do so as we have said in cases of scrofula, and if the wound becomes hollow, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
from the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is swollen, then abscesses often come, and also it happens that the inflamed vein becomes an abscess.
and if one touches them thus, how it is through the artery, it is the long abscesses that are in the foreground; and when you feel them with your fingers, you feel the straining; and when it is through the vein, it is those things that appear swollen;
and it is foolish to touch this abscess, and likewise when it is beneath the ribs and in the angles and in the collarbone and many other places, and it is very large. It is necessary then to choose the iron treatment, and the one who is at the head should choose it also, and in the one who has an inflammation of the artery, it makes a sore on the skin above the loin.
It is necessary then to choose the iron treatment, and the one who is at the head should choose it also, and in the one who has an inflammation of the artery, it makes a sore on the skin above the loin. then work on the incision, making a beautiful division of the skin, so that it is discovered;
then insert a needle underneath, and make it pierce up to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
then locate the place which is between the two ligatures of an introducer, as far as the blood that comes out of it, and be freed from the abscess;
then apply the treatment that will induce a wound to close, so that the ligature holds; Then treat the wounds that come from the point, as long as they are healthy.
and if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, then you must hold it with your hand so that you can draw out all the pus from the skin. Then insert the needle beneath the skin that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and it has a double thread, so that you draw it from the other side. Then lay the abscess, as I have told you, or bind it with one of the threads from the double thread, which is a strong thread that comes from the two heads.
and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, if you rebury another needle all through, right through the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in three layers.
then cut into the abscess until the superfluous comes out, then cut away the unnecessary from the heart and let what is tied remain.
then put on a clean cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply treatments of tents and ointments until he is healthy.
of abscesses of the kidneys
Here is the translation:
And it happens more often in the joints and the two toes or where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of a dead body, and it is in many painful conditions.
and when one extracts it forcibly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in the depths of the body, but beneath the skin;
and it must be well-examined from all parts, and does not go either forward or backward, neither beneath nor above, and the one who is in joints does not want to be touched by iron: perhaps it will contract by chance;
and he who is at the head or forehead, makes the skin on the spatula-like. If the abscesses are small, if you hold them with tongs, and cut at their root;
and if they are large, if you suspend them from the anvil, and scrape, then cut to the bone and assemble the wound at the suture, and cure until it is healthy.
of large bulging swellings It never happens in the stomach and not in any other part of the body, and it is an illness which is called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots, and large nodes; and there are small and very large ones.
And I saw a man who had a wound in his belly that was more like a fungus than anything else, and there was no difference, and it was white, and it had little roots, and it was already split, and it corroded immediately with moisture.
I touched them and found in one 18 ounces heavy, and in the other 6, and the work of the incision is such that you consider if the patient's humors are moist, and the color of the articulation is pale and moist with subtle roots;
if you touch the spatula largely, and they are in your presence with the fire cautery. For when cutting often comes too great a flow of blood, and if you do not take heed, then hasten to give a cautery.
and if you see the patient is frightened and fearful of the incision with the iron, take a well-made thread of flax, and tie the articulation as we have said, and leave it 8 days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease from restraining the flow of phlegm as long as it reaches the joint, and heal by working through it; and if the roots are thick, fear not to cut into the belly, but you can well cut into the middle,
Then cauterize so it does not relapse; then heal the wound, and beware not to touch the tissue that is of faulty colour and of poor sensation and of weak regard.
For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted sores later on.
when the swelling is full
The appearance of the swelling comes from cautery of a wound or a fracture of the syphac, and it is on the belly and in some of the swellings, as it has in other ruptures, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windiness;
and it is by the rupture of the skin and by the exit of the boil, if it is the color of the abscess similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various exits. And if it is by the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses with their fingers if it swells up, and then returns, and sometimes it is narrow, and increases much at the entry of the bath and through strong effort.
And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, it does not constrain at all; and if it is by blood, it opens through these signs the large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity.
and if it is by windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the operations are that you examine whether the appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. If it is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in this chapter about abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold their belly, and be stretched out straight, then sign from the bottom around the bowel. then instruct them to place it gently between your hands, then go around the place that you have signed to the entire spatium (spatium likely means a medical term for a specific area or region of the body). Then the majority of the abscess is above all the great uncle.
then open the majority of the abscess extended on the limb, and you should indicate with your finger, and examine the intestine. if you find the true cause of the limb, then dislocate it, and examine the intestine at the bottom of the belly.
and if you find the boil, take it at the outset, and cut off the excess flesh;
and if the artery is damaged, or the vein, so you will be somewhat inward, then return to your work and take nine needles, and thread nine strong threads, and thread the nine needles inward so that you have made a crossing that you make pierce;
then drain the abscess in three vessels on the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the limb putrefy as long as it can, and separate the dead flesh by itself; where you cut when it is subtly and putrefied, then heal what needs to be covered, and shave the abscess as we have said;
where you cut when it is subtly and putrefied, then heal what needs to be covered, and shave the abscess as we have said; and remove the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the limb of what it covers, and sew up the limb.
two ulcers
We have spoken in the division of similar ulcers, and how one should operate with medicines, and how one should avoid the cure with iron; and we say that an ulcer is in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when an ulcer is in the limb or where it can be reached if it is like an ulcer which is in the muscles, and in the skin, and in similar places, and one should remove everything when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it does not matter that you approach it, for I cannot heal any of them; nor did anyone ever heal them before me.
And the operations, when it is in the limb or where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile several times; then make them healthier if they show manifest repletion, then make the patient healthy before doing the operation; then cut off your ulcers or cancers, and shave all parts, and scrape all parts without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, and carefully feel the limb with your hand or with something else, and see that the remaining blood does not contradict the incision of the artery or vein, so cauterize until the blood is stanched; then cure with another cure until it is healthy.
of dropsy We have already said in the division about the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is done with medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is excluded altogether; and one should not touch iron for these similar cases: it is to know, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this case of dropsy called "excluded" from medicines, and the cure does not benefit, if you see the patient is weak, or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as a tumor and solution of wind and similar things; if you do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient is very virtuous, and they have no other illness but dropsy alone, and it is not too young nor too old, then you should operate thus. Raise the patient's right hand above your hands, and the ministers press the belly at the lowest part of the thigh, then take the spatula-like instrument according to this form: And be cutting from these .ij. parts in a point, and do not make it so enterprising that it cannot come near the intestine when you fix it in, and do not let it become blocked.
Then look if the dropsy is going towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you make a division above the bowel .iij. right below the navel; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then make the division on the left side of the bowel .iij.; and if it's due to the spleen, then make it on the right, and do not make it so that the patient's juices flow into the weak spot, lest the superfluities run to that feeble place.
Here is the translation:
at the top is the almond, if it happens when the strument comes to the water, if it sinks now on the instrument; remove at that time half or a third part, for if you remove more than it doesn't fit in that hour, perhaps the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit of the arm, or he falls into a swoon, or he approaches death.
but remove according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses; then touch the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now by the cord that stops up the passage which is on the syphac, as I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then reintroduce the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and remove a small quantity of water.
do this on no day, and guard yourself from flooding until there remains only a little water. And if you doubt the patient, and you leave much water, if the treatment of the sepulcher or hot bath is suitable, and by very gentle sweating or bathing in the sun, and if you abstain from drinking; and the treatment with desiccative medicines as long as he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
of the stopping of the flow Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
And the manner of the surgery is that the patient lies supine on their back, with the head of the rod and the handle thus like the size of a pen, so that the perforated skin cuts in the middle, as it is necessary; and beware of the flow of blood which comes often, and if it happens, stop the bleeding of that which bleeds, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
the pimples on the rod Many times cysts come on the rod, and it is a sign of bad blood; and in them there are malignant and non-malignant ones; if it is necessary that you take them with a subtle finger, and scrape all around, then put on cotton cloth in Egyptian ointment; then cure with ointment diafinicon until it is healthy. And if the cyst is malignant, of bad color and festering, it is necessary that you apply cautery. When you have scraped it, and the cyst is on the rod, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the cyst that is inside first; and when it is soured, then cure the outside. For when you cure them together, it is not assuredly the place of the rod that it will not be perceived, and blackness and corruption come in its place on the rod and in the groin; it is necessary to remove all that which is black and corrupt, then apply a poultice made of honey and flour that is made from crushed pomgranates and vetches, then cure with other cures until it is healthy.
And if the flow of blood comes, then prepare the lunar cautery in this form: The cauteries aid in nine dispositions together: it is to know, at the flow of blood and at the corruption; and if the head of the rod is corrupted and withdrawn, then you must put or conduct a pipe of lead into the rod, and urinate on the patient; and when the skin is burned at the head of the rod which has happened to those who have not been circumcised, either by wound or by abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape with an instrument with a curved end, so that the threads are loosened, and the head of the rod is freed from all parts.
And if it is a grievous thing to devise this, then you must scrape with a spatula at the top of the rod and of the skin; then separate gently between nine, and I put a subtle drizzle of millet oil in a cold water, so that it does not burn again.
of circumcision
Here is the translation:
I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experimentation.
For I have seen the greatest part of my masters and surgeons who performed circumcision in the following manner: with forces, and all at once; if the skin was too delicate, for it had .ij. layers, and by chance if one cut on that which is above and delays that which is below.
Now the wound closes over, and the pain is double, and in the mundification which is done from above it is not assured of the point of the member; and in the mundification of the ankle by chance the iron escapes, and corrupts the vein, and many times thus they do not need mundification and I have seen it.
From the mundification which is done with forces all along the thread of wire I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut exactly as well above as below.
Here is the translation: Then put the fire cautery in your hands straight away, and hold the forces between your hands or below your feet so the infants do not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or whisper, and lift it up high so that the head of the rod is inside; then anoint well with the mixture that is assembled, then tie the rod with a double thread, then tie it below another link; and you hold it thus by the second ligature at the pouch and at the index finger, and gather between the links, then lift the whisper above hastily and pull the head of the rod.
Then put the fire cautery in your hands straight away, and hold the forces between your hands or below your feet so the infants do not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or whisper, and lift it up high so that the head of the rod is inside; then anoint well with the mixture that is assembled, then tie the rod with a double thread, then tie it below another link; and you hold it thus by the second ligature at the pouch and at the index finger, and gather between the links, then lift the whisper above hastily and pull the head of the rod. Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the mothers; and put powder on and on the powder a drapil glueit of a mixture of egg yolk cooked in rose water, confectioned with rose oil good and fresh, and leave it on until another day, and cure another wound as long as it becomes healthy.
The shape of the forces for the mundification is this: the two heads should be twisted and should be trenching, and the heads should be as large as the equally balanced handle.
Here is the translation:
And if they surpass three days, and that which is beneath the rod is swollen, let it be so long as the apostemes wounds are appeased, and lightly scrape off; if you touch thus as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, it will not harm him.
Heal then the place of sudden wounds with powder, which we have said or treatise on powders, and if you touch with a golden needle beyond measure, and it goes to the surface, it will not harm; heal then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
due to retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to obstruction of the stone, or congealed blood, or bowel, or hernia, or similar things, which we have said in the division.
and if the urine does not flow, and you see that it is retained by the stone which is in the bladder or near the kidneys, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over his knees; and let him put his feet on his back, and stretch out his belly from the upper part of his back, and let the patient strain himself as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted by the pressure of the stone above, because the urine does not flow;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer an extraction with all the instruments called "syringe", of which this is the form: and let it be a subtle silver needle like the quill of a bird; and let its cane be a palm long and a half, and let it be subtle at the head.
And the method of urination is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head of the lancet or cotton, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe; and stop up the superfluous part of the lancet and tie it just at the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and olive oil, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the verge with moist oil and olive oil and water tepid.
then gently insert the syringe into the verge, until it reaches the root of the verge, then bend the verge downwards towards the bowl; then insert the syringe just before the bladder, and let the patient feel it coming to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless the conductor or it goes awry; then pull the thread little by little along the lancet, and the urine follows the lancet, then stop it firmly, and make the urine flow.
and recommend the syringe until the bladder is empty, and alleviate the patient.
of bladder diseases
When blood or pus comes into the bladder, where putrefaction is assembled, and you see distillations of bitter and medicines, if you make all the instrument called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
It is closed, and if it has two holes: one on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the tubes are arranged so that the medicine flows well into the penis without obstruction, so that one can then draw out the moisture, and empty when necessary.
and when you see the medicines in the bladder, put the head of the cautery in the moisture, and draw out the drawing which is inside; if you draw the moisture to the cautery, and then strongly reinsert it inside; if the moistures enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and it is the form of the subtle syringe with which one injects into the bladder: if it is so:
And it is of silver or copper, and the head is higher; and below it has a .i. vein or the ligaments of the seat; then take a bladder of a sheep and put the moisture that you saw inject into the bladder, then tie it between the .ij. breasts in the form of a double twisted thread, and heat that moisture on the fire; then put the head of the syringe in the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder to inject all the moisture at once, until the patient feels that the moisture has just arrived in the bladder;
and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a .i. circle, and pierce it roundly all around; then put a strong thread through these holes, and assemble the circle as one assembles a .i. thong, and put inside what you saw of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already said in the division the ways of stones, and their extraction with medicines; and I have told the difference between stones in the kidneys as they fall, and all the signs, and in which stone one must operate with a cut; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is in the bladder often falls in children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder with subtle signs; and it appears suddenly, and greatly troubles the patient's penis, and they urinate frequently, and then become constipated; and most of these symptoms are the foundations; and it's easy to cure children until they are three years old, and it's very difficult in old people, and it's as if it's a middle age, for those who are between youth and old age; and it's easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to clean the patient with a clyster, to remove all the filth that is in the intestines. For it often hinders the removal of the stone.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch out his right hand above the loins, and with his left hand to clear the skin which is under the loins in the area where one makes the incision; then he puts on the spatula-like instrument, so that it is the form:
And make an incision between what is between the loins and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left kidney; and let it be straight on the stone, and the two should be thus or in the fundament, and let the cut be so that it is wide enough to pass through, and within it is narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
Perhaps the pressure if the two that are in the fundament, so that it feels no labor; and know that there is a part of stone where it has angles, and margins: if it is difficult to extract; and if there is a part that is underneath, similar to a mirror, and rounded, whose issue is light.
At that point where it has angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it doesn't feel, then it is necessary to extract on the tenailles which are like a lime at the head, in order to extract the stone so that it doesn't escape; or you put underneath the subtle curved instrument at the head; and if you cannot engineer it thus, then enlarge a little the perforated tube, and if the sense is not deceived, then extract with vitriol.
and if it has more than one stone, first remove the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut into it, and then pull hard, and the small ones afterwards if there are many. And if it is very large, you must be careful, and make a bigger wound. For these things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes back through him because his kidneys cannot filter; but in any case, strive to remove it, or to break up the attachments, as much as you can pull it out piece by piece;
and when you have completed your work, apply the plaster of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then reset the patient on their bed, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen it, rub in very well the oil and water, then apply the ointment of galenon and ointment of basilicon, until it is healthy.
And if the abscesses come to the wound and ulcers, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and thus retain the urine, which is known in such a way that without it going out with the urine: then put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and putrefy.
Then lift the wound of water and of oil and of serum, and aid him in all the ways that you can, so long as he is healthy; and it is necessary that all the openings that you cure, that you bind the joints, and gather the medicines on the spot.
And if the stone is small, and it is conducted by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot issue; so cure what I say thus, that you cut many times, it is excused from the cutting per this cure. I have already proven it thus.
Take a forest of iron according to this form and be at two angled points fixed in the thigh:
Then take the thread and wind it around the rod beneath the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then put the iron in the rod gently, so long as it comes to the stone; and turn the iron with your hand in the stone little by little, so that you can pierce the stone from another part; if it will soon come out, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is within the rod. If it is soon broken, and jumps forth with the urine, and the patient is cured.
and if you cannot do this for any reason that is deficient, then apply the file under the stone and another on top, then make a stick in the place of the stone between the two ligaments, then extract the stuck finger, and release the ligament, and clean the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure until it is healthy.
of the stone of women
Because the stone is often found in women, and if it happens at any time, then the treatment is grievous, and is defended by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows herself well, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who knows herself well in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more embedded than the stone of the man, because it conceals itself deeper, and there is great fear about it.
And if you need to ascend to this, it is necessary that you take a wise woman knowing well, and grasp the true vein on, and if you do not find it, then ask for a subtle cast; and present a well-balanced beam in the life of women, where a woman who knows part of the art commands that she do what you command her to do from the inquiry of the stone;
and observe very well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to press her finger or foundation and search for the stone; and if she finds it, she should constrain beneath her finger, and recommend that she presses her finger or with the patient, and squeezes and presses her left hand firmly on the bladder.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it slowly from the entrance of the bladder down to beneath, until she reaches the root of the thigh; then feel upon the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft and round con, where it has moved away, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above the stone or beneath, and let the cutting be first small.
then put the razor in the cutting, if you feel the stone so that it increases the wound as much as the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: it is to be known, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have ridges. know the similarities to recognize the issue.
And if the stone does not come out, then put on the vitriol broiet, and hold it for an hour so that the stone is stained; then return to your work, until the stone comes out, and use the instruments that I have told you about in the extraction of the stone as remedies to help you in your work.
and if he lacks sense, it is of the artery that is cut, so put powder on the wound and hold with tents and bandages, and do not start again, and leave the stone alone, do not touch it, lest the patient may die by misfortune; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the veins are purified, so return to your work, until the stone is loosened.
of flesh hernia
The watery humor is nothing other than a mixture of moisture or white syrup, which is beneath the skin of the hips, containing the egg-white; and it is called "syrup", and sometimes it is properly in the web of the egg-white, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the hip between the white syrup that we have said; and this does not happen rarely.
And the generation of this remedy is from weakness that comes to the joints, and it spreads out that matter.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: whether it's a declining color to yellow, or without red, or black, or watery pale, and that happens more.
and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is or white syfac as we have said, so are the red abscesses, i.e. a short distance thus like the figure of an egg, and does not open into the joints, for it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in its own web, so are the red abscesses with a part of the egg, and therefore one thinks that it's another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the hips and the white membrane, it feels very well; then when you want to know the color of the moisture, you examine all the internal parts carefully, because its shape is here in front. According to what comes after the internal parts, judge from what is inside.
According to what comes after the internal parts, judge from what is inside. And when we cure by iron, it is necessary that the patient be strengthened according to their power and the replenishment of their body; then let them sit on a high-backed chair, or on something a little elevated, and put many layers of fabric under them.
then sit on the left side, and instruct the minister to sit on the right side, and extend the rod to one of the ribs near the hip joint.
Then take the spatula-like instrument, and cut the skin of the joints within the length just to the white spot, making your incision entirely straight while cutting the skin of the joints up to the white spot, and subtly scrape off according to what you can do.
Then pierce the white spot with a large perforator, and extract all the water, and then put your fingers, and the white spot is above; and do not touch the joint's core, but let the white spot suffice; cut everything or in small pieces subtly the costal part of it, so that if you do not cut it wisely, the water will return.
and if the vein is ready to be opened, then reset it in its place when you have completed the opening of the white spot; then assemble the leaves of the joint's core into a bandage, and treat it like other wounds, until it is healthy.
And if you find the vein corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to ligate the vessels that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood; then cut the joint at all the suspensions, and extract the vein, and treat it as we have said.
And if it is assembled in two parties together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part just as you did the first alignment, then suck out the blood, and put on the wounded place a soft ointment made with rose oil.
and put on another soft ointment made with wine and oil, and put on the two cushions, and put double wrappings above, and bind it all together with a lien that is according to this form.
Then take two wrappings, and fill them with linen padding according to this resemblance and assemble them by sewing in the gullet of the arms, and one of the heads takes hold at the base just up to the back, and another at the part of the finger; and another two heads on the two angles, and let all be assembled into a restraint in the loop of the arm.
and at no time is the medicine of this cautery branch made in the iron fire, and it is that you take a subtle cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the cushions, and be careful as we have said, so that the white syrup that contains the aqua is uncovered.
If you take the cautery in this form, and pierce the skin with an eleven-pointed instrument, and scrape it with this subtle hot cautery.
And take the scalp in all the ways that you can, so that you remove everything; and beware that the fires do not touch the egg whites; and know that this work is more salutary; and avoid the detriment of blood, and warn against the operations of cutting.
and if nothing makes you do the opposite, or abscesses burst or bloodshed or something else, if you heal what makes you do the opposite, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this operation because of its horribleness, then make a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that the aqueous humor is there.
Here is the translation:
then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let it dry for a while to correct the remainder of the water, then heal the wound until it is healthy;
and if the white fabric does not allow the water to issue from the mouth of the wound, it is necessary that you apply a tube or instrument through which one draws out the water of hydropics, whose shape is thus before; and enlarges the wound, and knows that the water returns, and is assembled after 22 months or within, and when it is assembled as before, and then the patient will pass their days.
of the abscess of the groin
Know that in the treatment of this arm, there are more fearful dispositions, because it seems to me that many are worth leaving;
and I will tell you about the work and the similarities of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come from corruption, and similarly from wounds; and it is in most cases.
It is to know by excessive inflammation and fever, which is spread through wounds, or from percussion;
and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the corpse; and there is no feeling of pain, and it is a grievous abscess.
and by chance there are rough abscesses, painful and piercing, of a livid color, and sometimes they come from an artery, or from inflating a vein.
When it is from an artery, it is recognized by the disposition of a hot abscess, when you press on it with your fingers. and it does not seem to you that you touched it.
That which is made from inflating a vein is recognized by its disposition and the expression of painful touching with the fingers.
and one can well do the cutting on this similarity, and on the other scars; and it is that you cut the skin of the joints, then place the egg white above, and remove the fatty layer from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already mixed with these new scars, then it is necessary that you remove the egg, and cut it.
and if it is stuck to the fatty layer, or in that which is inside the veins, then it is necessary that you remove all that tension, and cut it roundly.
And if the birth of the flesh is where the skin is at the back, then it is necessary that you cut all of it, and extract the humor, as we have said.
And when the operations are accomplished, then apply the plaster of lime and rose oil and wine, then treat with other treatments until he is healthy.
of the abscesses of the loins
These are abscesses enveloped in an envelope-like swelling resembling a .i. boil, with the softening of the loins, and the patient's grief increases greatly when he sees;
and the treatment of this illness is well near also as fearful as this one before,
and in every way we will describe their work to you, according to what the ancient ones did.
It is necessary that you seat the patient on a high stool, then apply the suspensor to the joints below the two hips, to all the vessels which are near the penis, and the masters tie them, and they stretch out forcefully;
then cut into the spatula-like instrument, cutting widely through to the place of the vessels, until they are uncovered,
and then scrape off each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
then fix a needle where it has a double thread, and tie it to the first vein where the blood flow came, and tie it again to the other vein; Then they should cut open in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupting moisture.
then heal the wound as with others or by applying a poultice, so that no vessel bursts, nourishing one of the limbs.
for by this means no harm comes, and if all the vessels come together, it is necessary to treat the limbs through all the vessels. so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
of the treatment of this face The symptoms of this rupture are by the section that comes from the face, or the extension on the belly in the part of the angles, because the intestines descend from that route to one of the flanks;
and this route is from the face, or from the extension of it, and these two manners of many causes come: either from percussion, or from a fall, or from a blow, or from the lifting of a fixed weight, and similar things;
and the signs when it is from the extension of the face, are that it comes slowly and gradually, in a long tension, and does not come suddenly; and it is the abscesses equal up to the peritoneum, because the pus presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is a section of pus, which brings about sudden severe pain at its onset, and it is the diverse appearances of abscesses beneath the skin, close by, and it is due to the issue of the intestine and the body being worn out by the pus.
And sometimes it settles beneath the ribs with the intestine, and is retained there, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these treatments with iron to fear, because they think it will scare them away.
And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to reintegrate their intestine with their hand inside the wound, if they can re-enter. then be supported on his neck, between your hands, and lift the hips.
then stretch out the heart upwards, and cut all the skin of the joints from top to bottom. then thrust inside the ribs of the loins, according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that your eyes can issue forth.
Then scrape the dead skin that is under the skin of the joints, so that the white skin underneath becomes uncovered on all sides;
then put your index finger into the one that guides the joint, in the one that is between the white skin underneath which is under the skin of the vein, and between the second skin,
and separate what is behind the vein, and between the second skin; and then move the vein to the right hand within the circle of the joints, and hold the white skin high with your left hand, and lift the vein above all the skin towards the waist; and instruct the assistant to stretch the vein high up, and release what is stuck behind the ligament;
and if you find that there is a point of the intestine enveloped or white and hard, and if you do not find anything, then it bursts in the belly below;
then take a needle or one with a large thread made of ten threads, and sew up the back part of the hard intestine, which is behind the skin of the intestines; after the waist, then cut the heads that appear as threads, until there are three threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the hard intestine, which we have said is behind the skin of the intestines, with a strong thread of two parts; then envelop the heads of the threads, and tie them firmly with two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter there, lest an abscess forms and does not heal; and set the ligature according to the first long ligature, which is two inches from that one, and after these two ligatures let the swelling that is beneath the heart of the joints be great because of a finger.
and after all the other according to the roundness that the oil bears; then cut into the part that is beneath the skin of the joints, until the sense returns, and the swelling, as we have said before.
then soften the milling in oil, and put it in places, and I soften the ligature that we have said. And at no time is the cautery of the swelling veins, as we have said, after the incision, due to doubt about the removal of blood.
For it happens often, and let the lien grow as long as it pleases him; and if it delays in healing, so be aroused by warm water, and put on what we have said, until it heals.
then heal the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
of a fleshy hernia
In this case I never saw anyone who could make the cure with iron.
And the old ones said it is done like the one who takes the gaze in a manner that you take the vessels, after cutting slightly beneath the knee.
then cope with it, and treat the abscess of those who have it, until the vessels heal; and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
No time is spent on breaking into the angles, as we have said, and open the loins; and do not touch any of the intestines with your fingers, and if you touch them, it's a little thing, and repair everything hourly.
and always if it stays too long in this spot, the wound or syrupy matter will grow, until the intestines are touched.
and it happens through the extension of the swollen vein which is like a grape, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then softened and loosens the veins and opens them.
and the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before; and no time is it cured by iron in this manner:
and it is that the patient places his hand on his back between your hands, then feels the vein of the swollen artery according to the quantity of two fingers;
and then extract the vein which is beneath the skin that is swollen, then take the instrument and place it on the apparent vein of the swollen artery;
and press on the fontanelle of the belly, then cut the .ij. apparent abscesses on the chief of the vein, and cut one and the other;
then extract the chief of the vein, and do not touch any abscess that does not extend to another thing, just as I have made you aware in the treatment of the rupture of the intestines;
then heal by healing the wounds. And when you touch the threads, if it is putrefied and heal the wound, so that it becomes healthy.
The abscess is constricted, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cauterizations are moved in this place, and closer to health.
from the softening of the skin of the groin
Many times the skin of the groin is softened in some men, because the flesh that is within is mollified, and it is a pleasure to see; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure, to make the patient sit on his back, and cover the softened skin with natural skin; then assemble the .ij. lips to a suture, and if you see, cut first the superfluous soft skin at .iij. sutures or .iiij. firmly; then cover between the sutures, and cure it like other wounds, until it is healthy, and sews the thread.
of punishment
I know that punishments are commanded in our law, and for this reason I would have preferred not to speak of it in this book; and it is not necessary to do so except in .ij. ways: one is that the mirrors respond when asked about it, and cure accordingly; and the other, because we often need help from punishment of certain beasts to aid us, such as goats and sheep and chattering and other beasts. I say then that punishments are made in .ij. ways: either by attraction or by cutting. In the one we make by attraction, we seat the beast in hot water, until the groin is softened and pendant; then take it with your hand, until it is reset and you no longer feel it. Of the punishment of size: it is necessary that you hold the beast, and press the skin of the groin with your left hand, then suspend it, and cover each hole with a .i. plug, when you have well cleansed them; and leave none of the subtle flesh and the subtle fat which is above the vessels; and this method of punishment is more moderate than that made by attraction, because in attraction something of the groin may remain, for which reason the beast desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healthy.
and the hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are in two manners as follows: one is that between the thighs appears as if it were a figure of a woman's nature, where there is hair, and sometimes it obstructs the urine.  And the other manner is in women, and has on the tailbone as if a rod and two thighs.  And the cure for men and women is to cauterize all the affected flesh, and to treat them as other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine jumps back through the skin of the thighs, there is no cure.
of the tents of the genitals
Tents of the genitals are a flesh affected on the natural part, so much that it is too shameful to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that is the cure. It is necessary that you remove the superfluity of the tents of the genitals with your hand or with onions, and cauterize lightly; and do not go too deeply in fear of causing blood to come out, then the cure will be another cure until it is healthy; and there is another flesh that grows at the mouth of the anus, and swells, and by chance jumps forth, and is similar to a cow's disease, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow's disease". It is necessary that you cauterize it, as we have said about the tents of the genitals, and the cure until it is healthy.
of erratic
Here is the translation:
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are overgrowths of veins that occur without usual custom, and when hemorrhoids become old they turn into ulcers; and we have already said in the division the similarities with those, and the signs, and I will say here which ones receive curation. I say that hemorrhoids and ulcers, when they are deeply rooted in the marrow, and do not appear to the sense, if it is not the cure by iron. Those that are at the mouth of the marrow, one can feel, are those that can be cured. It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, then remove the ulcers as fastenings, and cut out their roots, then sprinkle on medications that restrain blood, such as dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then soak her feet in cold water for an hour, then seat her in a cold bath; and if blood comes out, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gallic wine, and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and apply the plaster to her back. And if it is effective, that's good. If not, then apply poultices to the back and arm, without touching the iron; then take lard, and mix it with plantain juice or aglentier wine, and apply it to the spot.  And when the abscess subsides, then cure the affected area thoroughly until it is healthy; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough scalp, so one must cover it as I have said about the ulcer; and then cure it thoroughly until it is healthy.
of abscesses of the marrow
Here is the translation:
of the birth
It is necessary to first understand the birth naturally, and the signs are when you see the woman lower down, and desire to smell the air: then hasten the children to issue forth; then know that this childbearing is according to natural figure, and it is the issue under its chief, and the second with him; and when you see these signs, then press gently on her belly, so that the child issues forth; for when it descends onto its head, then is the second with him, and is cleared of its superfluous parts by good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For it sometimes comes onto its feet, and comes onto the body or the shoulders, and the hands, or it comes onto its belly, or above, and is converted by a venture on its neck, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary at birth that she be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as one ought to aid him.
If the child comes onto its head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the virtues of it are weak, then make her sit on a chair, or where the women hold her; and let her nature be of oil or fenugreek which is cooked, and then put the baby between her two little spatulas, which is its form: and bind the second one, and hold its little finger as much as the moisture which is in correspondence with the fetus; and press on the woman's belly so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then inject the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and oil of sesament; then make her take a drink and eat some condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: thus now the child is born. And if the hands do not come out, then you must gently rock them back and forth; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a siege, and raise her feet high; then remove the siege from the ground, and hold onto the woman so that she does not fall at the removal; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then hold the hands to the cot which is placed before, and extract the child, and rock gently.
from the birth of the child on its feet When the infant comes onto its feet, if it is necessary to push upwards; and then turn it little by little, until it is even;
then take hold of the feet and extend them little by little.
When it jumps just above the elbows, if you command to grasp, and make them steady with condition. if it jumps far, then God wishes.
And if it does not jump far as we have said, then turn it a little and a little, until it is according to the natural shape. For then it will be lighter.
And if it does not come out as we have said, take a poultice of altaea, and oil of sesamum, and melted gum, and crush everything in the mortar. and apply it to the nature of the woman within and expel this sign, then make her sit in warm water up to the waist, below the ribs;
and when she is moistened below, make her a girdle of myrrh, and apply it below, and leave it for an hour; Then make him sit on a stool, then make him stretch out and hold his mouth and nose, and take the belly lightly, for the infant now jumps. from the escape of the child onto his knees When the infant comes in this form, if he puts his hands on his belly little by little;
of the issue of the child who comes with a wide hand during It is necessary to reposition the hand: if one cannot reposition it, then make the woman rise and go;
if she cannot walk, then make her sit on a bed, and flex her legs forcefully;
then anoint the muscle that I have touched;
and if it does not putrefy, make it sit on a seat, then study to reinsert the hand; and turn the child according to the natural figure, and make it stretch out, and instruct that it take hold as much as the veins issue forth.
from the issue of the child on its neck, and it has spread out its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back I think that you should hold its hand, then turn it little by little, and lift it lightly;
and when it is even, then apply the natural muscle tone of the high and low, as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little;
and when you will have done this, then make it sit on the seat, and instruct it to take hold; and make it steady. in this same manner for the entire second one
in this same manner for the entire second one When it comes to be in this manner for the entire second one, then cup the second one at your finger, so that the moisture is evacuated;
and he applies it to his face and neck, if the covering of the swelling, so that it is not retained, and kills the inflammation;
then put the child inside, as long as you have placed it so that it is fitting, and instruct the woman that she should not take it out at any time:
from the issue of twins Here is the translation: They are strange things, and do not live much, if you can name them.
I know that, they should be multiplied, and are separated by the siphac which divides them, which is tied to the bundle.
and never do they issue naturally like all those below, as we have said.
And if they issue grievously, then the treatment is as we have said, and let the subtle balm be applied, and make it all lighter and easier as it does. and do thus as he values his health. of many children
of many children No times are formed in the marrow, i.e. or ii or iii or iv or v or vi or vii, or more just up to xv, and all are fully formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the glorious wisdom,
and it is fitting that the wise one knows all this, for by chance similar things have happened to him; if you do according to what is suitable.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman whose child has died in the womb, as I said in the division, and it does not come to fruition, and you are constrained by manual operation. it is suitable that you know if the woman is of healthy virtue, and has not had an accident or fear of death.
it is necessary for the woman to be bent over her back, and her arms bent downwards, and her legs lifted;
and the midwife holds the thigh in two places, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not thrown back during the delivery of the child;
then anoint the mouth of the womb with moist oils of aloe and of fenugreek and flaxseed, then oil the bath with these oils and these anointments; then place them in the womb lightly, then want the ligaments to be bound to that one, or she places the bonds that are suitable for it;
and take care that the infants' fontanelle is exposed so it descends upon its head; if you touch the onions in his eyes or on his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the throat or near the ribs,
and if the dislocations are on his feet, touch them or prick them and press the moist spots;
and it is necessary to hold the onion in his right hand, and place the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and bend all his hand lightly, and touch the onion in none of those places that we have mentioned, until it comes to the empty thing;
then prick against another onion, or the third where you are in this profession, so that the extractions should be equal;
and then they are equally stretched by moving one way and another, to make them issue, and the onions should be held in place, so that it is their form:
And if one part remains, then anoint the boil with some of its own oil, and apply it to that part, and treat the other part;
and if it remains stuck, set this anvil or higher up, and do so until it comes loose completely.
And if one hand is in front of the other, and he cannot bring it back due to stiffness. then you must wrap it in a bandage, until it is completely healed.
then put the cupping on the joint of the sole or at the ankle, and thus you must do the same with the other hand, and in this way.
And if the head of the child is large and it is twisted at the issue, or it has an assembled sharp chief, it is necessary that you place the spine-like spatula between your two, and make the head straight and extract the sharpness; where you round it at the instrument which is called "almidach", because the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and thus in the same way, the infants have a large natural head; and then treat the bones at the attachments,
and if the head bursts forth and it is held back by the vein, so be careful, as long as the moisture that is or issues from there;
and if it cannot issue, then cut into pieces at the muscle where you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce as long as the moisture flows.
And if the infant is on its feet, it is light attraction, and the adjustments at the mouth of the marrow are lighter.
And if it is twisted in the belly or in the breast, it is necessary that you stretch it to a drapery enveloping it in the hand; and touch the belly or the breast, as much as the moisture that is there runs;
and if the other limbs are oiled, and the head remains, If he puts his hand in front of the marrow, and draws it just to the mouth of the marrow; then he puts on a bandage or two, and draws it tight;
and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come there, you must not disturb it; then you must apply moist and greasy things; and he anoints implanted splints, and applies gentle softening and soothing treatments.
And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, then anoint what we have said in the living infant;
and so that one cannot have power, if one treats the fever by division, and does not leave anything of the secondary treatment.
And when you have done this, then anoint what we have said in the abscesses that come from the marrow.
and if blood flows out, it must be stopped with a tight bandage, and other cures should be applied afterwards.
And I saw a woman in whose belly an infant had been dead, then she conceived another on top of that, and rejected the other dead one. After a long time, a swelling came to his abdomen, and it inflamed so much that it opened, and began to discharge greatly.
I was called to the case, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.
I put on a strong plaster, and it drew out a bone, and after some days another. I marvelled greatly, because this belly has no bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I touched the wound, and drew out many bones, until the woman was in better condition; and let the woman apply a long time thus, and so applies a little of the bow of the back;
and I did not record this chapter further because, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put it in aid.
to bring the hammer back to its place
Hereafter comes the form of the pressor, where one weighs the books; and at 10 turns as 10 heads of the ligaments. In every way, the tips should be more subtle of the restrainer, and should be made of ebony or boxwood.
and let the mouth of the instrument be of a foot in length, and the margin of the trees should be, and one palm and a half; and in the midst of them, the ligaments should be adjusted to this same instrument, which are fastened at one end and the other, half a palm in length or a little more;
and this adjustment is inserted into the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the corners.
Another form, made to resemble it more subtly and lightly, should be made from ebony wood or boxwood, according to the resemblance of the tongs. and it should have two arms, if you see, a palm long and two fingers wide;
and when you see open the marrow to all the instrument, if it makes sit the woman on her bed, with her feet pendant and her legs covered; then put the two arms together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument down between her thighs; then you should apply your hand to the entire instrument, just as you have done with the equal tendons, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the marrow, until the bail makes it do what it wants.
These instruments are all elevated above, and are multiplied in their similarities; and when the mirrors have them aligned, so much the more hasty is the work, and higher are the homes according to their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument that you have not aligned, for its necessities are not excusable.
When the second (nail) is retained in the infant's (body), then you must command the patient to retain their wing, and then make it sternly conditioned, and hold your hands at the mouth and nostrils. and let it jump through the whiteness, it is good.
If the whiteness does not, then take the pot, and make perforations or a cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, as it calms, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury;
all these herbs, or some of them, be cooked or put in water over the fire; then place a cane or perforations of the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marrow,
and let it simmer until the vapors come out of the marrow; then make it steam, as we have said. If the second inflammation hurries. And if it remains after this treatment, and is not fever, thus instruct the patient to anoint their left hand in oil of sesame or in a poultice of alta, and then put it in the bath.
and seek the second one; and when it has been found, then take it and stretch it little by little, straightening it so that the marrow does not slip out at the extraction. but you must move it gently to the right and to the left, and then pull; if it comes out and separates.
And if the mouth of the marrow is constricted, we have said the treatment of sternuation, and of fumigation with herbs;
and it does not consist of all that which we have said, if you beware that you do not fall into the trap;
but it happens that what is at the mouth of the marrow, you apply it to the hip of the woman, then you treat it with the four-drug ointment;
if you will purge and reset, and it will come forth; but however, when it purges thus, a bad smell comes from the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Here is the translation:
The shape of the instrument is thus, where one fumes the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the second one, this is it.
And it is to be seen similar to a cane, and one puts the subtle head in nature, and the large heads above the fire.
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the tinge as long as it is roasted, and recommend another one.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who do not have their foundation perceived, thus it is stifled by subtle syllables: it is necessary then to apply the ointment so that it perceives the subtle syllable with its finger, and does not perceive it at all from the spatula's agitation, and arrange the bandage so that it does not touch it;
then put on a clean linen cloth soaked in wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until it is healthy.
And if you doubt that it does not stiffen, then put or apply a plaster of lead, and leave it on for many days, and let it be removed when the infants want to go to their chambers.
And sometimes suddenly comes this swelling of wound or abscess; if it is necessary to cut into that sudden thing: if it is cured, as we have said about the treatment of a painful blow.
of the fistula from the bottom Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are nodulation, and those that come from beneath the foundation of the skin, or in the space of the two parties,
if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodulation is old, it works, and removes moisture or white or subtle matter,
and these fistulas are never persistent; and they are known by the fact that they arise or expulsion or flatulence when the patient makes an effort to expel, and sometimes by chance in a sudden movement.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the rod; and they reach just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the knee.
And thus one recognizes the fistula that penetrates to the foundation, and does not penetrate further. and it is that you apply your index finger to the foundation, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
And if there is tortuosity, then you insert a subtle probe of lead, or a horsehair, as long as you feel the probe or hair at your finger.
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come from the pertussive gesture or ventilation or ver, as we have said: know that she does not perceive at all; if you hasten to cure.
And when the fistula is next to the bladder or next to the urinary duct, if the urine jumps out, and cannot be cured by medicines.
If it is perceived next to the joint of the hip, then the tendon comes next to the limb; if there is no twistedness and the discovery of the pain inside, it is that he has already bowed, and there is no medicine that can be applied suddenly by touching;
and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure unless through labor, and vanity of foolish doctors who interfere with them.
In those that are not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced.
and it is that the patient places himself between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his hips, and hold his hips bent towards his belly. Then apply a gentle traction, or of pulling if there is twisting, until you know where the tendon goes.
If the patient feels it in the foundation, then you must apply your second finger index.
then sense that the tendon has been pierced; and whether it is discovered where you feel between your finger the sifac or the flesh, then know that it is perforated. if you do not work carefully, one cannot heal it.
One does not completely heal anyone, but it happens rarely;
and the help that one makes, if it is heating the subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it was said before; and the whole hot thing in the fistula, until it reaches the bottom; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these fallen characters should be raised, which resemble a bird's feather;
and then treat the many wounds with ointment in a burr, until those characters are firm, then treat the joints with an ointment that soothes and consolidates.
If he is thus healthy, it's good. If not, no other way can he be healthy;
and hold it between, and do not prick except to the finger that is at the bottom, and between your finger and the holding a thick covering of flesh or of skin, and you see the fistula at the one who teaches the covering of the finger; if you touch the beginning of the fistula, and apply beforehand to the holding, and then put the cautery afterwards, so that it reaches the head of the holding;
and the holding will be delivered, and it will fall apart; then I will show you those withered skin flakes that resemble a bird's feather, and none of them will remain.
And if you feel a vein, and cut between the finger and the nail, then cauterize with fire or medicinal water.
For the fire cauteries gather these things: it is to know, the burning of these joined fingers, and the staunching of blood and the drying of moisture.
then treat the swollen wounds with ointment or in powdered herbs, as long as the eyes gaze downward, and thus make the burned fingers be soothed in the ointment.
then treat the wound of the grafted fingers suddenly with dry herbs, and these are the dry medicines.
For when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not relapse again.
And if a fistula comes near the base of the foundation, and is separated from the body, then you should apply your finger to the base or foundation, and inquire about it.
If you feel the tension, and between two is the membrane or the sifac or cartilage, or it is near to piercing, if there are no fiercer ways than the way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
where you cauterize as we have said, or you cut near the base, or if you can put them in tension and cure as before.
and do not go too much in depth, that you do not disturb the tenure that holds the foundation, and come to the gestures by the voluntary sense. then the treatment, as we have said;
then the treatment, as we have said; by chance if it will be healthy, or you uncover that covering and the wound then that it is attached to the foundation, either by tension or by another appointed instrument; then define that faulty flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can;
Then study how to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part that is beneath the foundation: if it is less bothersome to the patient.
And often they are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is where it touches the foundation beneath the skin above. if you take a perforated tent at the head in this form: And I push the twisted thread into it, and push the tent onto all the threads in the fistula until it is at the head.
If it is stuck in the margin of the foundation within, then extract the thread of that which is pierced, so that you touch your finger or foundation;
and draw the head of the thread, and assemble the two joints together, and hold one to the other, and let it be a day or two;
and restrain it no more times, until the threads grasp those flesh that are between two, and heal;
then cure the wound so that it is sewn and healthy.
If the fistula does not pass through, then make it pass through in all ways that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
For it does not suit to make a copper setting for the fistula if it is too deeply embedded, and then the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
The shape of the spine-like spatula which one makes for the fistula is very sharp at one end and cutting. and not on the other side, because one should not cut what one should not touch, as you see here:
Bruises are in two manners: where they are deep in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they immediately cut off blood. and there is one or more, and they are deep in the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that are deep if they have little moisture,
and immediately cut off or a little citrine water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body.
and the treatment of those who have them deeply in the foundation, if it is that you instruct the patient to spread out on a bedchamber, so long as the foundations issue forth, and one perceives the threads; if you hasten, and you hold it as with pincers, or you hold it on your fingernail, then you cut it at its roots;
and if the uncle cannot hold them because of their moisture, if they take them in a piece of drapery, or a cushion, or a piece of chamelot cloth; and stretch them with your fingers, then cut them, and sprinkle above some warm powders that are in the vein of cauterization; where you cauterize as it is said or chapter of cautery, then you treat with other treatments until they are healthy;
and if the foundations cannot issue, then clisterize the patient with a sharp and bitter cluster to cleanse that which is in the foundation, so that they can issue openly;
when the patient cannot urinate, and if the vein is outside the foundation, then it is a light treatment; and it is that you take them with your finger or tongs, and grasp them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healthy, and they fear the incision by iron;
Here is the translation: and it should be thick; and hold the thread firmly, then touch the thread, and extract the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave them there to correct the excessive bleeding of blood.
then put on the dressing, a clean cloth soaked in rose oil or cerote, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient that they should rest.
and then leave it until it heals, and when they will be healed, if you treat with ointment and other treatments, until they are healthy.
to dry the wounds or foundation Many times there occurs a withering of intestines, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
It is necessary that you raise to the point of a spatula or on an angle the scorching above, which does not allow it to become damp. then heal it as long as it is swollen, just as it is necessary.
and if it cannot be healed, then recommence the rubbing more strongly than before, so that it hurts much, and is scarred. then heal until he is healthy.
give friction A formice is a small, false appearance in the body, and it goes very deep in to the font;
and sometimes it finds the false frost, and one feels it as if dead from friction, and it comes into all of the body, and more in the hands than any other part.
And the treatment is that you take a vein of a bird's wing, or a strong wing vein, and place it on the patient's forehead, so that the circles totally encircle the forehead. then turn your hand all around the vein so that you grasp it entirely around the forehead, and put it in the front, and scrape the forehead of its roots.
And if you see, make it in the form of a vein of copper or iron, and be subtle underneath and draw above.
do not pierce, for you must hold with your finger, and press; And if you see, cauterize the forehead, as it is before or in a chapter of cauterization.
of the form of a cluster Never does one make a cluster of silver or copper, or of molten tin or lead; and never does one make these small and large instruments, according to the ones that are needed.
Those therefore that one uses in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, are small.
The form of the cluster, small and large, is above large, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
and it has a separation where the intestines are tied, as you see, and the chest is perceived within; and it has on one of the sides .ij. perforated, and in the other .i.
and it be the belly or womb where one puts the medicines of a bladder of beast or of parchment, and it be pierced all around with small holes,
and have between each hole a space of two fingers, then insert into these holes a strong twisted thread or a cord made from a crossbow, and assemble the belly as if it were a bag; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front of a strong thread, then cleanse; and this is the form of a circle:
And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the wound with oil or albumen of egg, or similar thing, then insert it lightly;
then he prepares the ministers with his two hands together, so that they are all wise, then extract the cluster, and raise the patient's legs to the partition,
and if he sees the medicine issuing, as much as he can; and if he sleeps a night altogether, it is more great aid.
And if you cleanse him of a disease of bowel decay, and the medicine hastens to issue, so recommend it as much as he may be healthy.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the foundation, or abscess, so should the enema be as subtle as for a child.
and it is the form of the subtle enema on which the skin should be restrained:
of wounds
We have already said in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments with hands and medicines, according to the accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or wounds where they are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by piercing of stone, and cutting with a sword or dagger, or with a lance or club or arrow, or similar things.
where they are made according to the laws of the body, as it is a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the feet, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come to its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is a fracture of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely broken and the wound is great, and you doubt the abscess that is hot: if you make it healthier from the cephalic membrane, meanwhile if it comes from blood from the wound, and the healthiness is contrary to the affected part;
and abstain the patient from repletion of wine and of coarse meats.
And if he does not want to recover, let his meat be diminished, and drink no wine, nor eat any flesh.
and apply to the wound, abscesses that come, cotton wool soaked in rose oil remedy, or in wine stippled.
and if there is no abscess heat, apply to the wound, so it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will say a little about later.
and he arms are numb, if you put on some ointments, so that they be healthy.
And if the wound is large like a spear wound and similar ones, and the lips cannot be assembled by tugging, if they are assembled by sewing, as I will say about wounds of the belly, from the sewing.
If the wound is discovered on the bone, and it is deep, and only holds for a little while, if you cover it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard skin in place of raw flesh. and instruct the patient to eat thick meats, such as tested and well-cooked food, like poultry, and similar things.
And if you find a wound that is putrid, and it does not adhere to the bone, so cut around the entire putrid part, and pour forth, then heal.
and if it has formed an artery in the wound or vein, which is without cartilage, and it cannot be staunched by medicines, so seek out the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it off with a thread. and if this does not improve, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which soothes in such a way that the wound heals quickly.
And the manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; lively chalk three parts, and grind the powder subtly, and apply the plaster, and hold it firmly in place, until it adheres well and joins with all its sap;
and then bind it tightly, and leave it without loosening, so it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And never does one make a poultice of chalk solely, when one has not incense nor dragon's blood, but rather the arsenic has not touched the wound.
And if the arsenic has putrefied the wound, meanwhile it is in this state, if you do not mix with water this powder.
but mix with some digestive oils, or poultices made from water and honey of barley, until it throws off the pus. then heal other wounds as long as they are healthy.
And if the breakage of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers.
and I will tell you about the breaks of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve or artery of the neck is cut.
If it's the nerves, there is no other remedy than to let them heal, and not to put anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract. and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and their connection is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but let the medicine be soothing, thus heat the water in sweet water, and mix with rose oil, and cool the water thus in sweet water, and other mines of a similar nature, and apply moist unguents.
And if the wound is large, then cut and lay on bandages, then treat until it be healthy.
And if the wounds are deep and it is split and full of pus, then prick below or lower down.
and if the artery is cut, and blood flows out, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize, this is the surgeon's task;
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the guts, and the conduits are guarded, because that's where the food goes, if you cut the gut on the vein of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then hold it firmly, and leave some days, then heal the wounds of the joints so they are healthy;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, seek it out; and if there are pieces of bone, remove the fragments that you can, and those that you cannot have, let them be until the wound festers; and be careful and adjust the dislocation;
and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have said. And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then the treatment follows as I have said in its chapter.
from a wound of a lance or a knife
If it is a blow of a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, then look to see if the wound is venomous, as the patient will quickly languish: know then that the wound is mortal.
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put the powder at the first hour, nor bind it with the blood that does not congeal in depth, and return to the body, and open the patient's eyes; but I put an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
and if you do not have an ointment, then put much cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture,
and make the patient sleep on the wound for 2 or 3 days, or more. if there is no spasm, nor evil trembling of the heart, nor disturbance of the veins. and when you see good dispositions, then know that the wound is saved. Heal then by stretching and other treatments, until he is healthy.
and if she cannot heal, and operate, then knows that there is a fistula; if the cure is as one must.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or on the foot or back, then the cure is for that which is in front.
if it is large, of stitching; and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has caught pieces, then cauterize the wound, and remove the false fractures if they are dislocated. and if they are not dislocated, then let the wound putrefy, then ease the extractions.
and of other wounds the judgment is similar for other members as we have said.
because of the obstruction of the belly
The obstructions of the belly are great, mean, and small;
from the great wound that often injures the intestine, or the nerves of the intestines, because of the introjection of air;
and the constricted area is more painful, and often a small wound is worse than a large one;
because one puts back the intestines more at points, if one does not put them back in hot and cold; because the intestines swell so much that they feel cold, if they go back more at points,
and because it makes the putrid wound worse, because one must reset the intestine to its place that is as others.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to three manners:
the common stitches have a stitch in the belly wound,
and the stitches of other wounds on the body and these proper stitches are common to other wounds;
and however they are more suitable with the belly wound, and I will describe each one and explain.
I say that when the wound is small, and none of the intestine is outside, and one must grip this thing to put it back, which is by one of the two manners: for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in such a manner: wipe a sponge or a cloth in water and soak it thoroughly, or you burnish in water squatting and scrubbing and wiping, and raise the intestine until the inflammation is removed;
and often make these veins retract, and it is necessary that you have skill to remove the inflammation.
And when you see the swelling go away, if you moisten the intestine with water or milk and may the bad humors be cooked. for it is thus that the entry is aligned to a little thing;
and if it cannot enter, then make a little wound at the instrument through which one collects the humors;
and the first treatment is to reduce the swelling that causes the pain; we do not need to cut so much as there is no great necessity for it.
and it's the instruments for the wound:
if you cut within the curve and do not dig too deep, and see there the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine bursts out, if he puts it back in its natural shape in its own place, so you have power over it, for it is worth much.
When the wound is large, and it is in the part below the belly, so you should make the patient sit up on his back, and he puts his legs higher than his head; and it is in the part below the belly,
and also the rupture of the belly is in one of the said parties if you set the patient up so that the swollen part is higher than the other;
and thus it is necessary to manage this, as I say, in large wounds and bruises.
In small wounds, you should use what appears suitable to you,
then hold it in your hands, I mean, minister carefully so that you stretch out the entire rupture with your hand, and gather the lips; and it is the common manner of stitches,
and it is the common manner of stitches, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound, that is to say, a space of two fingers, and fix a needle or it has a strong thread; and prick the two heads of skin with the two heads of a scalpel,
then tighten with a double thread inside the needle of two parts, Then gather the edges of the wound together gradually,
and then leave it to rest for a space, and fix another needle; then thread the yarn as you did with the first needle, and do not cease from doing it according to what you have learned about the needles, until the entire wound is restrained;
and let the thin needles be between subtle and large, for the thin needles take in all the flesh, and those that are too large cannot enter well: because it is suitable that they be moderate;
and one must not push the needles too deeply into the flesh and the skin.
so they do not catch and open the wound before the suture;
and then touch the heads of the needles, so they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and you hold the ends or wrapping around the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and let them be until the wound is cicatrized;
and this method of cauterizing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for it suffices to prick with a needle or two.
The second cauterization is common, and it is that you gather the two heads of leather and the two heads of silk thread together on a needle or it has a strong twisted thread; and when you have pierced these two heads gathered together,
and when you have pierced these two heads gathered together, if you reset the needle to the part where you started, in the manner that one cuts the threads;
and put space between each stitch the thickness of a smaller finger;
this bandage suits the man,
and I sewed up a wound that one of our men had in his belly,
which was inflicted by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm's breadth deep, and thus of the intestines well prepared, a handful of large
and it was the wound in the midst of the belly. I returned the intestine then when it had been twenty-four hours outside,
and the wound was sewn up just fifteen days, and I treated it, and it was healthy.
And the doctor had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and did not care for it at all, because I stood in a place where one could find none, nor any medicine; and applied it above the wound with a cotton cloth many times a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healthy.
Now I will tell you the proper ways of suturing:
Take the needle, and prick the part that is defective just up to there within;
when it has pierced the right heart in the right place, if you have sewn or stitched where you have pricked with the needle,
and make a piercing of another part within just up to that defective area;
and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as if the furrier makes the furs, and you let one side of the swelling go, and take it again from another side, until the entire abscess is fully drained.
The second method of draining, which Galen properly described,
it is like a spring that naturally reunites the separated parts, and apply one head of the swelling to another head, in such a way:
insert a needle or pointed instrument, and make it pierce the swelling softly. and let the heads of the veins flow; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the part that is above just to the inner part, as the heads of the veins flow;
Then make a piercing of one and the other from the weakened part just up to that within; in another head of the mirror-like thighs which are on the other side.
and it's the worst manner of fracture and the most common.
Galen says this in his book, and none of them bear witness to it,
one should stitch the belly with another needle, or have a thread in each one;
and one must insert a needle from one side and another from the other, in the manner of those who sew up wounds;
and know that when the rupture is within the belly, if it is the stitching more grievous than the other places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of the other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound at all its blood, thus that the arrow has moved. then set back in order the intestine, and the cut; then apply the powder irritating the flesh,
then set back in order the intestine, and the cut; then apply the powder irritating the flesh, and the arrow has moved, if you put on any ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and cleanse the thread, and sew up the sutures, and the membrane; Then cure the wound as with others, until it is healthy;
and if you have no medicines, set them on, as soon as it begins to gather pus, cotton much, and apply it several times a day until it is healthy.
For you do not have mastery of other medicines in many dispositions, since the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not affect the principal members, if it is necessary that you apply a light linen cloth in oil of tempered heat, or in rose oil, and place it between the fingers, and beneath the soles;
and if he feels pain or prickling in the belly, and many times it happens, If they treat with black wine enema, and meanwhile the putrid matter reaches just to the intestine;
and it pierces within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine which is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded, and it is due to the abundance of veins that are there, and the subtlety of the whole body, and the approximation of its nature to the kidneys.
And if he jumps from the wound, set him back like the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and has turned black or dark, then it is necessary that you lift the black spot, which removes blood that does not come; for there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligament, and put the fingers pendant of the part below the wound until further down to ease the extraction when the veins burst, and the wound heals.
of the rupture of the belly
When the intestine is rounded, and the wound is small, if one can restore it in some homes,
because I saw that a man was pierced or had a belly wound from a spear;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and thus obstructed the evacuation and the flatulence;
I treated him according to what I knew, and did not cease to subtily treat him until he was healthy, and his limbs were sound.
And when I saw him sweat, I doubted that the patient did not have pain in his stomach; and he had no pain, but remained in better dispositions, and eating and drinking;
and certain experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in such a manner: take firm stitches, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the patient has opened their mouth, if they place it on the two lips,
then place another finger afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely closed;
and cut the wound. If the head becomes stuck in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient,
and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is cut from the intestine of a beast,
in such manner: Take the head of this intestine thread so it is well cleaned. and then attach it to the head of this subtle twisted linen thread, then insert the thread into the needle, and sew up the intestine, and reassemble it in its proper position;
and this manner of suturing is not forced except according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, meanwhile when it is in one of the intestinal guts, if there is no engineer who knows how to treat it, for that subtlety.
of a fistula or where it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes inflamed, is universally called "fistula". and meanwhile when it is split and torn apart.
And a fistula is according to the true vertebrae notation faulty and bruised, where one does not feel pain. and it is also shaved like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes in clear swelling burst, and other times thick; sometimes little, and other times enough;
and I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not clean, and there is no flesh. it is not outside except by one of the seven causes:
it is to know, through the small passage of blood or corpse; or because of its evil nature; where for this reason there is hard skin within, and on the lips, which does not let anything sprout. where there is too much swelling; where the skin is porous, and the material is of bad quality; where the medicine is not good in the treatment; for it is thus that the corruption is a manner of pestilence; for through the property in the region it is slow digestion, and slow health, and inflamed by nature; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Here is the translation:
Know that a fistula occurs in all tender parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, where the spleen is affected, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance;
and if there is no fistula that does not approach exactly to the place where I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you will recognize it, if you take a thread of iron or steel, the fistula is straight, if you seek it;
and if the fistula is twisted, seek a subtle touch of a probe. for the probes bend themselves according to the twisting;
and if the fistula has many passages and you cannot search well by probes, if you clear it through one of the passages,
because moisture flows from one part to another, and it muddies;
then the hand heals at your power, that you know if there is a bone or nerve, and it is shaved in the background,
and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when pressing with your hand, and the place where he feels it;
and when you know truly the place where it is, and if it is near a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: and burn with fire the rotten flesh that is within; and then the treatment until it be healthy,
and if the fistula is well perforated in the right place, then you should cut into the depths, as much as you can, then I put thick poultices in medicine for a fever, and the boils just at the head of the fistula,
then I put thick poultices in medicine for a fever, and the boils just at the head of the fistula, as long as the medicine corrodes the superfluity which is left at the bottom;
and then he puts ointments in the wounds, so that they may be healthy;
and if it is not healthy through this, then he should cautery it as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then he should cut. If a vein or nerve does not bother you with principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, so let it be until the corruption is entirely removed, then heal the things that are wounded as much as it can be healthy;
and if it is not healthy, and return to the usual state as before, know that you are not always ready just before they swell:
if it swells and bursts as much as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healthy, that's good. If this is not so, know that the corruption is too deep-seated, that you cannot come to it; if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
and if there is a small rotten bone, and you can treat it with tourniquets, if the extraction is to be done with an instrument suitable for that,
and if he has many bones, if they are all drawn out, do not leave a single one;
and the moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, if you cut and moisturize and flesh, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them for an hour, then put on the wound a poultice that induces ripening, and let them grow as thick as the bones around them;
and then they will have less strain on the bones;
and if it's a large bone, such as the thigh or leg, if you extract so much of the corrupted matter that the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of the corrupted body, and it reaches just below the bone; if you want to heal and cover everything just up to the corruption, and then cure until it is sound;
and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, if you take an example and aid in your work.
It was a young man of about thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came within the body,
so that the materials came to the leg, and it was inflamed with a large abscess, and had no way of flowing out by opening;
but the physician, in their foolishness, opened so much that the abscesses opened, and they run together many matters, and become fistula, and they come from many openings that all go to the bowel and moisture of the body;
and many a mirror mirrored cure within these years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands,
until I was called, and saw his leg and the medications with which it was treated, and that which runs together through the openings to a large body; and the body of the young man became red, and had a yellowish color.
I touched a tendon in one of these holes, and then felt all the holes,
and found that they came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I hastened then, and cut into one of the holes as far as I discovered a part of the bone, and he found it corrupt and perforated, and the corruption went up to the bone within;
I saw that which appeared to me from the corrupt bone, and I believed that there was no other corruption, except for that which I stopped;
and I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines slowly over a long period, and could not solidify;
and then I recommenced, and discovered the bone as it was beforehand;
and I found continued corruption in the bone, and the decay, and then the putridity, and I thought to reset the limb;
but I could not do so much that I cut around a palm of the bone, and the traitor was forced to all its mole, then I restored him with medicines; and he was quickly healed and strongly supported,
and it did not need to recommence the work for the faintness of the patient, who could not suffer, and for the fear of death that I have of him. For the frequent evacuation of blood, but it was completely healthy,
For the frequent evacuation of blood, but it was completely healthy, and a hard crust formed on the bone, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction in anything, neither to alleviate nor to come.
and stretch the head, so that you draw out the corrupted flesh from below, and uncover the flesh on the joint where you see swelling, so that the swelling does not obstruct the flesh; and put a splint or a table under the bone to support the corrupt flesh; and it is necessary to make an incision where one can see and feel the corruption, and to make another incision again.
And if the bone is corrupt, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, if one discovers the whole wound; then put the fire cautery beneath,
and then sew together one part to the other the corrupted area, and let the sewer be far from the corrupted place, if we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut off the corrupted joint, and sew the bone or where it touches the other part;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the joined joints, then there is no other remedy than to cut off;
and if the corruption is on the hand or on the foot, it is very strong that thing but however it is necessary that you inquire into this corrosion, how it appears to you and examine it in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not contradict you
and know that the incisors and the wisdom teeth, because these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the mouth and their thickness and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare each similar appearance of work with his instrument;
and know that the work will show you the instrument with which you will have to deal, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of illnesses; If you prepare the instrument which you need according to what is suitable for it.
with fire The heads burst out either due to internal swelling or due to fervor;
and when you will have medicated that corrosion through the treatment of medicines, and they do not benefit from it, it is necessary to cauterize that limb up to the place where the corrosion comes, if the patient is wounded by that which brings death, or by malice, which is greater, from the defect of the limb;
if the patient is wounded by that which brings death, or by malice, which is greater, from the defect of the limb; and the signs are that the limbs turn black, so it seems as if they were burned by fire, and afterwards the blackness spreads, then goes that corrosion of limb to limb, and take hold of the entire body; if you hasten to couple,
and it is by the percussion of certain venomous beasts, like the scorpion of the sea and viper and similar,
if the corrosion is at the head of the finger, so to speak, and do not give it any space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, so to speak, couple at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, if it reaches the neck; and if it passes the neck, it is death. and it does not deserve mediocre remedies because of the quantity of its virtue;
and all thus done when the corrosion comes or falls: if it comes to the first joint, then it reaches after the other joint;
and if it comes or falls, then it reaches the entire foot; and it goes up to the leg, if it meets at the knee joint;
and it comes above the knee, if there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die;
and the way of coping or of soothing the limb is that you bind it above and below, and stretch out one handkerchief with one of the ligatures below, and another handkerchief with the other ligature above, and you separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments at the spatium, as large as the bone will be uncovered;
then take a cloth or silk, and put a layer of linen on each part, so that the silk does not touch the healthy skin, and bring to the patient another ulcer and abscess wound.
And if blood flows out when you operate, then cauterize the place quickly, where you apply soothing powders; then return to your medication until it is complete,
then wrap the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healthy;
and I will tell you that he had a similar wound in his own foot:
he had a black spot that seemed to be burned by fire,
and this corrosive humor came first to his finger, so much that it took over the whole foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cover the foot, and was healed;
and long afterwards the corrosion returned to the finger of the hand, and it came to me,
and I applied things that repelled them after the purification of the body, but could not stop the corrosion;
and it is seen that I hold his hand, and I do not want, that I had hoped to retrieve the material; and also doubted that I cut off his hand, so he wouldn't die; for the strength of the man was weak; and he despaired of everything, and returned to his land, and he stopped touching his hand, and was without pain;
and I have not counted fewer cases where because of this one does another task, so one has mastery.
Sometimes an abscess comes to a boil on the skin, and it stays for a long time, making a large accumulation of pus. and then they break and burst, and the pus pours out, and the skin becomes clear, just like a vase. and the skin that is above is as subtle as a delicate sheet. and do not run to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy".
but if it grows so long that it reaches the bone in the front, then it is called "fistula";
and the skin is so that you cut the whole circle around, and likewise when it is subtle, just like a thin sheet; and he does not die from his corruption.
And if you find that the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not on the surface, and the skin is thick with flesh, so treat it with a cluster thus:
look if the wounds are large, and the pus that comes from them is of foul smell, then the clusterizer of Egyptian medicine which is thus made: take oil, and ointment, and litharge, equally, and put copper in fire, so that the medicine is red, and thickens as much as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and to cleanse the wound, and hold the perineum steady; and let the medicine stay there for two hours, then extract it by pressing;
do this many times, until the wound is made to putrefy, and the pus is removed;
and at no time is cleansing done with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of vine wood, and pour water over them
then boil, and clarify, until you know that the serum is well purified;
and if the patient cannot suffer it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, if you clarify with water and honey or that it has a little bit of litharge powder; where you apply a mixture of honey and wine, which has the properties of softening and cleaning, and the wine makes the wound dry;
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wounds are well cleaned, then apply a mixture of what makes flesh grow in it,
and it is that you take a definite plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine; or you cleanse it with certain medicines and ointments, whose properties I have discussed in the treatise on ointments;
and if the hole of the sinus is small, and the candle of the syringe cannot enter; if you enlarge it with a iron rod a little, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment; where application of basilicon, so that it may be enlarged;
and if the wound is too large, then sew and let it close sufficiently, or the cluster may enter afterwards,
and if the perforation that throws below is above, then stitch or sew below where it is. For when the bowel is in the peritoneum, then do not let it protrude there; and if you cannot cover the seat below as you wished, it appears in such a way that the bowel moves to the lowest place it is,
and if you cannot cover the seat below as you wished, if it appears in such a manner: that the bowel moves gently downwards, and does not leave anything behind. and take consolidative medicines to put on the breast,
and stretch over it a layer of linen that covers the entire breast; then cover the area around the nipple of the breast, i.e. a little larger than at first, then apply gentle ointment according to the quantity of the pierced area. and put it on the pierced area of the breast to alleviate the swelling, and do not remove the large dressing until after several days;
and he who is above the pierced area of the breast, often removes it to alleviate the swelling, and know that which runs from the swelling, whether it is venom or pus or sufficient, or digestive, or indigestive;
and take heed that the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has extended in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps upon the tender breast, if you know that the breasts are affected already, and approach the healthy ones;
and then dislocate it in the morning, or the third day, and when you open the wound, if you change another dressing, and renew the bandaging.
And if the senses are disturbed by indigestion after many days, know that the senses are not yet clear. And if subtle veins cut apart after long tension, do not despair of health,
for health approaches. For there are men who delay in their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
and if the belly is indigestible it hurts for many days, it seems that the breasts do not become accustomed to it;
and if the breasts are slow to heal, and are ulcerated, if you add medicines which are moist in substance and dry in virtue, as we have described in the Diafinit ointment, because it has a great part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
take Diafinit ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the juice of equal wine in substance;
then he confines himself to using it; and this same method makes honey-cooked groats, when we apply a definitive ointment, it is not present,
where you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and the powder, and grind it into dust over the honey when it is on the fire; and then in glueing, I mean, in applying a plaster, and it adheres to the breast, and no time is wasted on a lengthy Aristological treatment, and roots of the sky-blue, which is also like flour of veins and hundred.
and roots of the sky-blue, which is also like flour of veins and hundred. and in use of simples or composites: crush them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use. and if the cure is prolonged, and it is not cured by this cure,
and if the cure is prolonged, and it is not cured by this cure, then know that the corruption is in depth, and makes an impression on the bone, or the hard members, or the ligaments. if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess on the finger
Panarice is an abscess that grows beneath the fingernail of the hand, or on the foot, or which happens to grow on other toes;
and when it is inflamed, and one does not take care, if an abscess comes to a boil, and they run and pour pus as far as they run the root of the nail, and by chance they corrupt it entirely;
and there come ulcers up to the bone, so that a foul pain comes, and the skin is sensitive and wide, and the color is dark.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit at all, if it is necessary for you to cut all the superfluous flesh which remains on the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauteries are great aids if the bone is healthy, and the finger is healthy;
and if the finger presses on the flesh inwards, and it begins to point, and the bruise, it is necessary that you put the right joint beneath the ankle that does not hurt. and the joint above, and touch the subtle and delicate flesh, and apply to the remaining flesh of the wound medicines that are burning and corrosive to remove everything;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, so scrape it, and pull strongly, for as much as the bone is corrupted, if not able to heal;
and if you see the decayed tooth, so scrape it in that place, just as it was said beforehand, then heal it as much as it can be healthy;
and if it is inflamed, and swollen, and it feels great pain, so it is necessary that you heal it first; Then cut the corner of the thumb spike, cutting transversely above.
and beware that the cut does not reach the flesh which is beneath the thumb, for the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it happens, then put something on it to soothe.
The two fingers that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all numb, and by chance they have a piece or they have bones, and sometimes they have a nail,
and none of them grows at the root of the joint, where the birth is in some of our fingers. Those that are born on a single node of the finger do not move, and he who is born with a thick finger, perhaps it moves by chance;
the size of one who is lean is light, in such a manner: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: if you hold two fingers together.
In one who is born with or has a hernia in the back, it is necessary that you first cut around the round flesh up to the bone. then cut the bone at a suitable joint for that, then cure until it is healthy.
The sudden pains that come in the back come from birth, or from a sudden wound, or from burning by fire, or from similar things.
If it is necessary that you cut out the pain, then the bone must be repaired according to its natural forms. Then put between two clean tents or moistened cloths in rose oil, so they do not stick together; or you put between two subtle pieces of smooth wood, as long as the eyes are stuck, if it is necessary.
They stick to one of these two with the palm, if you see that sticking, as it is necessary.
Of wounds
You are full of large wrapped veins full of superfluous melancholic humors that come into many parts of the body;
and even more so in the legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
It is necessary then that you administer sometimes a purging of the colon, and then the juice of the basil.
The treatment for iron is according to two methods: one is that they are struck, and then the black blood is drawn out; and another manner is to lift the vein and draw it back completely.
The cutting should be done in this manner: raise the first leg of warm water very strongly, so that the gross sensibility is subtled. then stretch the leg of the patient from above the thigh just to the part below the knee; then cut the vein in one place, or in two, or in three, with a large incision.
then he raises and draws the black blood from his hand, from one vein to the other, as much as the veins of the patient can suffer;
and then the vein, and he instructs that he should abstain from eating meat during the entire black bile;
and resume the evacuation and the health when the veins are full, and do not harm the patient.
The elevations of it are in this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, Then put him in a bath, and let the warm water rise as high as it turns red, and swells the veins;
and if you have no bath, heat it with fire, and then place the cup at the vein of the loin near the knee, or in the part below the joint;
then open the skin at the ankle, and scrape the vein of each part, until it appears as one feels;
and it will appear red and black, and when it enters under the skin, it seems like a white cord;
Then apply the fire cauterization, so it is raised from the skin, and then apply it to the ankle more lightly.
Then place the cupping glass in another spot, two fingers away; then scrape the skin on the vein until it appears. Then raise it to the root, as you have done, and apply it to another uncle, as you have done previously.
Then take another incision, where you have more mastery, then raise it, and apply the cup to the toe of the foot.
then burn with fire to the second joint; then strip the fat from the joint, until it is completely drained, then cut.
and if you cannot burn and lift, if you thrust a needle everywhere, with a strong double thread. and burn and cauterize, and thrust beneath, with a straight needle, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it is completely drained; and be careful that it does not cut, for if it cuts, you cannot cauterize or lift, and it becomes harmful to the patient;
and when you have treated it all, place on the sore spot a liniment made with wine and rose oil; and heal until it is healthy.
And if the veins are constricted and twisted and tangled together, and they are not straight, as we have said, then you must bend them gently, but do not cut them; and treat them as we have previously said.
then you must bend them gently, but do not cut them; and treat them as we have previously said. The shape of the iron instrument with which one cuts the veins is curved, and does not cut too deeply, so that it does not cut into the vein;
and it is of large curvature, for if it were subtle, it would seize the vein, but so gross as we have said, and this is the form:
Of the civil vein
This vein is located in the legs, in warm regions where neither herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture;
and perhaps grows in other parts besides the legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that comes from under the skin,
As it comes inside the body, snakes and worms, injecting between skin and flesh.
And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, Then it changes the skin, and begins the vein to issue forth, just like a root of a plant.
When the head opens, it is necessary that you envelop it with a piece of cloth of one and a half inches up to the neck.
and let the splint stay on the leg, and every time it is not in default, if the bandage envelops the splint, and the new one; and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and envelop the remainder, and do not cut into its root, until it is entirely separated; for if you cut it, it will return to the flesh, and cause an abscess and putrefaction in the limb, and a bad disease;
because it is necessary that it be treated little by little just to the head, and nothing remains in the body;
and it is sometimes this vein when it is treated with 5 handfuls of a long distance, or of 10., and one man came to me, at whose hand it issued from 10 handfuls of a long distance, and when you grasp it, if you prick with .i. reason or pierced, and pierce just up to the bottom,
if everything issues from it; and let the matter that is within be evacuated, and mix in the medicine that is inside, bringing about a purging of some kind every day, then the cure will be like the abscesses.
And sometimes this vein is affected by heavy rain, and similarly when it opens in the joint of the foot, or at the foot. and there come many abscesses, and where it jumps suddenly; heal the wound thus as we have said before.
Of wounds that grow between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "ox disease", because it often affects the oxen,
and it is a small wound that grows between skin and flesh, and spreads throughout the entire body, rising and falling, and he feels well along the alignment of limb by limb, as long as they straighten the skin or it heals, and then it stops.
and it is affected by putridity of certain humors, if they come forth like worms and snakes and roundworms or in the belly;
and doubt not of its evil, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, perhaps it returns, and destroys the eye; and this has happened many times.
When you want to cure and treat, if one cannot force it to happen as quickly as it goes:
it is necessary then that you bind the limb above and below with a strong and tightly fitting bandage,
then cut above and the vein is deeply in the flesh, and you do not find it, if you cauterize with fire above, so that it dies;
and the greatest harm that it does, is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near to the eye, hold the eyebrow firmly in place, then cover over, and pull away strongly;
and it is necessary to use the patient's modification of course of medicines dissolving the bad humor pores,
and beware of rotten meat producing putridity.
Of the pain that comes from flatulence. This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes into some members, and then moves from member to member; and I saw what I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm;
and afterwards, he will soon elevate his eyes as if to a shoulder, more stiff than anything, as if it were strong silver when it runs from one place to another;
the pain departs from that place, and is fixed in the shoulder,
and then a little afterwards it runs throughout the whole body, until it comes into the other arm;
then I count on it turning again towards the body, as I see it.
I was greatly amazed how it moved in this way from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner. However, I had seen that many had wanted to move the pain from one place to another, but I had not seen it, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought it was because the woman had a dry body, and the uncovered veins, and because of this it appears that the constricted veins are constrained;
and they do not appear so according to this reason among those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and recovered veins.
And when you want to cure this disease, and the patients feel that pain, it appears thus as we have said, if one raises it above and below with haste, and then cuts upon it as much as that ventilation constrains the place to be strong; and cauterize the joint; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
if one treats those who burst the ventilation, as if foul pills, and pills of serpent's grease, and similar others.
Of arrows
Here is the translation:
The diversity of their condition is that there are those who have large points, and small, and curly, and swollen; and of those who have sharp angles, and of those who have tendons, and of those where there are fragments; and that which falls in no member if it falls according to sharp manners: either in a principal member it shrinks,
like brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls henceforth in no place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you about afterwards, it appears. it is necessary that you be aware of the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many ways; and when this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply fixed, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and then the swelling appears which is on the brain, Here is the translation: and perhaps it loses sense of smell, or of hearing; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and jumps from the white moist wound appearing like a poultice, and jumps out also as if bruised flesh;
and this is a sign that appears, if you hold back from the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not inside.
The signs of the arrow when it falls or strikes, are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not soft. and by chance the septum moves also like the pulse, and in short black blood, and comes cold sweat and cold fainting: he then feels no doubt that death approaches.
And the signs of the arrow wound that never leaves the forearm are that without flatulence, it jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and breathes deeply and quiets the frosty air.
And if the arrowhead sticks in the covering of the piss, it is beneath the small ribs; and casts great anguish and great pain and breathes; and moves all the members of the loins.
And if it happens to him that his stomach or stomach hurts, perhaps because of jumping from an injury something undigested in the food.
And if it happens to him that his stomach or belly hurts, and there is a blockage in the intestine, if there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the obstruction.
And if it happens to him that his bladder hurts, and the urine jumps and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulders and the joints and the spine of the back and the arms and the hips and the legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to several different dispositions. When the vein is in a tender nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, thus I will tell you that it happened to me, because you should do otherwise.
It happened to a certain man whose vein burst or broke in the root of the nail: I touched it, and drew it out from underneath the fat of the ear, and it was healthy without any infection.
And I drew out a vein that burst in the fat of the eye underneath the skin, and the arrow was replaced, and he could not touch it except for the point towards the thigh, and it was a large arrow of a Turkish bow, with a sharp iron point without ears; the game was healthy, and no bad accidents happened to him.
And he pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears:
I felt the bristles, and I subtly extracted it as much as I could, and the Christian was healthy.
And it pierced a vein to this man, who had a swelling or a tumor, and I thought he would die;
and then after it had passed thirty days, his condition did not change at all; I cut into the vein, and I made an incision, and I pierced it deeply, and there was no bad accident.
And I saw this man who had a vein that fell or dropped, and the wound was sewn up above;
and hold the arrowhead within it, and do not change its natural disposition. nor find harm in any of its natural works.
And see another man, who had an arrow wound in his face, and the wound was swollen;
and he bore it thus, suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
And they remove an arrow from a man of the king's princes, which was stuck in his thigh, and it was slightly leaning towards the right side; and the arrow was entirely removed
I was called to the cure after it had been stuck for three days. I found the wound very constricted.
I touched it with a subtle touch, and did not feel anything; and he felt a sharp pain and ache beneath his right ear. I thought it was from the point of the arrow.
I put on the lead plaster attractively and digestively, because the limbs do not swell. and it appeared to me that the limbs were of the arrow.
and it appeared to me that the limbs were of the arrow. I put the cautery of fire on the patient's worst places, and resolder the wound itself, and waited thus for the patient to recover slowly.
until he felt the arrowhead, that is, the year within his nose; and he told me so. I put medicine on the wound, a corrosive remedy by worst places, until it was opened up.
and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow which had stuck to the bone; then adjusted at the opening of the wound by that medicine water, so that the head of the arrow appears visibly;
and passed well the terms within three months,
and then I slackened if the wound that I touched the tendons, and the muscle on one side and the other, and could not issue;
then I did not cease to subtily and ingeniously manipulate the instruments, until I took them out well-made tendons on that day; according to this which its form will come at the end of this chapter, as much as I will treat it, and restore the wound.
And the mirror shows that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I will restore it then, and the wound was sewn, and the patient was entirely healed.
Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, if you set your treatment on those whom I do not mention, for the books cannot take everything.
but the wise masters compare well to a little great thing, and on those that are present and failing, find new work, and new instrument, in the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not issue from the limbs where they are fixed unless according to certain methods. where they enter through the skin, or through another part;
and that which jumps beyond where it enters, it's an arrow entering into their flesh, and it jumps beyond now and then.
And if it doesn't jump now, let it be until the flesh is porous all around, and the exit is cleared.
and thus it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, let it be thus for some days, and move it each day.
and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, one pierces everywhere with a subtle finger, as much as the eyes in the surroundings are enlarged, and then the trajectory.
And if the arrow is removed from the body of the corpse so that it cannot be seen, seek it all along the tension. and if you feel it, if you draw it with a suitable instrument;
and if you cannot do so because of the narrowness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or vein, if you think that the wound will be large; and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has in the arrow heads which hold it,
and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has in the arrow heads which hold it, If you burn the flesh that is stuck with .ij. parts, according to the muscles that you touch, and then break or bend the wings of the arrow, so that you can extract it;
and then break or bend the wings of the arrow, so that you can extract it; and subtly observe that you do not break the arrow, that you extract it more gently.
And if you cannot at one time, then leave it until the surrounding tissue is purified, then extract it, for the extraction will be easier. And if you remove blood from him which makes it contrary, then diminish that which we have said about the treatment in his chapter;
and beware of the incision of the nerve and the vein, and set in motion a device so that you can gently draw out the arrow without danger;
whether it is pulled or twisted, or strongly or gently; and place the patient according to the position he was in when the arrow fell on him; for it is the greatest help that it should be, and if you cannot, then place them according to what the signs show you;
The arrow that comes from another direction, where it shows something of it, or the skin is swollen in that place if one sees or feels it somehow.
Cut then underneath, as much as the tongs can grasp, and then extract: if it bursts out now.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly, as much as it enters into the bone, and widens the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then recommence the extraction as much as it comes out;
and if it is a fistula of the vein, then cut around the entire fistula;
and if it is a fistula wound, and you want to administer a treatment, then administer an instrument that cuts the hair; if the point of the vein enters into the hair of the instrument; and then cut forcefully;
and if the vein is hairy, then cut with the instrument at the entering point, to alleviate the extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can. then heal the wound as it covers.
And if the arrow falls in the foot or thigh or belly or bladder or side, and it is deep, and you can cut above, so you cut.
and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, so that it heals. and the treatment until it is healthy.
The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
And they are made in many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
of the veins of the common body Of the veins from which one bleeds are 21, where it has or chief 16.
it is to know: there are two glands behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech". and the two arteries that are in the temples appearing; and the veins that are in the eyelids of the eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the swollen gums which are around the neck; and the swollen veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and the swollen veins that are under the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
One is the cephalic, and it is the left side of the head, and the common people call it "vein of the head"; and the moyenne is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic; and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is on the hucklebone, and it is that one which heals, which appears manifestly on the pulse.
And the salvation is the vein which is between the auricular and the angular, and if it has two roots;
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is beneath the curve of the pulse of the left side, and the second vein is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein which is called "nasse", which is at the ankle of the other side;
and on the other leg are 3 veins beneath those.
The health of the veins that are behind the ears helps against ancient cataracts and migraines; and the qualities of the healthy one, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the qualities of the healthy one, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are of a rough cloth; then constrict the patient's neck to a single gaze, as long as the veins appear behind the ears in the eyes dependent on the head: where the humps touch your back, and where you feel the pulse beneath your back, it is a sign of an abscess;
then take the lancet, and insert it beneath the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand above all the vein above, and cut and separate the skin and the vein well, you must make two traverses, and make the blood issue forth as much as you wish;
Then hold it steady and raise it, until it is healthy;
and I have already said about incision and cautery in the first book.
The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is worth migrating to an ancient, and swollen, and accustomed to opthalmia, and at the course of the watery eyes;
and the quality of the wound healer is such as I say: and it is that the patient strains his neck, so that the .ij. veins appear openly; and feel beneath your finger, and then indicate with a sign;
then lift the heart above the vein on high to your finger's tip, and insert the lancet below, and lift the vein high up, and the cupping, just as you have done with other veins, and correct the flow of blood according to your need;
then anoint the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton;
and then bind it firmly, and let it be until it is healthy; and we have already spoken of their cupping and their extraction, where the book begins.
The health of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the health of the cephalic veins in ancient illnesses, and in migraines, and in redness;
and it is a quality that the patient holds their neck twisted, so much that the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose shape is this:
And place the point on the vein, and hold it steady with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; then release the patient's neck, and lay the vein so it is healthy and never again swollen from a large flame.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
and the quality of their health is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting in no direction, as before;
then the vein, and let the vein be of traversed blood, a little thick, a little long, a little wide, for there is no spot to bleed.
And if the flame is subtle, perhaps it breaks; then make a correction of blood, as much as you have mastery, and then lay it on a cushion, and bind it well.
The vein of the vein of the birth that is worth an ague, and a sudden faintness, and a facial disease, as if migraine and redness come to the face, and especially when it is chronic;
and the quality of the sickness is such that the patient contracts his neck, then stretches his nose to his left hand; and take a subtle flame long-wise, and insert it into the labial fold in the space that is between the two nostrils; for the veins do not open well enough, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and do not go too much in depth, and make correction of the blood according to necessity, then leave it a night, for it is almost completely restored;
The health of the .ij. joints helps in the stretching of the wing, and at the beginning of messelry, and in many diseases, and in impetigo, and in corrosions, and in herpes, and in esteem;
and the quality of the health is that the patients strain their necks one towards the other, as we have said; and let the master be standing above the patient's head, and the patient sits on a stool.
then prick the vein of the arm a little widely, then draw out the blood moderately, as much as the master is.
then make another incision in the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and hold the veins moderately open. so that the patient is not strangled; and let him stay until morning, so that the wound may be healthy.
About the health of the liver The health of the veins above the liver helps with pain in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and cracks in the lips, and bad breath and inward.
And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck steady as I have said; then turn the liver, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right liver and the other on the left. and they recognize them by their blackness, and by the fact that around them there are many small black veins: take one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
take one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, if you take the largest of each part, and thus you make veins that are above and below, for it is a similar manner.
From the vein below the tongue The health of the veins that are beneath the tongue helps after the health of the head, and it is in the constriction of the throat, and in the diseases of the eye, and in the diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the health is such that the patient's sickness is between your hands before the sun, and lift the tongue, and look beneath each side for a black vein:
examine then one and the other, and do not go too deeply in fear, because beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the neck that one commonly examines are healthy according to three methods:
where we prick everything with a flame mirror, or subtly olive-shaped as if cut through trenches, and is called "anesil". and are large and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the flame mirror is very renowned, and it is large as you see:
And it has mastery over opening the veins full of thick blood that appears, and which contain thick blood and turmoil; and it's the form of the flame olive oil:
and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for purifying the subtle veins, where there is subtly citrine blood.
The purifying of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with the diseases that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the foot, and in the belly;
and it is necessary for the purifier to purge strongly, and that he should beware of the artery which is beneath. And if he touches the artery, and blood flows out, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and one must not be touching the flame, but cutting so as to make it numb.
And if the basilic vein does not open clearly, it is necessary that you extract it, and change to another; where you want any vein of it, or you heal in its place the vein in the arm: it opens clearly; and apply the flame to the thin skin, as we have said.
And if you want to recognize the signs of the wound, it is necessary that you stretch out the arm, so that you touch the spot as much as you recognize the pulse; then mark the spot of the wound, and then stretch out the arm, and apply the flame to the thin skin;
and beware that you do not make a cut in the artery when you see the spot swollen, for it is of the artery: avoid this then.
And if you see it swell up high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it's without an artery: Hasten thou then, and place thy finger thereupon for a long time, then lift thy finger if the blood is stagnant, which often happens;
Let the arm be still, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and be on guard against fear, and do not move them until they are healthy.
And if the blood is not stagnant, and it flows well, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery so it opens, for the head of the veins retreats; and stagnates the blood.
And take a small fistula, and make it, and take one of the embers and place it well just next to the other one;
If the wound is stagnant, that's good; if not, then cauterize, as we have said, with powders that staunch blood;
and the staunching agents are not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the possibility of the tenderness of the arm.
The healthiness of the vein in a thousand ways helps that it draws blood from the head above, and from the body below. because it is composed of the basilic and the cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the surgeon that he warms himself by the nerve that is underneath, and if he presses too much in depth, and he finds the nerve, and it swells and the veins become inflamed, and by chance they cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any other way due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you sound the instrument carefully; and beware of touching the nerve with your power.
And if he has a vein between the two fingers, then they make it two inches long.
The bloodletting of the cephalic vein helps, which draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
and it is necessary to bleed at the flame olive or at the flame martyr, because it is the safest of all the veins, for it has neither nerve nor artery.
However, it is necessary to choose the lightest vein, and not to grieve anything if one fails the first time, and then recommences. and by chance inflame the eyes of some men, when they first make it, but it does not hurt anything. The quality of the health is according to your thinking.
The first thing you must know about healing is that healing is not diminished unless it is for the sake of preserving health.
and to avoid future illnesses; and let the vein operation be done on one of the two veins that are at the elbow: it is to know, cephalic, fat, and basile. and one should heal at the beginning of taking precautions against summer and autumn and winter after menstruation, when the signs of fullness appear;
and one should heal on the first day or third, after three hours or two days.
The healing that is administered for the illnesses has no fixed hour determined, but only when need is of day or night, in all hours and in every tension;
and one should not heal children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying fruit for less than four months until the seventh month; One should not consider as healthy those who have passed sixty years.
And when someone wants to be healthy, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary that he should purge the intestines with a gentle laxative. if he has much retained filth, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful residue from the intestines, which is detrimental to the principal members.
One should not consider healthy those who are too full of meat, nor those who are drunk, as long as they are furious, nor dropsical.
and beware of the one who becomes ill after colic passion, and vomiting, and decay of stomach, and multiplication of habit in a woman, and of travail, of watching, and of joining, and this that all virtue, or through thing of the arm or sweet body;
then subtly the humors, if the blood is gross, through meats and through drinks and through medicines, if you have the pure power;
then enter into a bath, so that no thing does not dissolve, to subtly purify the blood;
and you will be healthy from the vein of the foot inward to the third, as we have said;
and beware of that day's work, and of puncture, and of luxury, and of similar things;
and be gentle and joyful, and may the healers be higher than those who heal, and rub the arm three or four times;
then extract the vein from above gently, for when it is too stretched or short, it cannot run with the blood;
and then rub the place with your hands, until the veins swell, and you feel them;
Then he anoints the finger with a little oil from his left hand on that vein below the knee where it hurts to anoint. so that the vein does not get cold and fails to heal. For there are veins that act like cords on the finger, and if there are those that are full of windiness, so that when one puts on the finger, it withdraws from the finger, and cannot open the vein, and thus one is of those.
and if he opens the vein, it is the wound that is too narrow, because it is necessary that the surgeons be advised about these things.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or on the hastening, if the veins are not inflamed.
And if the veins are inflamed, and the patient is in a hurry, let them be for a day or two, and do not bind the arm: perhaps he will come to abscesses or wounds; let him not enter or bathe, then recommence the healing as it pleases him;
and if the wound is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not lose as much blood as you see, then apply heat to that very wound directly and immediately.
and apply the egg white hastily, so that the eyes are inflamed; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the eyes inflamed, do not restart the bleeding, and apply a little lard oil, for it alleviates the pain of the blood, and is mixed in this wound the lard that the oil.
and then administer the lard oil in each wound that you treat the veins, to staunch the flow of blood.
and this same makes triple and bowed eases, when one puts it on the bed; if the sinew is subtle and separates when it is too large.
And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when it is not healthy enough to be cured except at the time when the opening of the vein is small, if you hasten, and put on the bed a moist sponge in water and a little warm, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has been let out of the vein, and if it remains on the bed for a few days without any blackness or greenness, it does not harm; and if you see, put among none of those things of aloe or myrrh remedy in juice of calendula, master, or similar.
And many times there is an abscess and appearance at the health of the basilica: put your hand then, and if you find the soft spot at the compression of the hand, it is that bad appearance. Avoid then that you do not put on anything of those things that we have said, for it happens in court without an artery; but the made .i. a plaster thick to harden the spot, then the treatment of another treatment, until it be healthy.
And draw each one according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
Here is the translation:
And it is necessary for one who is full and strong, and has the mastery of blood extraction, to make a larger wound, so that the flames are large.
and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed less often, and one should bleed in a slanting cut, not in a straight line.
and this manner of bleeding is free from decay of blood and copiousness of nerve, and is worth more than the bleeding that is long or large.
And for one whose body is weak from bleeding, it is necessary to give a mild potion in juice of green apples; if he is exhausted, then draw out three or four times the blood.
And if he is of a cold complexion, let him take before the healthy pain honey syrup mixed with aromatic spices, such as pepper, cane, ginger, and chicory, and well-fragrant syrup.
And if he touches the healthy area, after the issuance of much blood, it is necessary that he drinks broth of meat, and subtle, fragrant syrup.
and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of a vein.
And if he wants to recover his arm, and be healthy again another time, it is necessary, when he is afflicted by great health, that he cures himself little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
And who wants to wash their arm after the first bleeding, and it has a strong course, if they bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And who wants to bleed from another place, if they should bleed on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood within the body which is already heated, and it causes fever to come; if one wants to treat a great quantity, and widen the pores so that it bursts into a sweat. then you should observe all the conditions of bleeding, and put your hand on the arm where it bleeds, so that death does not come into the body through the sweat. and this has happened many times, when the surgeons are negligent;
and it is not suitable for you to see the arm dislocated, and to let blood flow out a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press strongly upon; not if it is curved, that he stretches the arm hastily, for that would be harmful;
but let it alone until it heals the second time; or you pierce at the tip of the flame, so that the blood which is congealed in the wound issues forth; and put upon the small pox of the seat, and press lightly.
And if the vein is inflamed, let it be and do not constrict it too much, until the abscess is appeased.
And if it is necessary to bleed twice, let the blood flow from the same place, or from another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is healthy in the place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the manner of the healing is such that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so long as the fistula becomes red.
then is bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, then the wound now heals through the middle, neither too wide nor too long;
and let the perforations be wide, and let it be well healed near the joint of the hand, and if you cannot issue from it, then put the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough;
and if it is in winter, do not put the hand in warm water, for one puts it more in ivy than in winter;
and the health of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The health of the little finger on the right hand is good against all the diseases of the liver, and that's the method:
Stretch out the hand, and soak it in warm water, until the vein is swollen, so that one can see it; and if you cut across, and if you cut from all around, so that nothing remains;
and do not go too deep in the fontanel, because the nerves are then very close to the skin
and then put your hand in warm water, if the wound is frozen, and cannot be opened.
And when you have drawn out enough blood as it is necessary, then put oil on the vein and sew it hastily, and thus do with each wound.
The vein on the left hand is suitable for the disease of the thigh, and do everything thus as I have told you about the right.
The healing of the sponge is worth all the diseases that are beneath the body, as well as diseases of the thighs, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its healing is that the patients recover quickly in warm water, and rub on the vein until it bursts. and above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they go towards the kidneys.
Here is the translation:
And if you apply it to the foot, beware of the nerves that are underneath, and the vein that runs across like a bow; and let the flames be gentle.
And if the sans (sinew or tendon) cannot come out, put the foot in water, and let the vein be well cleansed.
And if the veins fail the first time, start again a second time underneath a little, because the blood is salty; Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make the soporific of the other foot equal.
The vein for sciatic pain is at the seat of fire, and its health is worth the pain in the thigh, when it is due to bad blood.
And the quality of its health is that the patient stays in a warm bath, and stretches above the seat, three fingers deep, while twisting.
for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then you should bleed it in all the ways that you can, and by crossing. and it is worth more that you bleed it, for the vein is dry, and it is very repugnant to many people at home.
and it is worth more that you bleed it, for the vein is dry, and it is very repugnant to many people at home. And if you do not find it, a healthy vein appears or gives beneath the two feet, and towards the small toe, and guard against the nerves;
and make the blood flow so that you see it, and then release the bond, and put on a cotton swab and hold steady; it is now healthy.
The healthiness of cupping
Cupping is made of horns, or of iron, or of glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by pricking and attracting blood, or without pricking.
And this ventilation which is without touching is according to two manners: either it is with all fire, or without fire;
and two others in two sides of the neck; and the ventouse below the chin; and the cupping of the shoulders; and the cupping on the hips; and the cuppings in the arms; and the cuppings of the legs; and the cuppings of the ankles; and the cupping does not draw blood, except for a few small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
and because of this, one should not be afraid to take it, as one does when making a vein bloody; and it is not suitable for it to be administered, nor at all by fire or sensation of fire, in any disease that comes from excess, as long as the body is evacuated.
And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to administer, or by habit, if we begin treatment each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at every time;
for there are those who, when they have need to administer, have a heavy head;
and if there are those who find excess and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who have a flow of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and redden with blood; and if there are those who faint, and see by night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we command to bleed them after three hours of the day.
The blood of the nose helps with the grief of the head … that comes to the eyes, and it is not believed that it should be after the evacuation of all the body;
and this ventilation is on the level of the sanity of the cephalic,
and it does not suit those who are of a cold complexation in usage, or who have a catarrh, for that causes them great harm;
and therefore it does not suit those who are old in usage, nor those who have cold or frozen diseases in the head.
And those who are often sane, if they become oblivious, and therefore it is suitable to put the cupping glass a little further down due to the doubt of oblivion.
The ventilation in the neck is in the place of the healthy head and of the basilica, and for this reason it has worth to the strengthening of the foot. and at the fracture of the channel of the forearm, and at the whole, and at the replenishment;
and it is good to hollow out, for if it holds too firmly, so that there is obstruction of the oblique or stomach and heart.
The ventilations at the ribs of the neck if it has worth to the pains of the head, and obtalmia and migraine, and at the strangulation, and at the pain as roots of the teeth.
and it is in the vein of the basilica; and it is necessary that you instruct the surgeon to press his hand to apply, so he does not cut the artery, and does not cause a flow of blood.
The bad breath that comes from the mouth is a sign of disease in the mouth, and of gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the veins of the gums.
The bad breath from the palate indicates a disease that comes from heat and fullness.
The bad breath from the sides is a sign of as many diseases as there are veins in the arm. because it attracts blood from these thick veins;
and instruct the surgeon to not make too many incisions in depth, because the flesh is nourished by blood, and it knows about underlying nerves and arteries.
The cupping that is on the back is useful for removing excess from the foundation, and for illnesses beneath, and it is necessary that the cupping be large, and be of a good quality, so it can treat well; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
The cuppings of the legs are useful apparently, because they attract blood from the whole body, and alleviate ancient pains in the kidneys, and in the marrow, and in the bladder, and restore the flow; and they are in the place of .ij. sophenes, and of .ij. chevilles, and altogether they refresh the body after long use, and bring forth pus in more favorable dispositions.
The way to apply the cupping is that you put it on first void, and suck immediately, and place hastily, and remove evenly, and do not cease from doing this, until you see the red and inflamed spot, and appear the rosy color of blood; then firm, and reapply the cups, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have tender skin, and clear pores: if it is necessary to strike once only, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deeper; and suck lightly.
And if the blood is abundant, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to subtly open the way for the abundant blood.
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike three times; and when we want to draw out a little blood at a time, then we suffice with striking only once.
And if we want to remove a lot of blood, we recommence often; and if the blood is thick, then strike deeply, and the termination is that the cure should be perceived suddenly.
and it is suitable for one who has thick skin and hard, and those who have strayed pores, that you should apply the oils of apricot and olive, which are opening and dissolving: if it is in this way, of violet oil, or almond sweet oil, or oil of cucumber seed;
and if it is in ivy, of oil of cress, or lily, or chamomile, or another similar one.
And if the surplus is thick and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of aniseed, and similar ones.
And if it is one who has a tender and large pores skin, it does not need to put any oil.
but it needs to be washed after the ventilation of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar.
And he who has much moisture, if it rises from the ashes, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
And those who have thick superfluities rise from old wine, or water of sage, or decoction of aniseed or chamomile, or other similar.
and it is not advisable to apply a cupping device in front of the bath nor while bathing, but rather an hour or two after the bath; and do not sleep after the cupping.
and it is necessary that he be warmed, when he should be cupped and when he is being cupped. And beware of those who are healthy being choleric, and if their blood is too agitated and inflamed; it is necessary that he take cold things, such as apples, grapes, and lettuce in the shade, and similar things;
and apply poultices, and dressing of Chastry, and damp meats.
And he who has a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine moderately, which is between old and new, and apply poultice, and apply small poultices and little birds' wings.
and the day when he will be purging, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some men three or four drachms of triacle or muscat before purging, or after, to comfort the main limbs; and be subtle with the blood, but it does not suit those who are hot when they drink.
The cupping glasses that are applied without causing a wound are those that are applied to the liver, and to the spleen, and to the podagra, and to the belly and the bowels and the loins and the thighs, because these members cannot bear being wounded on their surfaces.
and do not perform it frequently, for it attracts blood from one member to another. as we put them on the muscles when they are not healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we put cupping glasses on the belly and on the bowels to reduce the member.
and stop the pain, when there is inflammation or stone, if it stops by its attractive power through adventure the inflammation, or clears the stone from its place;
and thus it is done when one puts it on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained windiness,
and these windy areas are administered void of blood by sucking so strongly; and no time are they administered together with fire, and never are they filled with warm water,
if as in bad illnesses of the lungs, and in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with warm water or with water where herbs called "covenaubles" have been cooked.
The form of administration of fire cautery is thus:
And it has two and a half palms of width, and it is placed on the side near the millet, a small hole, as if to push in a needle.
and let it be of iron, soft in front so that it does not harm the patient when putting it on the limb;
and let it have a crossbar of iron or steel, to hold a candle in place,
and they are great and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
for the veins of children are different from those of the old, and of the lean from the fat.
And one should then place this veinous humour on the limb:
take the candle of wax or .i. liniment, and put it in the veinous humour across the rod which is in the veinous humour, Make sure the fire is at the bottom of the cupping device so it does not burn the patient.
and then place it on the limb, and let the two be on the orifice as we have said, so that when one looks, the vapour goes out, and remove the cupping device.
and take hold of the linen as before, and reapply it frequently, if you are a master of this art.
In the cupping device which is administered in the disease of pleurisy, at every stage, there is no vein or orifice, and it is not administered unless when it is full of water, and is placed on the limb only slightly.
and it's the form:
Veins are not amputated unless they are in members where one cannot put poultices because of their smallness, like lips and cheeks, and similar places; and in the naked parts of the body, such as fingers or toes, and other similar ones;
and the quality of the usage is that when you find veins that are in tender sweet nerves without roughness, take them;
and put a soft poultice on them, so they become familiar with it, and have no wind in the belly; and then be cleansed of veins and cupping glasses, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the ulcers;
and when they are full, and painful, see if it is the place where one can put a cupping glass, put it, for it is of great value afterwards.
If not, lift the place of the axle, and then of the water, very well, and then sprinkle;
and you should examine the healthy eye too closely after the course of the veins, if it is cloudy. I will drape a cold cloth over it, and put it in place, so that the vein is stretched out;
and if the vein is multiplied, then put a glassy, muddy or similar things on it, so that it is stretched out;
or you put on the moist place of small, peeled beans, and let them stay until they adhere to the place, it will staunch now;
and if you have more mastery, then take other veins.
And if the sinews do not take hold, rub the joint with fresh blood, or you fix a needle as long as the sinew issues. and then put them in place, and soon as they feel the blood, if it's heated;
and when you see that they heal, sprinkle on a little of aloe and silk fabric, or of powder, if they will heal now.
Here begins the book of fractures
This cautery is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is a restoration of breaks and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that the foolish mirror reflects itself in this cautery, which did not find anything in the ancient books, nor did they read any letter.
and for this reason, the knowledge is estranged in our land, because I did not find anything good in it.
and I know nothing, except for the knowledge from the ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the knowledge, and through experiment, and through the experience of my life.
and I have described here in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I did in these three chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the words and the chapters where the wise men put their understanding, and dwell on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when break or dislocation or twisting or bruise comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, so that nothing troubles him entirely, just as weakness of body, or old age, or feebleness.
or if the tendons are not very warm, or too cold; and beware of cold joints, it is to know frozen joints, and the flesh of birds and goats, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any raw greens, and do not fill oneself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, so that you do not have doubt about an abscess forming hot, or a spreading of matter in the limb; if you restore the patient to their first government which they had used.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourish the patient with foods that provide great nourishment, where there is viscosity, just as if one would cure a wound with water, and rice, and bread, and pike, and salted meat, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For a complete nourishment represents more and quickly heals the fracture.
And know that old and decrepit broken bones cannot be well repaired or reunited according to their natural condition because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, like the bones of small children.
But there is no cure, reset the broken bone. Use thick bandages that are tight and join the limb together, so it is strengthened as it was before; and do not touch any part of its work, and for this reason one must nourish it with thick foods, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes to the elbow, and another in bending, just like the shape of a pen for writing.
For there is a fracture that goes to the elbow, and another in bending, just like the shape of a pen for writing. And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small crack throughout.
And in each manner he has his engine, and his own instrument proper in the restoration, according to what the remembrance comes into its place;
and it is known that the fracture of the bone occurs because the joints are twisted, and appear well by palpation, and sound to the pressing of the hand;
and when there is no twisting in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture;
but he can well have twisting, or crack, or small fracture. If it is not possible to move the hand, but rather apply medicines that come hereafter, and then hold it steady subtly.
And know that the fracture that goes to the joint, and are the disjoined parts, they must now be put in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not come to life.
and if abscesses come to life, let it be for a day, until the abscesses are calmed down; then put it in equal alignment with the muscles that you can lift lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restorations of those where there are pieces; then hold it steady, as it is necessary afterwards.
And if there are broken pieces in the bone, whether it is dislocated by two fingers, or it is in the hand or foot, or with a small limb, or with two cords, or with a cord and your hand;
and put the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are disjoined, you reset them by adjusting the additions in their proper places with your fingers, and beware that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient;
and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to their best forms.
And feel well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right: so dress it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who come with their work of abscess and contraction in the limb, as we have often wanted.
And when the limb is at the point, thoroughly chastise the patient so that they do not move it, neither while awake nor while asleep, nor while turning, nor in another way; and take care that the limb is so well-assured that they do not feel any pain. For when they feel no pain, it is not at the point, and you must put it in such a disposition that they do not feel any pain;
For when they feel no pain, it is not at the point, and you must put it in such a disposition that they do not feel any pain; and take care that it is set straight, so that twisting does not come when it is restored;
and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Know that the broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
For there are small limbs, like arms and fingers and similar: so it is necessary to envelop delicate and subtle bandages.
and those that are large, like hips and legs: so it is necessary to envelop with a wide and strong lien, for the wide liens embrace the entire large limb, and restrain from all parts equally, so that there is no unevenness.
then the entire area is lightly touched, two or three turns, according to the limb, and hold your hand a little above all the ligament, then go above the break and hold less, so that the break can be slightly disengaged;
and soften the ligament little by little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy limb, then take another ligament, and turn again above the broken limb;
then return to the part below the break, and hold it moderately, not too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first hour above;
then put between the lightly touched ligaments of linen or drapery, so that they are all even, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made stitches on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
And if there is inflammation or abscess, put something calming on the abscessed area, and remove the inflammation, and let it be thus for a few days;
then hold it with your fingers, and let it be bound with a wide bandage of large cloth, or with a stick made from a tree, or with palm branches, and let it be according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the stick one puts on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
and let it be as long as it is necessary for the size of the limb, whether small or large;
Then hold steady on the stiles just as you did at the first treatment, then place a thread underneath, just as on the breakage at the first treatment.
The more constricted it is, the less; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too large nor too small, and be of linen thread.
For if the threads are large, just as I have seen the works of foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted linen cords, and it is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it is not necessary that it should have less than two fingers' width between each staple.
And if the patient is wounded by the staples of the stiles after the constriction in their healthy areas, then put under them lint or linen cloth, so that it does not become inflamed.
When the wound is with the fracture, and the course is broken, I will tell you the treatment hereafter.
And beware that it is not fitting to strain these broken members with excessive movement on the first day. For when the member is large, it is not fitting to put these forces that soon after 5 or 8 days, or more according to the severity of the abscess that suddenly occurs;
and see here the manner of the ancient plasterers to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and it is that you take flour that is held as by the walls of a mill, and mix it with an abundance of egg whites, and make this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the plasterer restoring fractures in various dispositions, and also for women and small children, for it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Here is the translation:
Another way to apply plaster that is good for torsion: take mugwort and vismalve, in the proportion of 10; mirre and aloes, in the proportion of 8; acacia, 7; Armenian bole, 10, and grind well, and mix with water or abundant egg whites, and administer.
Another way to apply plaster to joints and dislocated bones, to alleviate sudden pain, and to heal the fracture: take new flax, and grind it into a fine powder in oil or boiled water, and apply it to the affected area. This plaster does not restore completely, but it is good for alleviating hot abscesses, and properly easing pains.
Another way to apply plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and earthy peony leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another way to apply plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to alleviate the remaining abscess. Take root of vismalve, chamomile, violet flowers, veal flour, each one part; grind them, and mix with wine, and if the limb is inflamed, mix it with water of coriander or with water, and apply.
Another way to treat more forcefully than the first, when an abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of violets and linseed, balusta, melilot, and sansuce, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part; and pound, and boil with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Hypocrates says in his book that one should not put on a broken limb anything but cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between two extremes, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems according to Galen that one should put on a broken limb, to restore, warm dry things, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to treat that is good for a wound and pain: take mugwort and chickweed of the decapitated omes, or feathers of a bird, and violets, and make them equal, and pound them, and make an emplaster and put it on the limb.
And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone out of its place; if you do not loosen it by hand soon.
And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, without rest or inflammation, hasten and loosen it, and remove the bandage now; and take a lighter dressing, and sponge with seawater, and dip in water, and lift the limb up, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is appeased. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on a dry linen cloth, moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it with a nut, until you are sure of a hot abscess.
And calm down the inflammation of the limb, and let the pain be removed, then restart the subtle treatment, and a little bandaging, and do not constrict it too strongly as before; and subtly treat until it is healthy.
And if you see that abscesses and redness and pain and swelling are all over there, and you have the task of applying poultices and bandages, then recommend it, just as you did for the first treatment.
And if it does not come to the limb as we have said, do not delay further than three days or four days or five days; and never leave it twenty days, according to what one sees, until the break is healed, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh.
Then restrain it more than at first, and the swelling reduces its flesh, as I said before; and if you see that the limb is drying out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come to it. Apply the warm water treatment then, every time you treat it, and let it be a third of a day, and bathe it a little with the remedy.
Here is the translation:
of diverse manners of fracture Many manners of fractures are, and diverse figures, and the causes are distinguished;
for there are fractures made by the percussion of a spear, and the neck of the bone breaks all the way to the underlying bone, as if it were crushed or broken; and because of this, this manner of fracture is called "haichure".
Where the spear head strikes the bone from above, piercing it senselessly, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute"; and these are the injuries of these two great or small fractures.
And if there is an embedded percussion, or crack or blow to the stone, or fall onto the stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a penetrating wound, which approaches just near the membrane that is under the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is the wound whether great or small.
And if there is a wound that is embedded in the bone as subtly as a hair, and it is a small crack, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary";
And if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by similar things, and causes the piece of bone to enter below, and it is like the veins when they burst forth as the craftsmen do when they strike on the anvil; thus within the stone.
And this happens more to those who have damp heads or bones, like a child's head;
and it happens in all these ways of breaking that small parts are dislocated, like these; and I will speak of them in their place.
And we recognize all ways of breaks through the traction on them, and the inquiry into the tendons, and by the rotten flesh that is on them.
The similarity of the fracture is known by this, that when one has discovered the bone, and one rubs it gently, then the black break appears.
In the treatment of fracture, beware of accidents harming the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and swelling, and feverish ague, and the eyes issue forth and redden, and other similar things in many dispositions, if it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see a threatening accident, and you expect salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the nave comes to you first, and it is in winter, then you should open the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
And if it is in summer, then hurry to open the bone before the seventh day, lest the tissue under the bone becomes corrupted, and the accidents that we have mentioned occur.
And if the break of the bone reaches just to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary that you split the broken part thus: and it is that you take hold of the head of the suffering patient, and uncover above the bone in all the ways that you can, and above the figure of the wound more softly than you can,
and if the discharge of blood comes to uncover the bone, or abscess bursts, it is helped by that which is necessary, and it is that you fill the cavity with moistened cloths soaked in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the bursting abscess is calmed, and you are assured of the discharge of blood; then begin to cut around the bone with a saw, and it is done according to .ij. ways of work: one way is that you cut with a straight tight cut in front, and this is the form:
And then you make another, larger, cut than the first.
And the second method is that you have various cutting tools, some being narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron indeed; and in using them lightly, you do not blister the head.
And if the bone is hard and tough, it is necessary that you pierce around it, so that you administer cutting tools with caution, not making too deep an incision lest they penetrate beyond the bone beneath the skin, and it should have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and it is necessary to have more of them, if each one comes into its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have cutting tools for every test; and this is the form of the three manners of cutting tools:
The quality of piercing around the broken bone is that you place a cutting tool on the bone, and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then reset the cutting tool elsewhere a little afterwards, and do so throughout, then open up the incision to the space of the bone which is between the pertusions, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone with your hand, or with any of the instruments you have, such as pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the vital organs.
And when you have pierced the bone, and extracted it, it is necessary that you use the aperteur which is designed to separate the bone from all other instruments similar to an incision tool, but it must be more delicate and subtle than the other incision tools;
and if it remains nothing of the small bones, no nails, if they lightly touch the instruments; then heal the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
And another manner of surgery is what Galen says, which is more wise; and he praises it very much, and that's his word. It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, there where the break appears, so when you have discovered that part, then you will put under the head of this lance-like incision, from which it is the form:
And do not cut from one part, and the affected part is in two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently break the bone all around, and beware well of the membrane that is underneath.
Here is the translation:
And if the break of the bone does not pass just to the membrane, and the bone is covered so slightly by above, and there are small pieces, if it is necessary to remove that roughness, and to remove the scales with a subtle rasp, which you must have in different quantities, to prepare each location as most convenient, according to the work and the shape of the break.
If you use large rasps first, and then finer ones, and do not cease from doing this until it is well.
In each of the other hair-like fractures and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you prepare the cause according to its direction; and this is something that is not readily understood by one who has not studied this art.
And if the wound is discovered, it is necessary that you take a piece of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and apply oil and rose water, and put it on the wound. Then take another drapil doubled in ii or iii, and the wad in wine and rose oil, and put it on top of the first drapil; and make it lighter than you can, so you do not bother the wound, then administer above another thread, and do not strain it more than necessary until it holds the wound sufficiently.
and leave it thus one day or two, until the apostemes wounds are calmed, then remove it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of veices, and powder of incense, and aristologe, and similar things; and make a powder from these things, and put it on the wound, and administer again medicines without sharp biting.
and beware that the wound is again clean, so you do not leave the swelling, nor assemble a boil, because when a boil assembles on the cloth of the brain, it corrodes and putrefies, and causes the patient great harm; for when one puts on the wound something biting, it necrotizes above.
Take heed therefore, lest some evil accident happens to the patient, as we have said, and it is doubtful without a doubt.
And if you bring no fewer than four times the medicine that one has put on, which has such virtue, if it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and two parts of rose oil and in glueing them together, and you put it on the ulcer. then heal in many ways the cures that are necessary, so that they may be healthy.
Know that no matter how many times the two parts of the nose are broken above, or one part is dislocated by the other, because they are two bones; and the cartilage beneath is not broken, so it does not make a swelling or twisting, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you put your small finger or instrument into the nose, and adjust this breakage inside your finger's tip, and in the pouch by default, so that the nose regains its natural shape. and do this lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain by your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the nail, and cannot be straightened to its place, then it is necessary that you put it even at the head of a rather large vein.
And if the break is of two parts, then make another, and hasten to restore it on the first day, so you can.
if not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscessed swelling is appeased, then boils at the head of the nail tend to drop off in shreds, if the break is in one part.
Where you apply it on one part, another part breaks instead; and let the tautness be so great that they fill the holes of the nose.
And they say that one should soften the tents in burre, and change every day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be softened with a concoction of egg whites and powdered mill; then leave the tent, until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
And at no time apply on or near the eyes a poultice of egg whites in place of tents, and if it has a sweet drapil wrapping, and holds the breakage, and soothes the patient within; or do as you have seen.
And if abscesses come to the nose while you are operating, if you apply cerote or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a poultice of diaquilin.
And if abscesses come, put an emplaster made from flour of iris, and powder of incense, mixed with egg white, then apply light poultices, and do not bind them with a thick bandage;
And if the break of the nose is small, and it is broken into little pieces, then remove the extraneous fragments comfortable to that, then suture the fracture, and treat things straining the flesh, and soothing, as with emplasters and ointments comfortable to that;
And if there is no deep wound in the nose, then treat it with tinctures, and apply a poultice of soft cloth, so that it be healthy.
of the dislocation of the jawbone
When the jawbone is dislocated downwards, and there is no point of injury above, and the break is above only slightly, and it is not broken in two, except for the small pieces that remain inside, if one examines it lightly.
It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left jawbone, then put your index finger of the right hand, and gently feel the break, and hold it with the other hand above, and set it evenly.
And if the break of the jawbone is dislocated in two parts, it is necessary that you apply extension to the two parts, so that they are even.
And if the teeth have moved out of place, or are broken, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put on the broken jawbone a cerote, and put on it a double wrapping; and put on the wrapping a large and well-made staple, or a piece of equal leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, and bind it to the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light food.
And if you see that the figure changes, then disengage it on the third day, and then reset to the point where it changed; and apply a poultice made of powder from the mill with abundant egg white or flour of six herbs, after you have removed the crust; and apply a light poultice, and if the poultices adhere, and the disposition of the patient does not change, let it be until it is healthy; many times it is healthy in eight weeks.
And if abscesses occur, then manage them according to what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, reset the broken bone in its place; if you subtly remove the extraneous growths that obstruct the union.
And if the wound is constricted, then enlarge it with flame according to the need.
And when you have gathered all these pieces, and it does not stay in place, if the wound is large, and put on it suitable dressings to heal the flesh, so that it may be healthy.
of the strength The strength breaks more often beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the break is in two ways: either it is broken and disjointed in two, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
And the operations are when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, if one holds the shoulder that feels the strength broken; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put the break in your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or disturbance.
And if you have mastery of extending, then put under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or of wool, and let it be large according to your need; and hold steady and lift the force, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you set the fracture evenly, as it is necessary.
And if you cannot bring the head of the fracture to the forefront, because it comes in deep, then it is necessary that the patient leans on his shoulder, and put under the shoulder a small pillow, and bend the ministers' shoulder down, until the bone of the fracture is raised.
And then adjust the fracture with your fingers, and if you feel the broken pieces, it is necessary that you bind them together; and pull the lighter fragments, and if the bone cannot join due to any excess flesh, take a coping from one of the incisors you have; but put under the forcele this instrument, to ward off the swelling.
and it seems like a spoon, and is not a small one, and let it be as large as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the wound; and have two hands, as you see, and let one be large, and the other be narrow, just as is the routing of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut into the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt it is a hot abscess, fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
And if hot abscesses come, apply a dressing with rose oil and in axle grease and in wine, and put it on.
The straining of the bone, when it is without wounds and without breaking, is that you put on the bone a plaster of mill powder and egg whites, and put light bandages on, and put a splint beneath the seat, if you have mastered it; then take a very large bandage of a palm's width, then put a double dressing on the bandages, and the plaster; then take a subtle stake of two fingers' width and length, and envelop it within that bandage, so that the head of the bandage stays in place; and place the star on the bruise, and turn the bandage around the neck, and beneath the healthy abscess, and beneath the sickly abscess; and the resetting of each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the bruise firmly, and you clearly see that the star does not move above the bruised bone, if you reward it every day, and when the ligaments relax, if you restrain them;
and make the patient sit on his back, and put him in a position when he sleeps; a small pillow under the joint, to lift the shoulder high; if you adjust the break of the forearm by adjusting the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm at the neck, and do not let bad accidents happen, until the twentieth day.
then reapply the plaster, if you see that it is needed, and hold it in place and let it be, until it is restored; and it is restored to the best in 28 days, and in less than any other remedy.
of the break of the shoulder
Because the shoulder breaks or becomes dislocated, and it is not set in its proper place except by touch; if you adjust according to the shape of the break, and reset according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can; then put on the joint powdered millet with a lot of egg white, and light bandages, and put on a double layer of cloth; then put on a large and subtle splint, a little larger than the shoulder, and if the splint is not bent in any way from the shoulder, adjust it with linen threads, so that the splint is aligned; and then hold everything together with a strong bandage firmly, so that the splint does not move from its place, and examine the ligament every day; and all the times it becomes loose, adjust it, and put the splint in its proper place, and guide the patient on their side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or in 25. And when this number of days is completed, then remove it, and be sure, for it is not a thing that sets itself lightly.
And if a piece of bone protrudes forward, and not beneath the heart, if it breaks out, and the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the force to appease an abscess hot.
of the breaking of the skin instead
The skin is not always broken in the middle, but it happens rarely; but it often breaks at the edge. And when it is broken within, it declines beneath, and the patient feels great pain, and faintness, and stupor, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the passages in the broken bone, and the wound seems well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and you place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and join the ribs of the chest to your hands, and subtly adjust them to fit all the ways you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on plasters and bandages above the subtle layer of salt, or another light dressing, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the round ligament to the back, and hold it firmly, and reward every hour the treatment, and if it becomes unaligned, then restrain it; and if you want to remove it, due to corrosion or purulence that comes from the blood, or pain or abscess, hurry up, and remove the plaster, and address what has come in ways of cures; then restore the plaster, and hold it until it is healthy.
of the breakage of the ribs
It happens that the breakage of the ribs does not come from elsewhere but from the large ones behind the back, and at the interior of the head, and they do not feel it except through this because they are slippery; and one feels it well in the inquiry as it should.
And the remedies are that you make equal the breakage, as it is suitable. And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a bandage, so you have mastery of it.
And if the breakage of the ribs is declining inward, the patient feels very great pain, and numbness, just as if it were bruised, because the bone touches the membrane; and there are sharp pains, and a great deal of blood is spilled, and it is a grievous wound, and the old men have put great skill into it.
And if there are those who say that they need to administer foods that inflate the stomach, in order to soften the fracture.
We do not do this, for warm abscesses do not come to life, if they have not arrived. And if they have arrived, then let them be soiled.
And they say that some of those whose veins are opened on the limb, to suck out the ferment, and it seems like a reasonable thing; however, there is doubt that the vein does not attract the superfluities from the limb due to the weakness of its disposition.
And they say that one must cover the limb of the affected member with hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to put the liver in its proper place, then it will be cured of the treatment for pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear because of the abscess that touches the membrane, and fear is in the patient, then it is necessary to open into the broken rib, and put an instrument underneath to ward off the pus; and then one must incise the abscess, and drain lightly, and then close the lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat with plasters, until they are healthy. And if apostemes come, then place a heated drapery soaked in rose oil on the limb; and place it on the limb; and treat while the limb is being opened to remove the aposteme, and apply soothing ointments on the rib where it should be, until they are healthy.
of the broken neck
Sometimes a break comes to the bone of the neck, and soon it will swell; and thus it has a curvature of the spine. And when it happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take heed of their hands being softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel. Know that it is mortally wounded in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when one holds them firmly and steadily, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's ills are cured, so apply a cure.
And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take heed if their feet are softened, and if the affected parts are in their hands, and on the back there is loss of vitality and involuntary evacuation; and when one has evacuated it from their belly, there is involuntary evacuation. And when it is evacuated from their back and they want to sit, they cannot. Know that it is mortally wounded: do not labor in vain over their cure.
And if this accident does not come to them, it is the thing most lightly.
And the cure is that you apply if there is a hot abscess, apply to the spine oil of roses or oil of lavender, as much as it is appeased; then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices, and tie with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel the pain, until they are healthy. And if some bone is dislocated, it is necessary to cover over the heart; and remove the bone, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound, so that it is large, with a bandage, then the treatment of anointing with charcoal, until it is healthy; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the knee", you should put your pouch on your left hand, and place it equally with your right hand at your power, then apply the plaster and the stake above, so that you have mastery; then hold steady, and if there is a dislocated bone, make them straighten up, and remove, and treat the wound until it is healthy.
of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Because the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it is, then there is not a small amount of diminishment at the head; and make a long delay, and decline to the paralysis, and come to the patient's pain in the limbs, and swelling, and inflame what is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, so that you are above the fracture; and know what is the fracture and the shape of it; and if the fracture is at the head only, then place equally on that fracture, so that it is in its natural shape.
And if the fracture is very long, or it declines inward, then make the patient sit on their belly, so that the restoration of this fracture can be facilitated. And when you have made it even, put on the plaster, then put on a splint of wood or of osier, and hold the fracture steady, so that it does not move; and apply the remedy under the ribs, until the ligature is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back.
And if the abscesses come, do not touch them, until the abscesses are appeased, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it is necessary, so that there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
of the fracture of the shoulder
The shoulders are what is between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of the two manners: one of which is that you take a full handful of grease, according to this form:
And lay the shoulders thus, and hold them high, and sit the patient on a stool; then put his broken arm on a stick, until it comes to the seat, and has in the middle of a curve of wood, then lean against something heavy or the attendants hold it steady below; then place the mirrors with the fracture even at their hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other manner is that one wraps the patient in his sheet, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands the attendants that one should hold what is on the fracture at their hands, and the others should hold beneath all the ligaments, and each extends to its part.
Here is the translation:
And if abscesses come, do not hold back until the seventh day, and put a mild ointment on the affected area in oil and rose oil, so that the abscesses are appeased; then hold steady, and the manner of holding steady is that you place the plaster on the break, then assemble the arm at the joint, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and place the dressing, and hold steady on the joint, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper position, so nothing can displace it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone is not moved, use a splint, and place on the break a larger and stronger splint than the others, and have between each splint two fingers' width of space, and let each splint be as large as it passes over the break in two places; then hold steady on the splints, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter on setting breaks, more firmly and less tightly.
And if you see the setting of the splints, and the holding, as we have said, in the process that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is hot, leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine each two days, the bond, lest it becomes inflamed and comes to the proper place, or the nourishments cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted. If you dress, as we have said.
Here is the translation:
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "radius" and "ulna", of which one is small and is the one that follows the pouchet; and the other is large, and is the one that is below, towards the little finger; sometimes the large radius breaks solely, or the small one, and sometimes both break together.
When the small radius is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are broken together. If it's the small radius that's broken solely, then you must extend it lightly, and set it evenly.
And if it's the large radius, then you must extend it more strongly; and stretch it on a cushion, and tie the pouchet of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient lie crossed on himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then place the minister's hand at the part below his hand, or at the joint, and another minister above. And then set the mirrors evenly, according to its best form.
And if in the breakage into pieces, set each one in its place, and if there is none that can be restored to its proper position by pricking the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, make a splint and bind with a bandage, as we have said before.
And if with the breakage into a wound, I have spoken of it to the singular chapter; take the treatment.
And if at the beginning of the restoration, abscesses are forming, apply a dressing; make a covering of cerote oil and white wax, not too hard nor too soft; and lay the dressing on subtly, so that the abscesses are calmed. And then remove the cerote, and put on the plaster made with powder from the mill with abundant water, then place the bandages, and let the bandage of the breakage be a little stronger, and slightly larger than the others; and know that it must have 8 or 10 bandages or arms in different positions: whether the breakage is in one of the bones, or in...; and bind more tightly over the breakage than elsewhere, and remove them less often, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the dressings that are on the breakage be soft and moist, and not hard nor dry; and let the thread, from which it is strained, be of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And rewrap the limb and the ligament after several days. And if any evil accidents come to the limb, just as the pruritus comes to the limb, it is fitting that you treat the limb with warm water, so that the pruritus is calmed; and do not let the limb be too tightly reposed. And then restart the binding, and if the ligaments are weakened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, adjust them accordingly.
And if you take a ward, the numbness cannot come to the limb, because it is too contracted, so it is necessary that you relax it a little, and let it be for some days, until the numbness corrects itself, and then hold it steady.
And if the numbness of these things that we have said does not come to the patient, do not loosen it just until 20 days. or meanwhile, then he puts his hands on his neck, and makes his neck even, and be wary of movement and degeneration, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and as we have said before, there are few fractures, and it does not come but rather often occurs.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient should be crossed, and stood straight in front of him equally; then put his hand on the extended toe, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and put them equal to the mirrors, so they are well joined; and put the plaster and the poultices, lest abscesses come, then he puts a staple according to the quantity of the humor; and it is wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the break is in the palm of the hand towards the belly of the plant, make a sphere of cloth strips, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken plant; and then tighten with a long cloth strip, and let the staple be of soft skin as well as large as the plant of the hand, and tighten, as it is necessary.
And if the break is in the forearm, it is necessary that you put a staple above, and another below in the plant, so that the hand is overlapped and straight, then tie everything together around the hand, and tighten the linen between the two.
And if the break comes to one of our two bones, it is the pouches, put them equal, as it is necessary; and tighten with the plant, and if you see that you put a small straight staple to lift the break, and do not move; and if the break is in the other two, like in the index or one of the others, put them equal, and tie with the healthy bone which is afterwards; or you tie all three together, holding it tight, or you put on a staple, as I have said; and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of the abscess heat, and avoid what comes, as I have said.
of the broken hip
The bone of the hip is often broken, and it can be seen well when it turns in front and behind; and the restoration is done by binding above the breakage, and another below. And the patient puts his face, then each minister stretches out his bandage equally on his part; and it is when the break is within the bone.
And if the break is close to the root of the hip, then one of the bandages is towards the thigh, and the other below the breakage. And also if it is close to the knee, then the bandages are above the knee, and then the extension downwards; then put the mirrors to the bone equally with its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the lie, so that abscesses do not come there.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down, then return to your work and your treatment; the ligature is made in such manner. It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture. Make a double bandage in two or three layers, and leave the surplus hanging down, then twist the leg so that the ankles come to the root of the nail, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, from beneath the knee, and make the head of the thread above; then twist around the leg and the thigh with the bandage, then place these straps on the fracture, and place a stick on the bone of the leg; then fill in the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft folds to equalize the constriction, then start to tie firmly two or three turns around the fracture; and as you go further up the fracture, make it less constricting; then take .ij. heads of thread that you placed between the leg and the thigh, and remove .iij. straps that are above, then return beneath to the head of the thread, until you reach the foot; and the constriction, if it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that no abscess or inflammation comes about similarly.
And if it happens, then dislocate it, and address what comes about, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, then it is necessary to extract, if one can; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to break the bone, and draw forth forcibly; and the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
And sometimes the thigh is broken in this way, as we have placed straps, just like in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration made thus, it does not hide the pain of the patient.
And know that the scab is restored on the same day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of the complexions.
of the gutter of the knee
Know that in the gutter of the knee there is often little breakage, but it folds many times. And if it breaks, it's only a crack, or a perforation, and it has to do with all wounds, and without wounds, and this feels very well.
And the restoration is when one puts back together what is broken at its joints, so that it is assembled as it should be; then put in the dressing, and I put a round stell, if you have mastery of it, and hold it steady as it should be, then re-establish all the arrangements that we have said about other breaks, like hot abscesses and similar things; put each accident back together what is fitting for it, so that it is healthy.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "straight" and the other is called "fibula"; and all the same fracture comes as it does to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the works are all the same.
And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns entirely awry.
And if the subtle bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, it feels great pain, and one sees it well; and turns downwards. Then one must make an extension, and put it in place, and lay the edges evenly; but however, it happens that the break is ugly, and there are many pieces, so that the extension should be smaller and lighter; and adjust according to your strength.
And when you have completed your work, take two flexible rods that enclose the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee to the ankle; then wrap them in two layers of bandages above and below, and bind it firmly, so that the leg does not bend to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one should touch the leg for a long time, for it is fragile, and they put it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly treat it in the fracture where there is pain; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident; if you heal until it is healthy.
of the fracture of the bones of the foot
At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot sometimes break and the toes bend, and it does not happen except in several dispositions.
And if the bones of the foot are broken, and you see them overlapping each other, put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot on the shin, where the bones are lifted, then press until they return to their place; then apply a poultice and bandages above, and put under the belly of the foot a small table with two flat planes, then hold it firmly to the foot, then wrap drapels around, and other things that you have as medicine.
And when ten or twelve days will have passed, if you disentangle the thread, because you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken, whether they are dislocated.
And if there are any of the two bones broken, restore them, as we have said about the fingers; then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little larger, then put under the foot of the table that I have described, and hold it firmly in place; and if there are eleven or twelve, or more, broken, put on each finger a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in a bandage of linen, and hold the foot of the table underneath; and let it be standing above the head of the table, so that it holds the belly of the foot well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, since we have spoken; and attend to each accident as it is necessary.
of the break of the bone of the thumb
Here is the translation:
And when the finger bone of a man or woman is broken, if you restore it as we have said in the case of the ankle bone; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from one who applies his study and use, and reads my book. For the break signifies more than one disposition for the right path of restoration: then give guidance.
On the verge, when it is broken, take an eye of a goat and put it on the verge; then wrap drapels around, and let it be for two or three days, and it will be healthy soon.
of break with wound
It is suitable for one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be healthy now, so that the healthiness that we have said testify to it.
And if the wound is healthy, if you have a residue of vitriol, and you don't have anything else, then recommence to restore the breakage at the same hour, or that day, lest abscesses come.
And if abscesses come, let the restoration wait until the ninth day, as long as the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, lest you cause a bad accident to happen.
And if the broken bone appears on the uncovered heart, it is necessary that you put it in place lightly with your hands, with small extension.
And if the extensions are not suitable for putting in your hands, then reset with this instrument which is of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and it is necessary to put it on the mirror that it holds 3 or 4, according to whether it is necessary in each treatment of breakage; and let it be round and a little thick, so it does not slip from the compression on the member at your work, and let it be steady beforehand, and thick from the middle onwards, thus:
And it is called "palliance", because it requires that the curved head be placed on top of the apparent bone; and the joint is set in one motion, so they align with each other. And if the break is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it requires that you grasp the head of the bone, so the instruments have control over it.
And if you cannot set the bone, as we have said, then take hold of an instrument suitable for that, whether it is an incision or a saw, to your power; then remove what is remaining in the bone of roughness and small scraps.
And when the bone is set, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural state. Do so much that it is in its place, then wrap it with a black sticky plaster, and properly if it is in this state; and do not put anything on the wound that is crude or oily, lest it cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer these when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the break; and many times fools have done this, and have caused death or corrosion on several occasions; and let the strappings be more gentle and softer than the other breaks.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents may occur, as we have said, and you feel pain at the site, then it does not require putting these on; but envelop entirely around, in place of these, wrapping strongly, and bind them. And when you see afterwards, whether it be a day or two, to enwrap the wound with a bow, if you have put anything on it, and anoint it with healing wounds, as you anoint tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
And it is necessary that you anoint the limb three times a day, in the morning and evening, until it be sound and healthy.
And it is necessary that the limbs be wrapped in such a way that the bandage does not bind too tightly.
And if many days pass, and it cannot heal but repeatedly breaks, know that there are small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you touch the wound with tension, and remove all those separated pieces that cause that pain.
And if fistula comes to the limb, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in this chapter beforehand. And when the bone is broken, and opens into the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not touch it, for many times death comes from it, but let it be until it purifies; perhaps it will happen that it heals after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
The bruises that come upon the wound
We come many times after the health of the breakage, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a sad thing to see the shape of the limb; and by chance it cannot do the natural works of the limbs.
Take heed then when it is fresh: if you administer medicines stiptiques, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acaice, and similar others, so that you take none of these things, or all together, and mix them with wine stiptique or with abundant water or with oil; and put them on the wound in poultices, and hold it well, and do not dislodge it for many days; and then remove it, and restart another, until the swelling is gone; or you extract onto a piece of well-made plaster; for the property of the plaster is that it removes all the swellings from the limbs; and if the swelling is already converted into hardness like stone, and it needs to be removed, so scrape off the surface, and make the superfluous apparent; or take it away with some rasour, until it is gone, and the cure until it is healthy.
When the fracture of the bone is restored and remains afterwards with weak and subtle members, it happens for many causes: because one is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many ligatures, and could not bring nourishment to the member; or because of multitude of aromas; or because of too great movements, not at its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, if it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient slim, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath, and give joy and happiness; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the aromas often come from the warm water, so that the nourishment flows to the member; and it returns to its natural figure.
because of a twisted member after the injury
When the member is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is exposed, and the shape of the member is ugly, it does not return to its natural function: so do not believe those fools who say that one must break the member anew, and many foolish surgeons have done this in our land; and these operations are blamed, and great evils come from them, and often death; however, if the nodes and torture are fresh, then you should raise them with warm water, or apply mollifying herbs, such as foilles of vismalve, and roots, and mellilote, and similar things; and make a mollifying plaster, as one does well, and take the musculature of vismalve, and mix it with fat of goose or oil of sesame, and apply it; or take greasy figs, and crush them with flour of colon, and similar medicines that alleviate the swelling.
And many times the node is removed by continuously and lengthily rubbing with moist hands. And so, movement should be restored to the limb at every hour.
And if the twisted tendons are inflamed and hardened, like stones, and need to be burned with iron, so it is necessary to cut just up to the bone, with subtle and light incision; and to put caution and study into the treatment.
Here begins the book on dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to none, if it is necessary now to bring back sense to the stretcher.
For because delay, if one inflames the joints, and by chance if one resets it on a point in the joint; for this reason it is not necessary to move it at the hour when it is inflamed: many times it brings spasms and other pains.
Always, when this happens, if you make the patient healthy, then let him be, until the aposteme's heat is appeased; then lift the member with warm water and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each member as the treatment comes into its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the head just up to the feet.
of the jaws
Sometimes the jaws are dislocated and awkward, and the dislocations of the jaws occur in two ways: either they are somewhat loose from their place, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so it cannot hold it, nor close its mouth, and entangles its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns to its proper position more easily.
And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
and in this manner that the ministers touch the head of the patient, and put their fingers as if from one of their hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocations are of two kinds; and the other finger of the hand should be deft, to set evenly; and instruct the patient to soften them, his jaws, and move them in all parts.
And the fingers put them even, until they return to their place.
And if the reset is grievous, meanwhile it is the two jaws together, if they are warmed with hot water and oil, so that the resets are lighter; do not delay in resetting, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without numbing, if you put on a damp cloth made of oil rose and wax, then tie it lightly with many ligatures.
and the patient lies on his back, and his head is supported between two cushions, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor does he exert himself too much, but takes light food, until the pains are relieved, and the jaws are relaxed.
and then he chews what he wants lightly, and does not struggle to open his mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well relaxed and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be put back in place at one time, and are not converted to their proper use, then fever and strange habits come, and perhaps a solution of stomach, and perhaps a vomiting of pure colic.
And when you see this, then know that it is a perilous condition; and many times he who has had it dies in eight days.
of the force
The force cannot dislodge from the side it presses within the continuation of the limb and the foot, and is often dislocated at the defect, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient places himself on his back, and stretches out his arms; and then presses the limb firmly with your palm, and it will return; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place.
and the joint that is towards the hip cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it does dislocate at any time, reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healthy.
and then the same is reset the head of the spine, when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in four ways: one is when it is dislocated at the part of the joint below; and the second is at the part of the foot above; and sometimes it is dislocated at the top part, and this happens rarely;
and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, and it does not dislocate within for the sinews; and many times it dislocates below towards the joint, especially in those who have little flesh, for in those who have little flesh, it quickly dislocates; in those who have sufficient flesh, it dislocates slowly, and returns slowly.
And by chance it happens to some men that they have a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells up with a hot abscess, and one believes it is dislocated because of this.
It is necessary then that you examine them, as long as you are certain of them; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that the dislocation occurs when it falls towards the axilla, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a clear diversity. and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the axilla touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were an ulcer; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move with any movements.
and thus, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly at the toucher;
and this kind of dislocation is not forced to be reduced, when it is new, or if the patient's illness is bad.
And the method is that the minister lifts the hand of the patient upwards, then puts their fingers underneath the joint, and lifts the joint with force upwards to its place; and the minister lifts the hand, and stretches it upwards, then puts it in place; if it will be hastened.
And if it does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and the minister should anoint soothingly and calmingly, like a decoction of alder, fenugrec, and mellilot in water, and so be anointed.
then be careful with the patient on their back, and place under the joint a stick of equal length, not too soft nor too hard, then put the mirrors by his heel on the stick, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and treat the hand of the patient.
and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder returns now entirely, and if you see that you reset it in this manner.
and it is that you make the patient be present, a man who is stronger than the patient; and stand straight towards the ribs, and put the shoulder under the joint of the patient, and lift the joint high, so that the patient hangs in the air. and another minister treats the hand of the patient downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, then weigh with him some heavy thing, and the dislocation returns now.
And you reset it in another way: and it is as if one plants a long stick in the ground, so that the head of the shoulder should be just like a pestle, neither too big nor too small. then it should be placed under the patient, but he should have soft drapery spread above, and the patient should be stretched out long on a cushion; then his hand should be extended downward from the other side in a straight line, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then make this treatment: take a stick of two cubits and three fingers in length, which has the head bent to enter obliquely under the seat, according to this form:
then place the head of the stick under the cushion, so that the cushion does not touch the patient, then put it under the seat of the patient; and extend your arm on the stick from top to bottom, and place the shoulder on the stick, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on a small chair or stool of one side, and extend the hands downward, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is thus, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary to place under the seat a layer of equal linen, then apply the plaster made with powdered mill dust, with incense and egg white, on the entire shoulder and around, then hold underneath the seat steadily, and turn the ligature around the plaster, and bind the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary to massage a little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then massage more afterwards, 5 or 6 days, and move it; and if it is strengthened and not softened, it is healed.
And if the joint is weakened by moisture or another cause, it is necessary to administer cauterizations at three points, as it is set forth in this chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 8 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are injured or stretched out or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Here is the translation:
And if after healing, stiffness comes to the limb, and later it moves slowly, if the patient is bathed many times, so that the stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its original nature.
of the dislocation where the joint
It is known that the joint where the joint is dislocated is alleviated at points, and at points it returns; and it is alleviated from all parts, and meanwhile before and behind, and the dislocation is not repeated, for one sees well and feels well; and it is alleviated according to each figure. And when you join the diseased joint with the healthy one, then you can see it openly. For the joint is crippled, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset thus, lest abscesses form in the vein, for if abscesses form in the vein, it would be grievous to reset; and by chance it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is at the back; if it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration is, when it is such that you can reset it, that you extend your hand to your hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the count on the inside, above and below, and bend the joint to its fingers together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and strengthens from the root of the palm the count that is out of joint.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold two ministers, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each part, then that you have enveloped a double layer long and wide.
and when the doctor joins the joint to his hand, if he anoints it with no oil to soften the joint, then he sets the joint firmly, until it recovers;
and when it is in its place, if he puts a dry plaster with egg white, and sets it firmly, and binds the arm to the neck of the patient, and leaves it for some days, then he disbands it.
And if the joint is fixed in its place, he disbands the bandage, and leaves it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, he recommences the plaster and the bandage, and leaves it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then he disbands it.
And if it feels irritated after the repositioning of the joint, and it moves, he bathes and rubs it well, and presses until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a fat woolen cloth, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and let him enter into a warm bath. And when it sweats, hold the joint firmly at first, then reset the nail above, and then between or in the bath; and do this two or three times until it is healthy; and if you see that, put on a warm moist compress with borage, and hold steady; so it will return to its proper disposition.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is light, more than the other joints However, it must be quickly returned to its place, in the same way that it was dislocated, so that the limbs are not swollen, or an abscess forms there.
And the remedies are that you put the sick hand on a table, and extend the fingers of the hand, and adjust them evenly, so that you put your palm on the appearance of the joint, and bend it until it returns to its place.
However, it seems like you want me to translate the text line-by-line into English without adding any comments or contextual information. Here is the translation: And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand on the table, and the doctor places his hand on the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that is good.
If not, then hold the swelling down with a gentle pressure on the abscess, and let it settle thus without restarting.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in its place after several days, the twisted joint remains.
and do not touch the patient's arm unless it is numb, and cannot stretch out anything at all: then know that the nerves are pinched, or the arteries; if there is no other remedy than to extract by fire cautery in this case, and perhaps nothing else will work.
And when the hand is in its place, put the dressing on it as we have said, then hold it and let it be still for a while, then release it and leave it so.
And if it cannot move well, and there is no swelling, apply the warm water of a decoction, and rub it until it is healthy.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Never are the fingers of the hand dislocated to any part, never to the back of the palm or to the belly.
then they are ready, and put the dislocation back into its sockets so it recovers, then support the head of the finger, and bend towards the part where it is disjointed;
and let it be for a while, and then put it even that day; and of the joint, as we have said, and loosen it that day, and make it movable, and relieve the joint; and do this frequently, until it is straightened;
and do the same, if it is dislocated at the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy; and do the same, when it is dislocated from another part.
for the dislocation of the spine in the back
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of cure, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations come suddenly without will, cannot be held back, and many times some members are softened, or the two hips or the two arms.
And many times the spine changes in four places; that which changes at the back is called "gilbositez".
The treatment is that you should recognize that gilbositez originated from childhood: if there is no point of cure or sanitation for the entire body.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient people used to say that grand remedies were spoken in great words, where it did not have much benefit at all.
But I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in diverse ways.
I say that in the inflammation that comes before the foot, no one is healthy.
and also that which comes directly to the sides, and one cannot cure those except for that which properly comes to the back, as I say.
and it is that the patient should be extended on his face in a level place, and has the steady hand of another behind him, so he does not faint;
then fix a stick to the ground firmly, and another at his feet, and tie a bandage around the sick person's joints, and another at his thighs, and at his knees, and at his ankles;
and two ministers take care of the bandages, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two sticks;
and be well fastened, the stick as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine firmly, until it is straight again.
And if it does not return with this treatment, take a table of three feet long, and shave underneath the affected area, and let the patient be on their side, and put the end of the table underneath the affected area, then place the middle of the table on the spine. and put the mirrors at their feet on the other end of the table, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, do it with the turntable that turns by hand.
And it is that you place three tongs at the head of the patient's arm of great size, and towards the feet three others, and between each tong, above and below, a palm's width of space.
and have in each tong a small perforation, where the turntable runs, and let the tongs be firmly fixed to the ground, so that they do not move; and between each three tongs have one turning tong, on which the strap turns, and have in two turnings two small tongs of a palm's length, to turn the turntable.
and then the ligament that is among the bones at the turning of the neck towards the head, and the other ligament towards the feet at the other turning, and each of the ministers turns its turning to all the ligament, and the masters place the spine evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, then place on the emplaster of decocction with a lot of egg white, and then the stoups, and then the steel of a tablet of two inches long, which grips the limb of the gibbosity and the part of the healthy spine, then bind with a ligament, as we have said, and use the subtle nourishment of the patient, until they are healthy.
and if anything comes to the end of health, then it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the steel that we have mentioned before; and never administer it with a piece of lead.
and never does the appearance come in the back of the spine behind the ribs, and think that it is dislocations; and it is the bone that opens, because one should not have presumptions: by chance it may bring death.
of the dislocations of the thigh
You know that the joints of the thigh and the joints of the shoulder only come dislocated, not like the other joints; and the joint of the thigh is dislocated according to four parties: within and without, and in front and behind; and more within the hollows, and a little dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the bad leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the patient's knee than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee at the fire. and it is the limb that is swollen from an abscessed hot aposteme, because the head of the hip comes there.
And the sign of the one to whom it comes to the fainting, if it is that this accident is contrary to these beforehand.
And the signs of the one who faints beforehand, if it is that they stretch their leg according to the accomplishment; however, do not double the knee joint without pain, and if you want to make them walk, if they cannot go forward, and retain their urine, and inflame the ankle, and when they walk, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of the one who faints behind, if it is that they cannot stretch their knee, nor double, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is dislocated beneath the ribs.
The reminders of this type of dislocation are that you should reset the dislocation, which is ancient, and it stays according to its disposition, if there is no cure; and it does not seem that he has a presumption.
And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and it's one of the three manners of dislocation, if you hurry to turn the joint, and stretch within and without, and move to right and left; perhaps if it returns, and there is no need for another cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare one strong minister, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee. and another minister extends his hand above in this manner so that he puts his hands under the armpits, then tightens with a soft bandage on the hip; and another holds the head of the bandage.
and they stretch above and below all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This manner of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If this is not so, it is necessary to put a cure in its similarity. When the dislocation is in the shoulder blade, it is necessary that you adjust the patient on their healthy side, then place the bandage at the root of the hip, and the limb which is below the ankle, then stretch the bandage above towards the ankle, and towards the forearm.
then take another minister by the arms, and embrace the large limb of the hip with the injured side, and stretch it out in a straightforward manner: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot secure it in this manner that we have said, it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the injured patient together with a strong bandage above the two heels, and above the two knees, and so the injured leg is stretched out two inches more than the other.
then let it be suspended from the top of a pole, and let it be two yards above ground; then instruct a minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let another minister be suspended with the patient, who strongly embraces the hip, for the joint returns quickly now.
And when the dislocation is at the thigh, thus guide the patient, as we have said in the one who has gout, and stretch a line on the affected leg properly, and also on the foot.
then place two splints, one at the head and another at the feet, then fix a splint between the hips of the patient in the shape. and have moist cloths applied around, so that they do not bind the patient too tightly, then extend each minister towards him, and the mirrors place their hand equally on the dislocation.
Here is the translation:
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the affected leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and put the fingers of one hand on top of the affected joint, then press with the other hand, and extend downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to stretch the affected part downwards, nor lift from the ground, but rather it should be as if the joint was dislocated at the back, as we have said about lying on the .ij. joints; and be on its face, and the bandage is stretched out as we have said before, and one should press on the joint at the table;
and it will be a point when the patient stretches out their legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hips, and put in place the plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the joint does not move.
and rest .iii. hours or .iiij., then dislocate, and put the plaster on; and if you see that they are even, hold steady, as before, and let it be .iii. hours; then dislocate, and make them walk slowly, until the limb is comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knees are dislocated in three ways: namely, inward, forward, and backward; and not at all in front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg to his thigh, and if it does not adhere to his thigh, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and put your foot against his feet;
then take his knee in your hands, and withdraw between your two, then bend the two joints of the knee in their natural form; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he has well aligned his leg to his thigh lightly;
and put the plaster on, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together strongly for 3 or 4 days, then remove it; and do not disturb the patient's pain further, until the limb is comforted.
And if the limb is not in place, administer a strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it be healthy.
of the dislocation of the ankle
The ankles are sometimes swollen, and sometimes entirely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
And the signs are that the ankle is inflamed, and it pulls towards the part where it is dislocated:
The reset is easier, and one should extend it gently with their hands when it is slightly swollen.
And when it is completely dislocated, then you must make the patient sit upright, and hold him firmly by the leg, above the ankle.
Then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left. Do this several times, then stretch upwards, and push the foot well upwards.
And do this several times, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns to its place, that's good; if not, start the treatment again, for it will return.
And if it cannot return thus, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix a strap firmly in the earth between his thighs, and wrap the dressing around, so that it does not slip away from the patient.
then they apply the minister's clip, and another minister extends the foot to his hands or to the string, so that he lies on the column of the foot; then each minister extends equally, and the straps are placed between the clips of the patient's hips to retain the patient when one stretches them;
then they put the mirrors equally on the dislocation with their hands, and another minister holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation returns quickly.
And when it is at a point, they put the plaster and bandages on, and they tighten strongly, and bind the foot to the leg, and watch over the nerves that are behind the knee, so that the ligaments are not too stretched.
Then let it be for three days or four, and hold the bandages in place, then strain; then loosen it on the third day or quarter, and allow the patient to move about for three days. and if he goes beyond this term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses or wounds come, it is necessary that you treat them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
of two
When the fingers are dislocated, they must be beautifully extended without strain, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any of the toes or feet, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press your foot firmly, until it returns to its place.
And when it is even, and there is no opening, you put under the sole of the foot a table at the shoulder, then hold firmly, and let it be for two days, then disengage; and make it rest, until it is healthy.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often it happens that the patient dies.
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, be wise in the art and you have not used it for a long time, and be piteous and merciful and slow, not hasty.
and apply gentle remedies at the beginning of hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope for health. and when you see hope, reset the limb to its place now, so that the hot abscesses may subside.
and when the limb is in its place, if you administer soothing things to calm an abscessed area, and heal the wound, as it is fitting, with dry ointments.
and also with a dislocation and a break, and you will not be in a hurry, if you reset the bones, and do what we have said about simple illnesses.
and beware of entering into a path of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worth more to you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and your body. Amen.
