You, most dear sons, I have completed this book which is the latest of the science of medicine together with its filling, and have finished it according to his explanations and by his declarations. And it has come to me in vision that I shall complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from all things, so the science has perished and been dismembered, and there remains nothing but small descriptions in old books that the hands have moved. And from this has come error and vanity, and the intentions are closed off and the science is estranged.
Or it seems to me that I shall vivify it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the instruments for cauterizing and other tools of work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And because of this reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is estranged. And it is fitting for him who sets himself to it to master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the justice of the members, and their forms, connections, and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and ligaments and the number of joints, and the movement and rest of the veins and muscles, and from where they issue.
And therefore, as Hippocrates says, the name with the name is much, and with the work it is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
We tell you in the introduction to this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said before, must beware lest he err and kill men; thus I have often warned many of those who undertake this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
For I saw a foolish physician who cut into an abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of her neck; therefore so much blood flowed out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another physician who treated a stone in an old man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he took out a piece of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been summoned to treat it, and saw the patient's condition and the greatness of the stone, and knew well that if it was not taken out he would die.
And I saw another physician who undertook to treat a duke of our land who had his leg broken and with the break was wounded; and the ignorant physician forced the break over the wound as far as he could, and did not leave any flesh intact, and left it in this state for so long that the leg became all inflamed and came to ruin.
I was called upon to come to him, and I hastened to come and release the leg; and when I had released it, he was at ease and felt no pain.
But in any case the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was completely lost.
And I saw another physician who opened a gangrenous abscess, and then inflamed it through the wickedness of his treatment.
For when a chancre is pure of melancholic humor, it does not seem right to touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
And therefore, most dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, one where there is danger in multiple situations; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore it is necessary that you guard yourself, so that the foolish physician cannot speak ill of you.
Take your arms in custody, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave the frightful diseases to grievous sanitation; and take away your arms from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galien says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on a bad disease unless you are called a foolish physician."
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicinal cauterizations, and it is the chapter organized from head to feet; and about the forms of instruments, and tools for cauterizing, and everything that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about poultices and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter organized and has the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things; and it is organized from head to feet, and has the forms of instruments.
Therefore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of the aid and harm of each temperament.
I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest and most subtle speech and secret answer; and many wise men have spoken about it and agreed with it; and I find their words too short for my purpose, because I fear the length.
I say that cauterization helps universally all complexions where there is matter, except for two complexions: namely, hot temperament with matter and dry temperament with matter.
In hot and dry complexions with matter, some have divided and said that cauterization is great aid; while others have said the opposite: that cauterization is of no use in disease that comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat or dryness; and says he who says the opposite that cauterization makes great aid in hot and dry disease that comes to men's bodies. For when you understand the body of man and its moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it to be true some times through experience.
And besides, do not meddle in matters that concern only those who have tried it and know through long experience the book of cauterizations, and the diversity of temperaments of men, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and the remedies and expectations of time; as for other temperaments, we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the physicians gathered together and agreed on the cautery.
And know, son, that fire cautery is assembled together with the secrets of cures, and more great goodness than burning medical cautery.
For fire is simple, and does not come forth except to the member that is burned, and does not harm another member unless it be its own.
The burning medicines come from one member to another, and bring to the afflicted member grievous disease; and by chance, they kill the patient.
The fire because of its height and the goodness of its substance does not do that, if there is no superfluity.
And I have found this in experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it stands on the truth of things; and therefore I excuse myself for the length of my words, for it does not please me to take away the secret which is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says by demonstrating; so receive it into your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done and chose precedents.
And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the impending harm is mitigated by the aid of cauterization; and likewise if the cauterizations are for necessary and pressing pains that cannot wait for a later time when greater evil may come to the member.
And never think this, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and they say thus; but it is not so as they suppose, because cauterizations are nothing but a medicine that changes the complexion, dries out the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is more valuable than other medicines in its haste and virtue of its work and power.
And a possible thing is that the disease comes to be according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue; and there are superfluities assembled in it through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered at the right time or place where there is excess moisture, as with cauterizations for denseness due to pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and that is true; but they do not believe that cauterizations are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and it is because when we administer methods of treatment for some disease and they are not effective, then we administer cauterization, and it is worth it. Therefore it appears well that cauterizations are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
The ancients said that cauterizations with gold instruments are more effective than those with iron ones, and they did not say this except for the quality of gold and its high substance; and they said that the place of cauterization does not make corruption, but this is not true because I have tested it, and I have found that it is true in some people; and gold cauterizations are more valuable than iron ones, as they said.
And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it has been heated by the color of the gold, and it soon becomes cooled down; and if you heat it too much, it melts in the fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
And therefore we use fire cauterization because we have made it appear suitable to our work.
And I have ordered this chapter from the beginning to the end, because the way may be more light for you to find.
of olive cauterization
These cauterizations are worth against moisture and cold on the head, and there are two ways in which we do this because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for multitude of dreams and pain of denseness and pain of the throat, and indeed for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cauterization is that the patient be purged by a soluble medicine, moistening the head three or four times, according to what the virtues and age and habituation of the patient can tolerate; and then make the patient's head cold.
And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands on the same weight; after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and let the blood flow from there until it is burned with the cautery called "olivare", which is the form:
And place it on the marked spot with ink, and make it descend and spread your hand little by little in twisting; then lift your hand suddenly, and reward the spot if you see bone 1/4 inch thick; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; after that, take a small piece of silk, and put it in a soft and wet cotton cloth, and place it on the spot, and let it stay for three days; then put on a moistened linen bandage in butter; and leave it on until the scab is removed; after that, cure the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
And the ancients said that when a wound remains open longer, the more it purges itself; and therefore it is more helpful.
And some of them said that one should cauterize so much that part of the bone is burned, and then take away what has been burned from the bone, and be healed.
And others say that one should cauterize so much on top, and push it so hard that the bone is reduced to as wide as a finger's width that women put in their purses for this reason, so that the humors may flow out; and one must leave the wound open long enough; after that, one must cure and suture.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be good in all respects, except for some people who have a way with fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; because the key is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we witness in other members; and indeed when the patient's key is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salutary and purging for me, and from this use I work towards a gathering of health.
of ancient pain of the head
When a chronic pain comes to the head and lasts long, then the patient should use yarrow and pills called "cochie", and cleansing of the head with oils and plasters; and if one does the fire cauterization that we mentioned before, it is not effective.
Take care if the head of the patient is of a hot nature and not too cold; then cauterize it beneath that cauterization that we mentioned above.
After that, make a cauterization on each horn of the head just up to the bone, as we mentioned before, and make one cauterization in the place called "vasselz"; and there is one place where you put poultices; and hold your hand so that you don't see right up to the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cauterization than in the others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations on the horns be more subtle than those used for cauterizing the middle part of the head, and that is the form:
of the head cauterization When sudden pain comes to one part of the head and spreads to the eye, and the head is cleansed by common medicines, and all the other treatments that I mentioned in the division of diseases have been tried, and none of it profits: then he should make cauterizations according to two ways, that is to say, by medicinal fire and by burning.
The medicinal fire cauterization is when you take a dose of althea, remove the bark and pound it into one part as two horns, then make an incision in the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can place the dose of althea under the skin; and when it has been placed, tie it well and strain it for 12 hours; then release it and treat the wound so that it is open for 2 or 3 days; then apply a poultice in butter until purification occurs.
After the ointment treatment until it is healed; and if you see that this applies to some of the burning medicines that I have written about or in the treatise on burning medicines.
The fire cauterization is done according to this manner. Heat the cauterizer as follows:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or clover with one part of corbeure, and it appears to have a small opening; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly, so that half of the espace of the key is burned; then lift your hand when the artery does not burn, which is outside, and let out an abundance of blood.
After that, put cotton in awe of silk, and place it on the spot for 3 days; then put moistened cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cauterization called "cultellare", do it all at once, and be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine which is not very old.
of migraine
When you treat migraine as we mentioned before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauterizations previously discussed for medicine and fire do not suffice, then it is necessary to heat the cauterization called "cultellare" until it turns white; and afterwards place it on the aching spot a line and a half long, and hold your hand once, and strain so that you do not cut the artery and come right up to the bone; and beware of the jaw when eating, and the nerves have no regard except for the mute one, and spasm does not come to the patient; and beware of the blood flowing from the artery when it is cut, or if it has great fear and especially for him who does not know how to do it and is not a student or experienced in this matter; and leave the work in my way; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it belongs in this book.
And if you see that these cauterizations do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the head in the same way as we mentioned before, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see fit, administer the cauterization that we mentioned or the chapter on extracting the artery, with the cauterizer that has two knives; and this cauterization is better than the previous one and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears due to coldness
When pain comes to the ear due to coldness and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other treatments that we mentioned in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat this cauterizer called "poins" as follows:
After, puncture all around the diseased ear, or around both ears if the pain holds in both, and move away a little from the root of the ear after you have marked the place to prick; and make 10 punctures around each ear; afterwards, cure the wound until it is healed.
of the torture of the mouth
Torture that must be cured by cauterization is only one of those that move from phlegm, as we mentioned in the divisions of disease; and do not make any cauterizations on similar things that come from scorched skin and spasms of nerves.
When you cure this appearance of torture that moves from phlegm and from cleansing of the head and gargling, and it does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, another a little beyond the temple, and the third in the junction of the two lips; and place the cauterizer on the part that appears healthy, and make the cauterization near the head of the ear above a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple just as long as a thumb; and leave the cauterization until half of the key is burned; and this is the form of the cauterization:
And this is similar to the "cultellare" that we mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the knives be a little bigger; after that, cure the wound as I mentioned before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we mentioned before, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then do three cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one on the spot called "vasselz" as we mentioned before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and it should be cured as we mentioned before.
Lepers suffer from a condition known as ergotism
To this disease it is necessary to give the patient great year's and pills of molybdenous brain; afterwards, raise the chief part of the patient all, and place a plaster of mustard on the back of the head, as written in the treatise of plasters; and that is the manner of cauterization: if you do it as I have said.
If he is healed thus, well it is; and if not, make him three cauterizations around the head descending to the neck, with two inches of space between each cauterization; and cure him as the others, and if you see anything swelling, and the patient is suffering, make one cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and cure him until he is healed; and that cautery which is called "olivare", as I have said before.
of the coldness of the head It is necessary that the head be cleansed with years and what we have said before; afterwards, raise the head of the patient, then make a cauterization in the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you have more need, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most of the soreness is burned, and lift your hand; afterwards, cure him until he is healed, and that cautery which is called "olivare" as we have said before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should only use a cautery in cases of those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to cleanse the brain with years and other treatments that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from severe medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot endure it, make him gargarism and mastication cleansing the brain often with good meats; afterwards, raise the head in the middle, and make one cauterization as we have said before, and one on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is severe and suffering, make cauterizations as I have said to someone who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and be the olivary cautery according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is a child, make one subtle cauterization according to this manner:
When by the cause of melancholy the superfluities or moists are corrupted and become thick phlegm, then cauterize as we have said to someone who has paralysis.
And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then make him drink something through which the brain may be cleansed, according to what is said before in the division.
After raising the head of the patient; after make one turban of linen well made, like a circle, and put it on his head; and the patient should be crossed, and held tightly from all sides; afterwards, present the liniment, and moisten with butter of ancient burdock; and heat it temperately so that the thread can be inserted without causing him to suffer; afterwards, empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week for another good governance, until he is healed.
Or if you see that the cauterization is causing many points throughout the entire cauterization. This manner of cauterization moistens the brain sufficiently; and then put on a damp cotton cloth in butter and goose grease.
of the awe of the eyes When awe comes first to the eyes by the signs I said in the division, then begin and make the patient drink something cleansing the head, and ward off all moists, and make him sweat or take a bath several times fasting.
After instruct him to lift his head back, and make a cauterization in the head, and make two cauterizations on each temple if the descent of awe is to both eyes together, or to one eye; and close all the veins and arteries that are below the hair, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple; and take care of bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it as well as you can with your skill.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incision how to stop it; and never make a cauterization or cut under the two bones behind.
of the heart of tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or beneath the arteries that appear on the forehead; and one sees that it is cold phlegmatic superfluities, then make the cauterization that I said at the beginning of awe descending to the eyes: one cauterization in the head, and two cauterizations on each temple, and two cauterizations or cuts under the two bones behind; and if there is more need, then cauterize slowly above the eyebrow with each small cauterization.
of the heart of tears within the eyes
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit at all, then make the patient drink three cooked cockroaches; afterwards, raise the head, and make a cauterization in the middle of the olivary cautery; and make two cauterizations on each eyebrow, one a little below the hairline; and take care not to cover the artery. And that is the form of the cauterization which is called "clavilis":
When the parchment of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this olivary cauterization. This is its form:
And if you see that you make two cauterizations on each eyebrow as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave your hand until the third part of the parchment is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
of the hair that pricks the eye Never is it the case that the hairs of the eyes are converted downward and prick the eye, and then one makes cauterizations according to two manners: that is to say by fire, or by burning medicine.
Or the cauterization by fire commands the patient to let his hairs grow long and equal; and if they prick him at their growth, then bind his eyes so that they do not move until they are grown.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a warm bath; afterwards mark on paper the shape of the eyes, like the curve of the myrtle leaf, and make the beginning of the sign below the hairs; then put damp cotton wool soaked in egg yolk and persimmon juice on the eye, then heat the cautery to form.
After cauterizing on the figure you have marked out little by little many times, until the skin is burned in that place; and the sign of the healthiness of the work is when you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it be thus for three days, then put damp cotton wool into butter until the blister is gone; afterwards treat with oil until they are healed.
And if afterwards the hairs come, and the paper is softened, then start again with the cautery on that same spot, just as you did at first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and is even, and do not prick the hairs against the eye.
The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; then make a form on parchment like the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and live charcoal, each one third, and mix them well together, but hurry so it does not cool down, then put it on the shape you have made, like the leaf of myrtle, and place it on the paper of the eyes; and if the patient holds only in one eye, then work on that one, and if in both, then do it to both; and put damp cotton wool under the eye in egg yolk; and the patient's head should be in a warm bath and you show your two fingers above the medicine, and press little by little every time the patient feels the burning of the medicine, for they feel burning as if from fire. When you have done this long enough, then remove the medicine from your hand. And when the burning has passed, then lift up the leaf of aloe, and check if you see the paper raised just as if it had been lifted by constriction of fire or incision; and if so, then it is well. If not, then put more medicine on the spot where the medicine has not worked, until your works are even and your eyes are in place; then put damp cotton wool into butter until the burned skin is gone, afterwards treat the leaf with oil called "dyafenis" and others, until they are healed.
And if it is necessary for you to take great care with your work so that the medicine does not harm the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then start again with the medicine on that same spot which has been softened by the natural paper, just as you did before; afterwards treat until it is healed; and this is the form of the myrtle leaf:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this they should be constrained; and it is not fitting for the right way to be shown to one who does not have the study of this art.
The translation of the title is "On the Treatment of Fistula by Cautery".
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you make a cauterization according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put their head in your lap; and hold the men's servant's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or leave its head; afterwards put damp cotton wool soaked in egg yolk or persimmon juice on the eye; afterwards heat the cautery which is shaped like this: it is shaved to the shape of a vulture's feather, together with the quill being the cautery; if you see, then it should be pointed from one head to another, and if you see, then it should be like a tent; but however, what is shaved is worth the movement for your work.
Afterwards press the fistula if it is open, and extract the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, then operate, and extract from behind; afterwards put hot cauterization on top, and hold your hand to the cauterization at the part of the neck above the eye, so that your hands do not act foolishly; and put the cauterization in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cauterization just to the bone, then it would be well. If not, then start again with the cauterization one more time, and another if needed, and leave it for three days; afterwards put damp cotton wool into butter, and the drying oil treatment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass without being healed, then put on corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; and the rest according to what it would come in its chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. Understand about fistulas, and open the opening; afterwards put in the opening one subtle camel's hair of which it has the form: and make it to the quantity of one third of a pint; and hold your hand or camel's hair firmly, and do not let the patient move until the melted wax runs onto their eye; and it is necessary to put damp cotton wool in egg yolks or aloe on the patient's eye: the wax soaks into the fistula, and heals by marvelous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer a poultice to the neck, and bring the fistula back to its natural place in the neck according to what is fitting for its own location.
The translation of the title is "On Cracks in Lips". Very often there occur cracks on lips called "pilous", and even on children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing knife according to this form:
And put it in those cracks as quickly as possible until it comes to a point; afterwards treat the area with cerote oil until it is healed.
The translation of the title is "On the Abscess of the Throat".
When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the uvula or palate or at the roots of the teeth; and after it has become purulent and swollen and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, but it does not help: then it is necessary that you have a cauterization according to the size of the fistula; afterwards block or pierce the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron becomes hot and comes to the point of the abscess, and then make it so once or twice; afterwards treat as we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the area and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
Movement of teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and it doesn't work, then put the patient's head in your hand; afterwards, apply the cautery where the form will come next in this manner as if you put a rope around the tooth; and put hot caustics inside the cautery quickly, and hold for so long that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards, lift your hand and reapply the cautery according to your will; afterwards, fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and let it stay an hour and have a rich fever.
And in this manner the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the gums made soft are restrained, and the moisture corrupted is dried.
Of the pain of the teeth.
When the pain of teeth comes from coldness, whether it is true or apparent, and medical treatments do not work, then there is need for a cautery in two ways: and the butter cautery and the fire cautery.
The butter cautery is such that you take whale fat and the end of a iron or clay spoon; afterwards, take cotton and wrap it on the point of a tent, and soak it in melted butter, and put it on the painful tooth quickly and hold until it cools down; and thus do it often until its virtues come to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton are soaked in cold butter, and put it on the painful tooth, and put a hot iron on top until the fire reaches the crown of the tooth.
The fire cauterization together is such that you take a iron or clay tube, and it should be thick so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; afterwards, heat the cauterizer, so that the form will come next, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterizer cools down; do this often, for the pain will be gone that same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter in the excitement of this cauterization, and then let it run richly; and this is the form of the cauterization:
When scrofulas are of phlegm and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion through medicines, then heat the cauterizer so that the form will come next, and have two openings for the fumes to exit at the other part; and put the hot cauterizer on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put the cauterizer according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and put moistened cotton in butter so that the burning sensation is gone; afterwards, cure the joint with ointments and tents until it is healed.
When the moisture prevails on the channels of the humoral temperament, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first through soluble medicines; afterwards, do a cauterization at the root of the throat, and be careful not to come too close to the throat, and only burn slightly. Afterwards, do another cauterization at the jointure of the neck at the top of the spine, and this is the "clavicle" which we have the form before; and cure the joint as we said before until it is healed.
Of the throat. When all and every disease of the humoral temperament is of cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or heat, and it is an old disease, then do two cauterizations on the navel in the lap; and another cauterization inside the chest between the breasts; and this is the "clavicle" according to the form that was said before.
And if you see, do a cauterization in piercing at the entire cauterizer that is called "poins" which has the form as before in the disease of the ears; and be the poins up to 30 or nearby. Afterwards, cure the joint according to what was said before, and this cauterization should be done at three days according to this form:
And because of this the cauterizations are lighter, because you do three in one go.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder. See my previous translation: After that, instruct the patient to lie on his back and on his side; after lift the key which is inside the title with your left hand's finger; and if the joint is dislocated inwardly, then heat the cautery which has two iron rods, as this is the form:
and cauterize the key until it is pierced all the way to the side, and the figure of the cautery comes together with three cauteries; and for this reason it is done with the cautery that has three rods, because the figure of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerves follow according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has three rods:
And sometimes it is applied on top of one of these nerves, which is why there are eight cauteries.
After that, put on the cautery some powdered gall with oil; after make the patient rest, and do not move his members for a long time until he is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little harm occurs, then make a cautery on the thick part of the clavicle, or many cauteries in piercing. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
of the pleurisy cautery
The ancients said that for pleurisy one should make cauteries of aristologe roots, and in this manner: take a long aristologe root, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as big and as long as your arm; and soak it in oil, and apply it to the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the breastbone and the neck, and two small cauteries somewhat downward in the part that is below the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little behind; and one cautery in the chest, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two by the ribs of the chest after the cautery that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but rather do it openly just as you would smell.
And some ancients said that someone uses a fire cautery similar to a razor, and heats it and puts it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess; and the pain jumps out, just as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or an opening comes which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you cure the disease of the mouse according to what we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit, then I add three methods of cauterization that are all good.
One of the methods is that you make three or four cauteries, in aligning according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver cautery that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cautery, and let the patient lie down on his back;
And another method of cauterization is that you heat the cautery which has two rods, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the key which is near the mouse, or the patient's skin comes towards the left side, and let the elevations which you lift be according to the key, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
After that, put the two rods inflamed so that the key is pierced from the other side, and then remove the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see, then cauterize all the way to the cautery with three rods. After that, cure him when he has gotten better after a long time, and this works better than the other cures previously mentioned.
of dropsy
Cauterization is not effective for dropsy, except by the method called "asclytes". When you cure according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the mouse, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the chest; and let the cauteries be well close to the edge of the key.
After that, let the cautery remain open to generate healing for a long time, and do not cease the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and both intentions would be together with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the one that we have shown before as a clavicle; and the one for the back is olive-shaped, according to what has been placed here before.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and are full of yellowish water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery so as not to turn. And do not enter too deeply, thus the yellowish water would be released, and let the cauteries be according to this form:
After that, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the little finger; and let the cauteries be long, one below the kneecap in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries open for a long time without curing, until the yellowish water is released; after that, cure with the other cures that we have said.
of the menstruation
When the uterine solution comes from coldness and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestine are relaxed, and cannot be cured by methods of cures; and you see the patient suffering strongly and having great virtue, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said here before or the stomach cautery, at the circulatory cautery; and three subtlety cauteries around the belly, each as fine as a clavicle, and two cauteres on the hips.
And if you see the moistures abundant and the patient suffering, then make a cautery on the thumb, and one cautery on each kneecap, and two small cauteres on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
of the cure of hemroids
When the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and are old and are caused by gross cold and moist humors corrupted, and are not cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is entirely behind the almacate pouch and gradually forming a triangle, and one cautery below the belly. Two should be done;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, and the meat is not cooked, and one sees the face swelling, then one must make a great cautery on the stomach, as said before, and another on the liver, and another on the mucus everywhere at all the cauterizing; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
of the fatness which is called "thelul"
When you cut to the fatness which is called "thelul", if you scrape off the cautery that appears as a razor, and then put it all ablaze on that fatness being cut; and leave your hand so long until the cauterizers come out at the birth of the vein, from which blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much fatness, then cauterize each one just as we have said; after curing with ointments for as long as they are healed; and if you cauterize a great cautery on the navel, it will have greater aid.
of an uncured wound
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
When to anyone comes a fistula, and it is inflamed and discharges putridity and corrupted moisture, then you must prove all of it with a subtle tent, and be sure that you know the depth of the tent entirely. Afterward, scrape off the cautery which appears as a razor, and fill it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and continue the cautery until those corrupted parts are burned, once, or twice, or three times, according to the quantity of what is needed; and beware not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and the great veins. If the fistula goes into the bladder and intestine, then be wary of these places, and do not make fires except in a charred place, and think that it is not yet healed; after curing the wound until it is healed, and if the wound is sauced, and the matters are removed long times, then know that the wound is entirely healed; and if the matters are not removed, know that the wound is torn open, and corrupted bone to the front; and thus as one of those that we will say in its place.
of kidney disease When the pain of cold comes to the kidneys, and from excessive moisture, and does not take shape like a woman's, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the kidneys from one side and the other at the cautery clavicle which we have said before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizers in a line, and they will cause greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the part behind the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic hair begin, and one to the right and one to the left, and each cautery be as long as a thumb's breadth; and make one cautery behind the back, or two if you need them; and the cauterizers be clavicle-shaped according to the form said before.
of the uterus When the uterus is cold and moist, and does not leave a means for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come, one feels great pain: then it is necessary to make three cauterizers around the mouth, as we said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizers behind the back; and be the cauterizers clavicle-shaped, as we said.
of the groin
When the viscous moisture descends to the groin of the haunch, and because of this, it moves from its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the wound of departure is found, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the groin of the haunch with one cautery resembling a circle, and sign in front of the wound around the groin as it turns, so that the groin is inside the circle; and let the cauterizers be such as those which we have cauterized the stomach.
And if these cauterizers are not present, make three large cauterizers of the olivaire, and let them be as deep as all the colors; and cure until it is healed.
of the pain in the groin When pain comes to the groin of the haunch, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured with what we have said in the division and the cure does not hold, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors by fetid pills or other good-smelling pills.
After that, make a cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two manners: namely, together medicines burning, and cauterization by fire. Cauterization by fire is according to many manners, one of which is this: you must make three triangular cauterizers on the groin of the haunch in this form, and make a good depth and size, and have between each cautery a space equal to the thickness of a thumb, and be the cauterizers olive-shaped; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on the head of the haunch, therefore there are four according to this form:
And if you see that it should be cauterized at the cautery of the circle which we said before in the dislocation of the haunch; but make it in this manner so that the circle contains all the haunch and all the spaces of the color are burned.
And this is the manner in which one does it in sciatica, when the pain holds in the haunch and does not reach as far as the thigh or knee. And if it comes as far as the thigh and knee, then make two cauterizers on either side where the patient says that the pain holds, and one cautery above the ankle three thumbs to the left part; and be the cauterizers cutellaire, and let the flesh of the color be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends as far as two toes or almost so, then cauterize where they feel the pain, either three points or four at the cautery called "points".
And if it is necessary, make more; and if it seems that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then make a cautery at the cutellaire or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauterizers that you do not leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause more great nuisance and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who had a fire cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they were left so that the leg was completely swollen, and the feet also, and it was pierced and corrupted all over the feet. After a purging of the belly in which he got his death.
And if the pains are in two parts together, make a fire cautery on one and the other, according to this manner.
And be scalded until it is entirely red and gives off sweet smells, and then put on the boil of the sick person's backside, and be turned over on the healthy side; and have one fire cauterization repeated and leave it three days; and then make a poultice with butter, and let the wound remain open for a long time; after the cure by anointing until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use a little of this cauterization due to the fear of its gaze, and if we see none who use it; and yet these are good cauterizations, which can be borne by those where it is applied.
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or from excessive evacuation or from similar cold matter spread out, none of these likenesses is worth cauterizing, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary afterwards that the patient be freed from fetid pills or similar things, and one makes signs on the back where the pain stays, three lines marked with an "enche", and in each line five or more cauterizations depending on the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and make the cauterization according to the cauterization called "poins"; and if you see, do three or four cauterizations at the cauterizing point middle according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight, thin skin when they rise, and fear; and you will find in the last vertebra of the back and on our appearance which appears above other vertebrae.
When you see this and you know how to cure it, then cauterize at the cauterizing point of that according to this form.
And so the cauterization will prick each part of the vertebra equally. And if you see, then cauterize around the vertebra at the piercing point 2 or 3 lines, and let the points be close to one another. After cure, leave it so long as it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not administer a cauterization in gibbosity which is in spasms of nerve.
of the pain of joints
When the pain of joints is due to moistors that are spread out in each member of the body, and when pain comes into feet, which physicians properly call "podagre", and when it is from a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterizations in this manner: make many cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, if the cauterization makes a point at every point; and if pains come to just above the knee and to other joints, and this happens many times, then make three or four cauterizations on each part of the joint, all olive-shaped; and if you need more, then make more, but do not hold your hand back for as long as the sparks of fire are burned.
And if the pains descend to just above the knee and back, then administer the cauterization that we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the wrist 2 lines; and if there remains pain in the shoulders, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to just above the hips or just above the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and do good governance with the patient and take medicines. For if you do good governance and purge phlegm, he will be healed by the aid of God.
of the itch of the scrofula
When itch comes to pustules, and the boils descend to the groin and it is new, then it is necessary that when you see it cured, he does not annoy me that day; and that he uses things which loosen his bowels, so that the evil descends from his belly; after make him sit on his back between my hands, and command him to hold his breath until the boils are healed, and then cauterize below the itch on the bone of the elbow, and mark a sign like a half-circle above the body; then scald the cauterization in this form:
so that it is white and gives off sweet smells. Then reset the boils to their place; and make him hold his hand on it so they do not return backwards; and work well the hips on the patient, and put a cushion and a servant under them on the hips, and another one on the chest which holds his hands; then put the cauterization on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again another time until you reach the bone; and be mindful subtly that the boil does not burst when you make the cauterization; nor burn him; and that by this the patient may not die or suffer other evils.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cauterization, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauterizations of children be subtle according to their measure, and those of big people also big according to theirs; after three days cure the place of the cauterization with butter until the scarring is removed; after treat him with other ointments until he is healed, and make the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound is well sealed; and it is necessary that their swellings be made to subside slowly, so that the boil does not burst when they will go into chambers.
And after 40 days, when he will want to get up, give him a well-made bandage and apply it for another 40 days; and have good rest, so that he does not overwork himself and beware of excessive drinking and eating, and loud shouting; and when he has followed this instruction, he is entirely healed. And I will say afterwards about the cure of cutting in its chapter. of the itch of the belly
When itches come to other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make one cauterization of the same cauterization repeated according to its quantity, and let the third part of fire be burned; after cure according to what we have said; and some of the old ones have said that it should be cauterized at three angles according to this form:
but mark the first sign on the edge and make a line across the itch above and another below, and place your hand in the middle of the entire cauterization like a hinge. But the first cauterizations are lighter and more subtle.
of ancient pain in any member When pain comes to any member, whether it falls or is hurt, and that pain lasts long, and the cure of medicine does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize with the fire caustic called "points", and the cauteries should be made according to the length of the member, its smallness, weakness, virtue, and location of twists and pain. If he is healed from the first cauterization, that's good; if not, start another one on top of it, for these customs are such that the member must change where it is nearest, so you should make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
of sickness
The sick are helped sometimes by cautery with great help, and even the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it being cauterized, take heed if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not return or remain, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the patient, then do 5 cauteries on the head: 1 inside the head up to the forehead, and another towards the front at the end of the hair; and 2 on each horn, and 1 behind on the back of the head; and leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of thick humors can issue forth; and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is beforehand.
And if the sickness is spread everywhere; and it is manifestly failing, then it is necessary that you cauterize with those cauteries we have said on the head, and 1 cauterization behind the nape of the neck, and 2 cauteries on the spine of the neck, and 6 cauteries on the spine of the back, and 1 great one on the hump and another below, and 2 on each shoulder; and 2 on the sides, and 2 on the tendons of the breast, and 1 on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and take heed of the nerves that are behind the calcant, lest you burn them; and sometimes make a cauterization on the bone of the shoulder-blade, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more I make of a cauterization, the more it brings aid and moves the profit; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cauterization as healthy people do, because the body is already completely corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of iron. Afterward, apply a poultice made with flour and honey and other cures until he is healed.
of swelling
When swelling comes to any member and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, but it is not healed, then one makes cauteries on the member according to its greatness and smallness; and the cauteries should be a little way into the flesh of the vein. Then apply an ointment treatment until he is healed. And sometimes one makes a cauterization at the hand and foot and back, at the end of the nerve that moves the member, and thus the swelling is removed; and yet no one interferes if they are not knowledgeable about the members and the issues of the nerves moving the body.
of ulcers
When the disease called "ulcers" is inflamed, and the art of medicine is worth nothing, then one cauterizes with a cauterization a little deep, according to the quantity of the flesh of the vein, until the blenchour is removed, and its color changes; then apply a poultice made with flour of vetches and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of colander and almond, each one in equal parts; and mix everything together, and tie it up with a cloth, and air it at the bedside until he is healed.
The treatment for syphilis by cauterization
When syphilis comes at the beginning, and you see it stop, then cauterize around the chancre with a cauterization that seems like a circle, all around the tour of the chancre. And yet wise men say that one should make a cauterization also in the middle of the chancre; and yet this does not seem to me good, for I fear it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen once or twice; and it is a more rightful thing to cauterize around, with the cauterization that is called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
of the swelling that cannot be killed
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it cannot be killed, either because of its superfluity or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say, too old) and he has little blood, or because of time; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize around with many small cauteries in succession; afterwards leave it thus. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it piercing through the entire cauterization, then heat the cauterization so that its form is:
And put your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the vein, and be such cauteries that the patient feels it outside in this way, so that the course of the purulence is alleviated. Afterward, apply a treatment until he is healed perfectly.
The treatment with fire by iron
Another way of sickness is called "corrodens", and it's nothing other than a wasting away of the member, for it wastes away members just like fire consumes dry leaves. If you see this disease in someone who can bear cauterization with fire together, then heat the cauteries very little and big, according to what's needed at the place where the sickness is; afterward, cauterize all over until you remove all the corruption, so that nothing remains of it, except for everything that's corrupted to be removed. And then leave it three days, and put on the heated cauteries that suffer burns with oil until the ashes of fire are removed, and all the corruption. Afterward, apply a treatment with ointments engendering flesh. If you see after three days that healthy flesh is not born, it's good; but if not, then start again the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted flesh. And this wasting away has sometimes been cured by medicine in place of fire cauterization; but still, fire cauterization is more helpful, and I have already said the cure with medicine in the division: take as much as you need it.
of pins which come to the feet
A great many times it happens that at the feet a disease occurs which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a large, festering thing that hurts the foot. And the treatment for this disease is done in two ways. It's to know that there are two manners of cautery. The one by fire, and the other by hot water. By fire it is that you make a cautery on the hair as if it were a vulture's feather, and it must be made of good iron to a measure that it can penetrate the nail from all sides, and have subtle edges; after which put everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the tip of the nail; and let it sit thus for three days until it begins to emit pus; then make an ointment with wild marjoram crushed with salt, and leave the ointment on all night, and the nail will fall off and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the foot with oil anointing it as long as it is healed.
And if they are converted on the outside of the body, and many times it happens in hands and feet, then you must bring a hot water cautery; and it is done thus: take an earthen or iron rod, or a vulture's feather, and put it on the nail and the surrounding area, that is to say, pins and veins; and place the rod so that it surrounds everything, then put a little bit of hot water there, and hold your hand well, and press your hand in turning so that the edge of the rod comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water's way deep down to the root; and let the patient suffer a little the stinging of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will uproot itself from all its roots. Do this after another, until you have reached all those on the body, then cure them with ointments that produce flesh.
the cures of trembling
When some people shiver from cold or heat, or quartan fever, or another, then you must make four cauterizations on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine; and one cauterization on the belly, and one above the stomach at the olive-shaped cauterization; if the patient shivers, and the healthiness of the cold disease will hasten.
the stinking pimples
Sometimes pus-filled boils or stinking pimples appear on the body, which come from corrupted matter. Then it is necessary at first when they appear to make a cauterization on each head of the pustule: a subtle cauterization of myrtle wood, so that the point is seized by fire, or of long aristolochia root, or a lenticular cautery. And sometimes one does not cauterize them at first when they appear, according to this manner, and they do not grow any further forward, but are broken down the superfluities from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times it happens that great flows of blood come from the artery which is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stanch.
And nevertheless when this happens to someone, if you hasten to put your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and hold them tight until the blood is appeased beneath your fingers, and no more drips; then take a few small and large cauterizations, all red from fire, and take one, either great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is cut, and put it on that vein which you are holding with your two fingers, and hold the cautery thus until the blood is staunched.
And if it spouts forth when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cauterization is extinguished, then take quickly another one of the cauterizations that are on fire.
And do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is staunched; and take care that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well staunched without one of the three ways we have said: or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong bandaging with thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to stop blood; and let it be tied and strained in a suitable manner.
Whoever brings about the stanching by binding tightly with cloths or by placing hot things on it, or other similar things, if there is no benefit whatsoever.
And if this happens to someone and he has no mirror or medicine present, then he should put his two fingers on the wound of the vein just as we have said, and stretch them well until it is staunched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move his hand, but moisten with cold water often enough so that the blood is congealed, thickened, and staunched; and make inquiries ahead about what he needs in terms of cauterizations and medicines.
We have told you in our first chapter all the diseases in which it is necessary to cauterize with fire or hot medicine, and the remedies and causes and instruments and forms of cauterizations; and I have placed that chapter from head to feet, and I will go on in this chapter by the same way for those who want to find things more easily.
And thus as I begin this, dear friend, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauterizations, and therefore it is necessary to exercise greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to undertake foolishness. For many kinds of people come to cures. Some come from such a state with their disease that they will die quickly because of the severity of their illness and the greatness of their harm; and one should have fear of these. And among these are those who will give you their senses and say: "Wait, I am healed"; and the disease is spiteful. It does not behoove you to consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not act foolishly but wisely about what you are certain of and can take and hold; and use pronouncement and indication in the cures of your diseases where salvation is converted; and this will help you to acquire good renown, and glory, and memory of praise.
Here is the translation:
Or I have ordered you this chapter in describing chapter by chapter, according to what is before the chapter of cauteries, which I have described from the beginning to the end, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
Two full heads of water.
Know that this disease often afflicts children at childbirth, and when the midwife constrains too tightly the head of the child; and sometimes it comes from a reason unknown.
And I have never seen this disease occur except in children, and all those that I have seen died quickly; and therefore it seems to me that it is best to hasten the work in such cures.
And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the head grew bigger each day until it could no longer be sustained; and believed so much moisture that he would die, and this moisture is assembled below the bone above the forehead, between the skull and the bone; and the work is such that if the moisture is between the skull and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you cut a wide incision in the head's midst; and let it be as long as two inches, until the moisture runs out; and look at the form of the spatula:
If the moisture is thicker and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs you see are the commissures of the head opening on each side, and the water jumps forth when you press it with your hand from inside, and it does not respond to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture outside. Afterwards, close the incisions with cloths and powders, and put wine and oil in them, and let it be thus for five days; then loosen it, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and let the head drain equally, and then allow the patient to eat dry meat without moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And another manner of incision is that you look where the great opening of the abscess appears, and the assembly of water; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes to the right; and sometimes to the left.
Cut then at the place where the abscess opens, and the filling of water, and make the incision according to what you are able; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and if there comes a flow of blood, so that the patient may die from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
of rheum.
When it happens to anyone a disease which is called "catarre" in the eyes or at the breast, and the disease is old, and the treatment of medicine does not help at all, then the final cure is the cautery with what one will cut off the two arteries.
Therefore, when you see them cut off, the patient should bend his head back; afterwards, rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear; then extract the patient's neck to all one cloth; then look where the vein bites, and the marks of both are after the ears, and they are not responsive; then mark the marks with encaustic; then cut off one and the other with an acute spatula two parts as long as the incision comes up to the bone, and it should be by the width of the head.
And if you see, insert the spatula below the artery and cut above it, cutting just as two would crosswise.
And when the vein is cut, the blood will jump out continuously outside.
And if the artery does not open to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then mark with encaustic and cut up to the bone; and what needs to be done about the blood letting outside is .vi. c., and by chance a little more or less according to what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point of the forehead, then cut off that which abscesses do not come from, then drain the wound and bind it, and apply ointment treatment until it is healed.
of migraine.
When ancient migraine comes, and sharp catarrh, because of the moisture of tears and heats in the temples and old forgotten and similar things, and it is treated by ways of medical cures and all that does not help at all, then we cut off the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient bends back his temples' hairs, and listens to the artery which appears in the temple, for it opens well with its beating, and is not responsive except in some men who are too cold; and if it is responsive, then extract the patient's neck with some cloths, then rub the place with a rough cloth, and rise the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of which there is the form:
Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then treat it above with pincers, and separate well the webs that are below each part; and if the artery is thin, then turn it to the point of the unguent, then cut off that part according to the quantity of the two chits. For if it is not cut off, it will not flow at all outside.
And treat the blood of .vi. c., up to .iii.; and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk, so that no purulence may come before the healing of the wound, and there be decorremens of blood; then cut off the superfluity which is between the two ties at that very hour, and then, if you see, cauterize the remaining part with the cautery knife up to the bone until the arteries are cut off; and this is the main work, if the patient has no fever and is of a warm complexion.
For the cautery is help to finish the moistures: therefore it is of greater aid to the moistures. Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and puts a well-made tent on top; and when one removes them, be careful with dry medicines that bring forth flesh and tents until they are healed; and if there is no cort of the artery as long as you work, then hasten to cauterize by cautery, or take vitriol and strain it in your hand so that the blood is staunched; and if you do not have this present, put your finger on top of the place until the blood congeals, and rise the place with cold water until the bleeding ceases, and be strained as necessary; and what is most important and lighter in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery cutting into two parts, but the cutting should be well spaced to keep their heat for a longer time. For when the instruments are too thick, they hold less heat. And it should have between the two cutlery pieces a space of a good thumb's length, and then when you have signed to join the two parts, and you must put the hot iron on so that it reaches just to the bone, and make the incision in two places; and be distant between the two joints because this cautery is not done from top to bottom; and this is the form of the cautery.
of tears
When the tears from the eyes are flowing down from the veins that are above the forehead of the head, and it does not benefit at all from the medicine that is done there, and you see the face of the patient growing red, and feeling the forehead to be agitated as if with fear; and the skin is tender and moist so that the hairs of the paper are fallen, and the papers are scorched by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary for this cure.
And they used to call it the "blunt cure" in olden times, and is that you do behind the patient who has this disease, by cutting off the hairs on their forehead; then make three incisions on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and one of the incisions should be as big as two fingers all the way down to the nose, and the other two as wide as two fingers at the temples above the papers, and beware of cutting into the arteries that are at the temples above the papers; and keep your hand away from the continuity of the jawbones, and each wound should be the size of three fingerbreadths across the joints.
from the incision that is next to the temple all the way down to the second incision; and scrape out all the kernel that is between the two cuts right up to the suture that is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision all the way down to the other second one, and then extract this spatula.
and insert into the first incision the instrument which is called "culterelle", and it is very sharp on one side, and soft on the other side, not at all sharp, and this is the form: And place the sharp edge towards the fatty part of the kernel, and the soft edge towards the bone, and insert it so that it comes to the middle incision. And cut all the vessels that flow down from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous right up to what opens from the kernel, and then make another incision in the middle incision right up to the other one; and then extract the blood equally, and express the bone for the blood taken; then put a patch of old cotton in each incision, and place moist cloths soaked in vinegar, oil, and ass's milk on top, and take care that abscesses do not form; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and administer great quantities of lukewarm water, then the ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other cures for wounds, until it is healed.
of the swelling of the eyes
When someone comes with a severe catarrh as usual, and you see the eyes swollen and small, and weakening the sight, and the papers burned; and the hairs falling, and the head in the forehead in great pain, and the patient is worn out; then learn through these accidents that those matters and this catarrh do not come forth except from many voices, and the mother cure that is there, so it is this.
And is that you instruct the patient to cut their forehead, then make a large incision in the forehead and another one of about an inch long. Begin from the left temple to the right temple, and be the incision up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move at mealtime; and when the bone is exposed, let all the blood flow onto a sponge, and then dry between the two lips of the incision and place old cotton and linen there; then bind with moist cloths soaked in vinegar and oil, and take care not to form an abscess; when it is healed, you should rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then apply ointments that make flesh come.
In the same way: take two parts of wheat flower and three parts of galenicals, and make a poultice; and administer it to these wounds to bring forth flesh all over.
of the swelling of the ears
All that comes out of the ears is one of three things: either grains, or beasts, or pebbles from the mine or similar things like iron; or seed, such as jay's wheat, lentils, peas; or flowing things like water and oil and similar things.
When it comes out of the ear a pebble or other thing that does not belong to the ear and does not grow in the ear, then put the ear in the sun. If you see a pebble, extract some small amount of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and make the nostrils narrow when the symptoms come, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and keep the ear above. Many times it comes forth through this cure; and if it does not come forth, then administer extraction with subtle forceps, and this is the form:
If it jumps forth through the forceps, that's good; if not, then administer extraction with a subtle onyx file of small double reed; and if it does not jump forth through this, then make a ring of iron and insert the chief of the ring or ear plug firmly into the ear canal, and stop what is around the ring from entering with it using soft wax; then treat it further, for many times it comes forth as we have said; and if it does not come forth in this way, then take a lump of which takes birds and put some instrument that is pointed to do so, and wrap it with a small amount of cotton; then press the lump on the pebble or whatever it is, and treat further. And if it does not jump forth through all these things that we have said, then you should hasten to cut the ear, lest an abscess form and spasms occur; and the manner of cutting is as follows: first, let the patient recover from the cephalic disease, and extract the blood according to its virtue, then sit the patient between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where the fat or bone depends; and be the incision like a moon, as long as you come to the pebble, then remove it according to your power, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and treat it until it is healed. And if it is swelling that has formed and it is inflamed, administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer one quarter of a spoonful held subtly according to this form:
and administer an incision to that swelling. But do not do this when you think the swelling is moist because of the moisture in the ear, until you have divided it into many pieces; then extract it with subtle pincers and a suction, as we said, so that the extraction may be easy.
Then the patient should use condimentous discharge first in the ear, and fill the ear with old cotton. And let it sit on that same ear where the liquid is. If it jumps forth because of this, it's good. If not, then take many stones according to their length, and make them hot by the fire; and put one or two pieces of the patient's ear into it, and lift up the other part from the other side, and strike another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease doing this stone upon stone until all the liquid has come out, and thus it will jump forth entirely; and if you see, then take one reed, and put one of its ends in the ear, and the other end in the fire until the thicker part of the reed is burned; then do the rest of the rest with other reeds as we have said in the stone.
In the removal of the beast, if it has a small body, like a mouse and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great body that one can feel it, administer an extraction with pincers; and it is the thing easiest to remove that is in the ear.
In the removal of earworms from the ears, when you have cured as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not help, then it is necessary that you look at the ear to the sun: if you see any worms, treat them with subtle pincers; and if you do not see, take the cane where there is the form:
And be narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle end of the cane in the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then suck strongly on the whole cane; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, stop around the cane with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not jump forth as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have tried in the destruction of worms, and you will find it in the treatment of distillations; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, according to the form which is there so you see:
And be made of thick silver or bronze below to one small hole, and above over for distilling; and to press inside the distillation with one instrument of well-made bronze for this purpose, and if you see take one scraper and wrap it around the pointed part with cotton; then pour your oil or juice into it, and whatever medicines you have in the cane, and let the cane be in the ear; then blow inside the scraper to all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled out of the ear; and if the patient feels inside, and the distillations are one pot heated by fire thus that it distills into the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicines would not be so good.
of the stoppering of ears
No child is born without a perforation in the ear; and this same thing happens to men by stoppering of wound or char born inside the ear, and these stoppings come sometimes quite far into the ear, if one cannot see it; and sometimes there is one pot too much for the perforation, and one sees it well.
That which comes quite far in, if one cannot see it, is from grievous inflammation in multiple dispositions, and that which one sees, needs you to put the ear of the patient to the sun; and look inside: if you see apparent opacity, then work with all this spoonful according to the form.
And be gentle and cautious in front and back of the whole ear, so that it does not harm the ear; if the opacity is of born char or flesh of the ear, then take it with subtle pincers and cut it lightly, until all that flesh is entirely removed.
And if the opacity is quite far in the ear, then take a subtle and light scraper and heat it slightly by fire, then put it on the flesh of the ear. If you feel the opacity which the patient feels grief at hearing, cut lightly, and beware that you do not injure the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and soak in Egyptian balm.
Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and soak it in rose water, and powder on vitriol broth; and if you see the ear swelling, then it is necessary that you remove the tent and apply another moistened tent made of rosate oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it until it is sound.
And if bleeding comes from the wound, then dip a sponge in cold water, and wrap it around the ear, and use other cures that remove the bleeding which are found in the treatment of distillations.
of the flesh of paper-makers
This mixture that comes from paper-makers of eggs when they are moist and dry, needs you to stretch them with forceps and pincers, and cut off a spoonful of their roots; then put on the white vitriol broth.
And if the skin is peeled off, then cauterize the lenticular subtlety of the cautery, and the cauterizing after the incision works as a remedy; and many times they repair themselves, except that nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not come back.
of the hawthorn
Many times there come from papermakers of eggs certain things that resemble hawthorn in their shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of thick moisture in the paper above and below; the work is as follows: take heed if the grandine moves from one side to the other, and it is a light thing to know; then cut out the width, then scrape off each part lightly, then take with pincers, and cut. If you cannot cut without piercing the paper slightly, do not harm the patient; and if the wound is large, assemble a seam, and cure until it is sound; and if it is small, make no force, for the ointments will soon restore it and bring forth flesh.
Et if the wax is dripping inside the ear towards the upper part, then turn it over and scrape off any impurities, and press it firmly from one side to the other; and if the paper is displaced by the incision, this does not matter; and when the wax is scraped off, then remove the salt water from the ear and cure the part of those who suffer from a wound as long as the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes
Exinach is a fat that is formed in the membranes of the eyelids above, and this happens more often with children than with adults, and it causes great pain to their eyes, and they come to suffer from cataracts in the mornings, and they are unable to gaze at the sunlight because the tears rush to their eyes; and therefore they lie on their faces soon, and sleep above, and their membranes are wet beneath their eyelids, covered by the exinach that appears in the eye. And when you press the eye with your thumb and feel the exinach between.
And the manner of treatment is that the patient puts their head in your lap; and then take one linen cloth, and prepare a tent-like shape around it, according to the quantity of exinach from each part, and put it on them; and press with your thumb on both sides so that the exinach is gathered inside the circle; then make an incision in the moist area above the spine, cutting a slit as wide as the wound one makes when opening a vein; and cut the skin so deeply that you come to the exinach; and in several positions, the exinach comes out of the slit, according to the shape of a white fat piece.
Then take it out as one piece of cloth that has been folded between your thumbs at the edge, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread; and be careful not to push it into the slit, lest you reach all the way to the oil, and you hurt it.
And if the exinach does not appear at the beginning of the slit, then slightly widen the slit until it appears; then take it out as we have said, then wet the cloths with oil and water, and put them on the eye, and strain through bandages.
And if there are such men who boil and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then he cures it until he is healed. And if it comes to a hot abscess, then he cures it with poultices soothing it until he is healed.
of the hairs of the eyelids
When hairs grow on the eyelids other than natural ones, and are inflamed, they harm the eyes, and bring forth manners of illnesses such as habitual tears and softening of the eyelids and albugine, until it is a cause of the destruction of the eyes; and there is a cure in three ways: either by fire cautery together, or by medicinal water according to what is written in the chapter on cautery, and this is done either by incision and suturing or by caustics, as I will say.
It is necessary that you put the patient's head in your lap, then turn the eyelid paper towards your left hand; if it is converted, that is good; if not, then insert an awl into each thread above; and have this at the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow from these hairs, and pull one thread upwards along the entire paper, and turn it to a razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the adjacent hairs, all the way to the spine, from the great tear duct down to the small one; then extract one thread, and put under the paper a small tent made of cotton and cloth, then sign on top of the paper a figure like that of myrtle, and although it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see the eyelid paper being divided into.
And if there is one who needs to cut a large quantity of the paper according to how the eyelid paper is softened; then make all along the spine above the two lines you have marked, and start from the great tear duct down to the small one; and let it be one of the slits near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert an onyx into one of the two angles of the key, then skin it entirely; then assemble the two lips with a suture made of a fine wool thread, and stop the bleeding, and make the superfluous threads above the two eyelids stick to something, if you see fit; and if not, don't bother; then leave the suture and the threads for three days or four; then cure the wound without suture or constraining things, because the eyelid paper revives with the healing of the wound and its assembly, but the suture is bitter (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear.
and if there is another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is like the leaves of myrtle, as we have recounted, with three onyx stones unconnected according to the form that is here:
then cut what rises above in small pieces evenly according to the form that is here:
And if you are unable to hold the forceps and things are not equal, take an awl with one thread and insert it into the figure; then put another thread at the great tear duct and the second thread at the small one, and assemble the threads evenly between your thumbs; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin above what you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments.
and at times it happens that the hairs of the eyelid paper are converted: then it is necessary to use what we have said about incision; but the suture in one and in the other is more artificial.
The cure of caustics is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and make an incision in it according to what I have said, and then make two caustics by art, and two fine threads as long as the eyelid paper and the width of the spine are; and cut at the two ends of the two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on top of what rises from the eyelid paper, and strain the two caustics from the two parts in form; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin that is strained will die and turn black and fall away, until it drops off by itself.
If it is delayed, then the wound will be more severe, and you should care for it until it is healed; and when the wound is closed, and the paper is lifted, and they can no longer feel the hairs; and this is the form of the two dogs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
The works are such that you take a subtle needle, and insert one silk thread of the same subtlety; then assemble the threads and join one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be as long as a palm; then arrange in the hunt another thin silk thread briefly, and tie the head of the thread; then put the patient's head on your lap; and be under the sun so that the works are declared, for it is a subtle and small work, then push the needle through all the chase to the root of the hair next to, and make it pierce the paper hastening as you move above the natural hair; then pull out the hair until it reaches the top of the chase, and push into the chase that hair, if there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand back so that the hairs come forth all over the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then pull out the chase from below all the thread that you have arranged, until the chase comes forth from the pimple above and you see it with the sight of the eye; then pull out the chase and the thread, and close the eyes and leave it two or three days, until the hair grows back to its place and the flesh forms a scab; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the natural beard, and lift it up with that one where you leave it, until it is stretched out and then raise it.
from the pouring of the oil
When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the pouring comes into the eye, there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or incision, or cauterization, and similar things.
And the manner of the work in it is that you cut open the wound, and loosen the lips of it, and put inside linen cloths, and bind it until it is healed; and it is not necessary to use in its treatment things that dry and constrict. For if you do so, the disease will return worse than the first one; but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and rose of water or alethea and flaxseed cooked, and ointments made from daquilon melted in some oil, and wrap it in a cloth, and cure those.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take care to ensure it does not heal in a way different from how it was before; and these works that we have said are nothing other than remedies for this disease, so that it does not return in the same form as before.
of the flesh that comes into the eye
This disease that is below and which is truly called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wound and cutting and cauterization and similar things; and the way of the work in it is that you take a needle with one double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce all the way to the right eyelid until the threads come out in two pieces of flesh; then remove the flesh above all the needle, and cut at one spatulate blade.
And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is necessary, that's good; if not, take one razor and put it in the incision, and turn the paper, and make two incisions or cuts within the paper; and let the edges of the two incisions be at the two angles of the cut that you have made, so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter which has no name except "one Greek"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges are worn out below, from what is attached to the paper; then join the two severed parts and sew them with one thread of flax; then follow the cure with those medicines that we have said, and with cloths, until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from incision or cutting or cauterization, it is necessary that you make a plain incision below the hairs of the paper, and according to what was said before; then sever between the two lips of a cloth, as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an artifice of all their power so that they can bring the figure back to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
of the suddenness of the paper
When this swelling occurs in many ways similar to the paper above being bound with white of egg, and cannot move nor perform its natural works, then it is necessary that you insert the point of a razor below the paper, and lift it up; and stretch it to the pincers, until you cut what is at the spatulate blade, which is not too tight nor too loose, so that the patient cannot suffer if the spatulate blade is too tight or bleeds into the oil; and make your incision, from which you remove that assembled part, slightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and let the whole assembly be healed, and sometimes in the oil, salty water, and then lift it with sweet water and vinegar; then put between the paper and the oil a cloth of linen, and place on the oil moist flaxseed in abundance of yolk; and after the third day use vinegar and soothing things until it is healed.
of the inflammation of the eye
Know that the inflammation is in two ways: it is nervous and resembles a hard scab, and another which is not nervous but resembles white moisture congealed, which when touched with iron and cooked at pincers, cannot be removed; and both kinds of inflammation begin near the great eyelid, and grow little by little until it covers all the sight and all the light and movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts their head in your lap, then you open the eyes; and lift the paper to your hand, then coil the inflammation at pincers with small double folds, and stretch it above; then take a needle and put one hair from horse, cow, or ox on it, along with a strong thread; and double the point of the needle slightly and insert it into the inflammation, and make it pierce all the way to the needle, and tie the inflammation with a thread and stretch it above, and remove the remaining portion at the edge of the inflammation that comes from the prunele and the silk up to the chief; then cut off what remains in the root of the eyelid to the spatulate blade and the small forces, and leave the natural flesh or eyelid so that the body does not come forth with tears habitually; and sometimes the inflammation settles at the onyx alone, and on the thread, as we have said; then one removes all the spatulate soft from what is left:
Et garde que the spatula does not touch the fleshy skin and break it, and that the prunelle is not pierced; and after the incision pour a little bit of burnt oil into the eye, and make a powder of litargire, and leave it until the next day; then cure what needs to be done so that it is healed.
And if the nail is not numb, and you cannot push the awl in, and the splinters cannot enter, many times this resemblance of a nail is cured with medicines; and it happens as I have counted in the division, and if you see it cover, then work on the patient's eye, and take the spatula lightly, and make an incision according to this form:
And lift the nail off slowly, and if you see that it does not diminish and the reason approaches, then distill from your mouth into the eye a powder made of litargire and red oil and burnt oil, and stop the eye until the next day; then resume the other work according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
If nothing is contrary in the eye, as a hot abscess, then drain it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid hurts in the eye by great harm, then suspend it with a splinter, and cut off a part but not all, so that the flow of tears does not come; then distill into the eye red oil made of litargire.
of the flesh which grows on the prunelle
The eyes of some men sometimes grow red flesh, and cover the prunelle, and restrain above the papillae and turn them back behind, and seem like a rose of balaust; and the work is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then you work on the eyes, and cut off all that flesh with suitable splinters for this, and sustain it by force; then cut off the first flesh, and go all the way cutting to the razor's edge, and take care not to bleach the eye at the operation; and make the incision of the spatula as we have said in the incision of the nail and with small forces, so that one takes away the scab, as the form after this chapter shows.
And when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then pour oil of burnt oil or distill red oil and similar corrosive medicines into the eye, and place a cotton cloth with egg white on top of the eye, so that it is secure from hot abscess; and if there remains nothing, and blood flows forth, and you doubt hot abscess, then leave the eye and cure the abscess with soothing things for hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do all the flesh which has grown in the eye by this resemblance.
But it is also necessary that you ease the cure of each weak eye by natural way; and by accidental way, in iron work; and do not put your hand on any of these works until you see that this member can suffer from that operation.
of the veins of the eyes
Scabs are red veins that are covered on the eye, and tolerate the sight's operation and weaken the eye all the time. It is necessary then at first that you look if the eye where the scab is, is sound, and there is no other disease except the scab; then coil it in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head in your hand, then suspend those veins with all the splinter according to his wisdom, and be the splinters subtle double according to this form:
And be two splinters by degree in one body according to this form:
Then coil the forces of those veins subtly, and let the blood flow out hour after hour, until you see the veins removed from the eye; and take care not to bleach the eye with points of spatula; and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very fervent in your operation so that you do not cut too much than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the eye green and red oil to corrupt what is left of the scab.
And if you are unable to coil all that in one hour, then make an application on the eye with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pains are soothed and are secure from hot abscess; then resume according to this manner which is before, until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
of the abscess of the eye
The doctor calls it "arissati" abscess: when you cure it with cautery and hot medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is a reason in it that you cut into the abscess where it should die, and drain out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then take it out with all the instruments of which this is the form; and it is called "aspre chief", and be made of iron to one chief rent, and be pointed as a razor as it is in the present form:
And place it on the surface of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed; and do this several times, then restore the surface with excitative medicines.
If the surface is hardened, and flesh grows, and the body of the bow is hardened, and remains so for 40 days, and it does not heal and is not apostemed, and bad accidents come, know that it is healed; if not, then there is no other reason than to bring back the abscess to the pit of the nose according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time by iron, and by hot medicines, and when it is uncovered, take one force according to this form, and be the head of iron at three angles, and the handle be thinned down to the chief as you see here:
Then place it on the bone near the eyelid, and move your hand away from the eye a little, then turn the whole force until it pierces the bone and lets the patient feel through what the veins do if they hold their hand on their nose; and then restore the surface with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the surface, the matter flows out to the nose; and it is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the exit from the eye
Quant the eyes appear to be full of pus in all and all, and it does not come from a disturbance or diminishment, then it is necessary that you lie the patient; then heal the wound, then apply poultices or a hot iron to help it heal; then put on top one layer made of aloe, encens, and sarcocolle, and then strain the eyes, and anoint them with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths, and fold each into four parts, and then put one on top of the other according to what the eyes need; then strain by wrapping it with a strong bandage, and renew the poultices in order to help heal without causing harm; then remove the poultices and let the eyes be strained day and night, and if the layers become moist, then it is necessary that you strain them much; then remove the layer after day and night, and if you see the eyes repairing themselves, it is good; but if not, then renew the anointing and the cloths and the layer and the poultices until it is healed.
Through the bursting of the conjunctival fabric
When disturbances come to the conjunctival fabric, then it bursts open, and comes out in paper-like sheets as if a resin grain, and it is astonishing to see; therefore, if you see it covering, the work is such that you put an awl into the root of the part below just up to the part above, then put another awl where there is a double thread from the eyelid part; and make it pierce, and leave the first awl according to its disposition; then cut the top of the double thread and tie one part of the conjunctiva around, and strain it well, then extract the awl and put on the oil a moist layer in abundance of egg white; and let it be until the threads cling with the conjunctiva, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the conjunctiva each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes appear swollen, then pierce them with a fine spatula that comes from the depth of the eye, and clear out the excess moisture and descend into the eyes, and enter soon after; then strain it until it is healed.
from the bottom of the eye
This disease called "alcunnati" is nothing but the bottom of the eye assembled in the eye, appearing like water flowing down, and it's not actually water; and the manner of its appearance is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take their head between your hands from both sides, and gently move it until you see the bottom coming up to your eyes; then let it be fixed, and don't let it descend and be removed from sight, and let the patient see things as they usually do; and if it doesn't descend below, know that it's a flow of water, and if the descending of the bottom isn't arranged as we have said. Then make the patient sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make a small hole on the corneal tissue one spot at a time by continuing the conjunctiva with the corneal tissue and the crown, until the bottom emerges; and when it has emerged, then distill hot honey mixed with water or fenugreek into the eye, or boil honey and water together, and then cure it with another remedy until it is healed.
from the tears of the eye
We have the likenesses of tears in our division, and what is necessary for piercing; so work according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light due to the sun, and tie the good eye tightly; then put the paper on top of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are left, or in your right hand if they are right; then take in your right hand if the eyes are left, or in your left hand if they are right, the instrument called "almagda"; then place the point of the instrument beneath the crown by the thickness of a finger on the white part of the eye at the part of the minor eyelid; then put the almagda instrument virtuously, and turn your hand until it pierces into the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the path almagda be at the bottom of the measure of the space which is from the prune up to the end of the nightshade; and that is the crown of the eye; so you will see the bone in that paper due to the brightness of the corneal tissue, and then put the instrument just above or where the water is, and then express it below one way after another. If the water flows now, the patient will see before him and the instrument in his eye.
After resting for a little while, and if the water rises again along the second path, put the force with the instrument, and when it is fixed and doesn't rise further, gently extract almagda by turning your hand slowly; then pour in a small amount of gemstone oil and leave it inside the eye. Then put on top of the eye estoupe or moist linen in rose water and in abundance of egg white, and bind with the good eye. As for us, and those who are of our time, we put on a comb made with abundance of egg white.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which has this form:
And then pierce the conjunctive alone, and don't go too far in, but make a fine line, then put in almagda, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient a suitable bed, where he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be free from all movements, and take light food, and don't move your head to the right or left, and be tied according to its disposition until the third day; then release him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then put back the tie until the seventh day; and it is not necessary for you to do this during the cure or after the incision now, but rather delay it, because the water rises quickly.
And if a pustule or boil comes up, then you should release the eye before the seventh day, and direct it towards what soothes the pustule; and when it is appeased, then release the sight and put on a face mask for one day to cover any rash, and be patient in that dark house. And then leave the house slowly and gradually, and convert back to your usual condition; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his land people pierce their almagda (a type of wart) with water, but I never saw anyone do this in our land nor did I ever read about it in books of old; and by chance this is a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of warts, because he who does not know them sees them; and they are properly of earth.
And the heads of these warts are of the same subtlety, and the ends in three angles are watery.
of the flesh on the nose
At no time do the flesh on the nose become joined together in diverse ways, of which some appear like scorpions to many people; and if there are such or if it has a charm enchanted by foul color, and if it is soft and not enchanted. Then you should make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; open his nostrils, and pour the juice onto those warts, and treat them fiercely; then take what you can bear to endure at the sharp subtle point of a part, until you know that that wart is completely removed.
And if any part remains that you cannot remove, then open it with all .i. of the subtle instruments lightly, so that there is nothing left; and if without causing harm, or abscess opens, then cauterize as needed; and if these are malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize until the blood is staunched and all the warts are removed, then pour wine, oil, or vinegar onto the nose.
If the nose is open and moisture comes just to the palace, know that it is healed; and if moisture does not flow as needed, know that there is a wart born in the bone above, for which instruments do not come to cut: then you must put one thread of linen, somewhat thick, into your hands, and tie each knot with at least one or less space; and place the patient's head on the thread at his power, and treat it with odorant until it comes through the nose inside the mouth; and many times do this to children at school, and it is a light thing for him who wants to do so; then hold the head that comes through the nose in one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth in the other hand, and know one after the other as you are with those who are on the thread. Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted that wart, then take away the warts, clean the blood, and soak the thread in Egyptian oil, and put it back on the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of wart; and then put a piece of cloth on the nose some days until it is healed, and if it needs medicines such as those, use them; and that is the form of the instrument to purge the head, which distills oils and medicines into the nose.
And it should be of silver or earth, resembling an open lamp like a cane, and conduct thus; and if you see, then make a closed cane, and the instruments full to purge the head; and have one band at the head to hold when heating oil or some liquid.
of the flesh on the nose
Many times a disease called "telul" arises on the head of the nose, and grows and becomes great in time, until it is visible to look at; and therefore you should cut it at the beginning, and remove all impurities, then put the cautery or burning medicine on top; and if one delays cutting it as long as it is great, be wary if it is hard, of foul color, of poor sense: do not touch it with iron because it is an enchanted abscess, for when you cut it sometimes, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touchment, not of foul color, and you see that you can remove all of it, empty the patient's head and cut without fear, and cure the head with things restraining.
when the nose is cut and cauterized
Know that when solutions of continuation come in one of these cartilaginous works, it profits little, more than in some people. It is necessary then to do what happens to anyone, if you look to see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then bring together the two lips into a seam, and cure until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape away all the parts of their color until they bleed, then bring together the two lips into a seam, and strain them, and powder with blood of dragon, and incense of burnt gum; and put on top of the powders a piece of emplaustre of strong or other emplaustre following, and leave it until it takes effect by itself, then cure with oil until it is healed.
The manner of the seam is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the seam of the belly; or with thread, as I have made known.
of the abscesses of the lips
Many men have within their lips abscesses hard, resembling grains of millet, and smaller and larger; therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut on each notch, and take as pincers and cut in each part; then apply a poultice to the lip after the incision of vitriol, until the blood is staunched; and then anoint with oil, and cure the lip with dry things until it is healed.
of the flesh of the gums
Many times a wart grows on the gums that the ancients call "albulus"; therefore it is necessary that you support it with tweezers, and cut at its root, and let the blood or pus flow; then put on top of the wound vitriol powder or other drying and constricting powders; and if that wart returns after the incision, and many times happens, then cut it again, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
of the sorors (sorores)
Sometimes there are assembled in the chief of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scabs which are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green, as corruption comes to the gum, and they are the teeth that stink; therefore it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his teeth be in thy sight, and remove the teeth or scabs that appear, until there remains nothing; and thus do with the blackness and yellowness, and jaundice and other blemishes, until they are cleaned away; and if one removes what is at the first stage, it is good; but if not, then one renews the second day and the third, until you have removed all; and know that teeth need various forms of instruments to remove them, according to what the work shows, because those who pluck out the teeth to remove decayed teeth have different forms than those who remove between the teeth; and these forms and others be prepared with thee.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth's pain that you wait to draw it out as long as you can, for this should not be done quickly; for it is a very high substance so that there is no excuse for drawing it. Then when the patient is constrained to draw out, it is necessary that you are certain of the tooth's sensitivity. Many times the pain would drive the patient mad, and he would think it was the tooth of a saint, and would have a good tooth drawn out; and yet the pain does not depart from him because of this, until the bad thing is extracted, for we have already wanted to do this to those saints; and when you are well certain of the tooth's sensitivity, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth with a spatula all along the gumline strongly to protect the gums from all sides; then move it to your hands or use fine pincers at the first notch and notch, as long as it is well extracted, then secure the pincers well; and the patient's jaw should be held firmly between your knees, so that he does not move.
After extracting the tooth properly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out, then take one of these instruments and push it gently into each side, and then move it as you did first. And if the tooth is perforated and has a hole, then it is necessary that you fill it with cloth, where the holes are; and then strain it subtly with pincers, so that it does not break when straining; and it is very necessary to work carefully around the gumline to dislodge the tooth.
And be careful that you do not break it, and leave a part of it, and it will regrow in the patient through the malice of the root causing greater pains than the first. And be careful that you do not act like ignorant saints who, because of their haste and boldness, sometimes break the cart and do not bring what we have told; but they often bring great diseases by the roots that remain or by breaking the cart, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the area with vinegar, or vervain, and silk; and if there is bleeding, which often happens, apply a poultice of vitriol; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, with which one should extract teeth first, are to be long-pointed and thick-handled, so that they do not bend when you pull out the tooth; and these are the shapes:
And be made of thick handles so that they do not bend when pulling out, and be made of well-forged iron, and have teeth to hold firmly in place.
of the roots of the teeth When the root remains at the pull, it is necessary that you put a moistened cotton swab on the area .i. day or ij., until the area is softened, then put in pincers called "algefri", with which the jaw seems to be a surgeon's; and they are made inside like a file, and this is its shape:
And if the roots do not come out with all these pincers, it is necessary that you uncover the cart entirely around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is to know palying, of which this is its shape:
And be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out with these things, it is good; if not, then help yourself with all the instruments, of which the shapes come after this:
And if you aid with this instrument that has two springs, of which this is its shape:
and other instruments that are in front in the reason of the teeth, and this instrument which seems like great pincers, whose shape is this:
And this instrument should be made so that it cannot break; and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments which are not counted; and wise and subtle masters find their own instrument by themselves, according to what their works and the disease demonstrate, for there are such diseases where the ancient ones did not teach an instrument because of the diversity of cases, and if one breaks the cartilage or the other bones, or it can, then seek out the instruments that you need, which I have told you, and help yourself with gestures, whose shape is this: And be big and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can be held and removed; and then restore the area with medicines suitable for this, and if there is putridity in the bone, and it is small, then reduce it with all these instruments:
When the tooth appears not according to its natural form and the shape is ugly, especially in young girls, it is necessary that you know whether the tooth is born after the tooth and is not in its proper place, and cannot be shaved or filed: then extract it; and if it is attached to the tooth, take this instrument whose shape is this, and which resembles a small beak, and be made of well-forged iron with a point:
And the coping goes slowly and slowly in hands of days because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others; and if it appears to be able to be filed, then file it with a similar file whose shape is this:
and it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and file the tooth slowly and slowly in hands of days lightly, so that it does not move until it is trimmed; then make it even at the end with any scraper, and if the tooth is too sharp and it wounds the tongue, then file away the roughness as long as it is even, so that it does not wound the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
when the teeth loosen
When the front teeth loosen, either by percussion or falling out, and the patient cannot press down on what they are eating without it crumbling, and you have treated them with restraining medicines, but this does not work; then they must be restrained with a gold thread, for silver threads become green and rotten, but gold never changes; and the middle thread should neither be too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are misaligned, take the thread and insert it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the ligament between the false teeth, if there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then re-cover the area up to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and carefully, so that it does not move; and make sure your ligature is at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then file the threads with pincers, and assemble them, and re-point between the healthy tooth, and put it in such a way that it does not wound the tongue; then leave it thus tight as long as it can remain, and if it comes loose or the thread breaks, then restrain it with another thread; so it will remain and serve thus for all its time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of aligning the two healthy teeth, and the two false ones, as you see:
Et when the tooth falls out, if one puts it back in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said; and does not intervene except by someone who is wise and patient, and sometimes makes the shape of a whalebone tooth, and puts it where the defect is, and holds it tight like we have said, and remains and serves thus for a long time.
to bind the ligament of the tongue
Sometimes this ligament comes from below the tongue or by natural birth; or by accident of a healed wound; and the works are such that you work on the patient's mouth and have their head in your care, and lift up the tongue; then bind the nervous ligament at length, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is stiffness or hardness, it is from sudden wound, so put in a compress and bind the ligament; and beware that the cut is not too deep, for the artery that is below; and when you have done this, then lift up the rosewater and vinegar mixture, or cold water, and place a linen tent under the tongue; and swab the patient each night so that the leeches cannot adhere. And if blood decoration comes, put it on the leech with vitriol powder; and if the blood increases, cauterize it at the slow fire cautery, which is good for this purpose; then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
And if you see it as being of fusse color or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, then do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining into blenchor, and there is moisture, then put in a compress, and make a small poultice, and deliver from one side to the other; and if the blood increases at your work, put vitriol powder on top until it is stopped, then return to your work until you have done everything right; then lift up the rosewater and vinegar mixture, and cure with other cures until it is healed.
of abscesses of the throat
Sometimes there comes within the throat boils which are called "godath", and one properly calls them "the two almonds", and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take heed: if it is a hard abscess of small sense and fusse color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the reason of blood decoration; but leave it until it is dead, and then you will divide it, or it would burst on its own; and if it is of white color bent, and the root is subtle, have the instrument ready to bind, but first look to see if the abscess has settled and is appeased. Then make the patient sit before the sun, and their eyes be in your care, and work on the mouth and take hold of the servant's hands, and press the tongue below all the instrument, so that it forms; and it should be of silver or fine iron, as small as a knife:
Can't you press the tongue against all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take a compress and insert it into the almond, and draw it up above as far as you can; and draw nothing else with it, then bind at the instrument, so that it forms, which seems like one force; and yet the head is bent, and one side to another, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel:
And if you don't have this instrument present, then bind it with pincers, so that it forms:
And be torn from one side and the other; and when you have bound one of the almonds, then bind the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and hot and vinegar mixture, and if there is decoration of blood, gargle the patient with water or cooked grape pome husks, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses are born in the throat than the two almonds, so bind them then in this way as the two almonds are bound.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was born within the throat, namely one abscess of small sense; and I had well closed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not exhale through the conduit which was obstructed, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have been dead if she had remained like that for one or two days. The abscess was so swollen that it had pushed out two veins through the two outlets of the nose. I hastened then, and inserted a compress into one, and drew it up high, and pulled out a great deal of pus; then refilled the other side in the other outlet of the nose, and worked on the mouth and pressed the tongue; after that, I inserted the compress into those abscesses, and bound a part, and only a small amount of blood issued; and thus was unobstructed the conduit of the throat for the woman, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and ceased not to cut away at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess recrossed again, and filled up the space I had cleared out, until it became very large; then I bound it and cauterized it within the throat: thus it grew back again; and I departed from those parts, and left only as God did after me.
of the vein
When the swelling descends to the vein, and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendiculaire"; and if it is under a large and rounded one, it is called "vein". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the swelling abscess is appeased, and it is subtle, then it is necessary to bind it; and the rounded one assembled and not long; and it is sanguine or of white color or black, then it is necessary to avoid cutting into it. For there is great danger on the patient. It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner I have said, about its swelling and length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press their tongue against the instrument which we have made a note of before; then insert the compress into the vein, and draw it down below, and bind with one or two instruments as I have said in the incision of the almonds. And it is necessary not to bind more than the superfluity that is beyond natural term; for if you bind more, it will cause trouble to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the almonds, and cure it until it is healed. And if the patient has fear of binding, then it is necessary to use a trick to cauterize with no fear. The manner of cauterization is hot water. It is that the patient puts their head in your care, and then presses their tongue against the instrument which we have said in the chapter on cautery, and confuses with live hot water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in using the handle of this instrument, which forms:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;
This cure is safer than incision, not the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in one pot, and put it in a place, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glazed with hard earth, and inside the pot have one instrument shaved according to this manner: And it should be of silver or lead, and one of the keys inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapour rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is numb; after which it often starts again, until the eye dries, and beware that you do not make this at the beginning of the hot abscess's appearance, for many things happen then; and do not make this unless at the decline of the hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and put a quill of egg inside it, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; for the quill of egg does not allow the vapour to weigh heavily on the mouth, and it is good care together with salvation.
Many times it is applied to the throat or spine of a fish or any thing; so it is necessary that you try what you can see, and press the tongue on the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing move; and what does not appear and is returned to the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit while the food is cooked in the stomach; by chance if the thing is purged through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of bread, or a lettuce root, or one piece of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, then swallow it; and when it comes up, it will be strained, and then you will pull out; and if it does not come up with what we have said, take an instrument of lead according to this form:
And the instrument should be curved at the head so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and have the head lifted upwards; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all life depart from it, nor push the bone inside; and it is better for the patient to insert the instrument, because then or the thing is purged; if they insert it downward, or pull it out slowly with all the instrument equal, until it is pulled out.
of the snot from the throat
At no time is the snot medicated, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the patient at the sun, then press the tongue on the instrument that I told you. And if you see the snot, pull it out slowly with one small hook or delicate forceps suitable for this. And if this is not worth it, take a curved tube and insert it into the throat of the patient, then put a hot iron at the end of the tube and do it often. And if the patient is kept in water all day, then take a full view of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it out without swallowing, and move it with your hand frequently; and as soon as the snot feels the water, it will fall.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then suffumigate the patient with asefetide at the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will surely come out. And the manner of the fumigation is that you take a pot where there are live coals, and let the top be covered with a pierced cloth, and in that perforation put the keys of the instrument; then pour your fumigation into it, and have the patient place the head of the tube in their mouth, and close their mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but comes just to the snot; and the snot will now fall, and if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and ales, and do not drink water; and then it is necessary that it come out through this governance.
And the form of the instrument with which one pulls out the snot is like this: when it can be seen, it resembles curved forceps suitable for entering the throat; and it has a resemblance to a bird's beak, and has asperity of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and behold the form:
the chapters on abscesses
Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what the memory brings forth hereafter from one and another in this book, and they vary in perforation and size; and it is in two manners by which the one is similar itself, and that which holds moisture. And the second manner is for those that are on the bone or in the flesh. For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the bone that are charred are different from those that come into joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce until the pus is mature according to its completion; and there are others that it is necessary to pierce when they are hard and do not die according to their completion, like those that are near joints. For when abscesses come near joints, and one leaves them so long that they are putrid all around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, which causes contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is on the principal member, and you delay perforation until it is matured, it will harm the principal member; or if it is on the foundation, one should pierce it immediately after it has died; and it is not necessary to pierce a hard abscess without digestion being complete, except for that which is on the foundation, lest it burst forth and become a fistula; and cannot heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the time of perforation of the abscess when it has died according to its completion, and that is when the pain has subsided, and the departures of fever, and the diminution of pain and redness, and of swelling and disquieting of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you perform the perforation or more depending on the location of the abscess, and where it appears to be; and the perforation should be long in the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints, and nerves, and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no pleasure.
In those that are pleasurable, according to that member. And when abscesses are in charred areas, it is better to wait until they are confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce them before then, the body will be filled with a great deal of foul matter; and by chance, the lips and the surrounding area may become hardened. And there are some abscesses that should be pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member requires.
Cil who have not a chief, if it be aposteme soft superficial, it is necessary that you pierce calmly; and when the apostemes are great, and it has coiled great bowe, and you pierce, then do not draw all the bowe in that hour, but only part of it; then stop the aposteme just until the next day, then draw out nothing further from there; do this by many times with ease, until the bowe is altogether gone; likewise if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman carrying, or small children, or old men decrepit.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor leu decorrant par maintes fois.
And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses; and I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see here the chapter.
of sores
Wherever a sore comes on the head, it is small abscesses and are ways of ours that are in fabric, just as a tailor works with silk; and there are many similarities. Some are fatty and similar to those with moisture like pustules; and some are hard and stony to cut into, and there is no doubt if the artery does not make it contrary. And the works of cutting are such that you test every .i. instrument that is called "entromissoire", from which the form comes afterwards, whatever it contains. For if it contains moisture, then let it dry above the long one. And when the moisture is gone, then scrape off without leaving anything; for it will return again if you leave anything behind; then plunge cotton in Egyptian oil, if present; if not, in water and soap, and fill the wound, and let it stay until the next day; and that which remains of the night. And then restart the cotton, just as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain of the night; then cure the wound with oil as necessary, until it is healed. And if the abscess holds one fat night, then cut into according to this form, from above; and throw away your scraps, and scrape off all around, and put all your care in drawing out what lies within; and if the artery makes it contrary, do what I told you afterwards. And likewise do with the abscess if it is stony, and of cutting and curing just as I told you.
And the cutting above the stony abscess and the moist one is lighter, for they contain little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses on the head where there is no moisture, and I saw one abscess that I cut on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess just like a dry, rough, and white stone, and it could not be broken; and if anyone had tried to open it, they would have made a wound as if from a stone. In other abscesses coming on the head, except those that come on the heads of children and the roots of ears, the opening should always be at its most dependent point, in order to let the pus issue; and cure them as needed.
of scrofulas
Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the shoulders, and sometimes come elsewhere on the body, and are many, and are connected one with another. And each scrofula is properly within its own coat, just as the night and the abscess of the head, just as we have said; and the similarities of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health. Therefore, when you see one with good disposition for cutting, and is similar in color to the body, and quiet on each side, and is not inflamed at the neck or artery or conduit, and is not deep; then it is necessary to cut above, and scrape off each part, and are the two lips of the wound, if you need them, just as we have said in abscesses of the head; and take little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, nor be the spatula awkwardly or cutting, lest your hands escape, and do not see too far ahead, lest you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you finish, then put vitriol broth or some powders that remain blood in the wound, and hold the wound; and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot. And when the blood is stopped, then return to your work, until you have completed it; then look at your index to see if there are any small scrofulas remaining, cut them and scrape them off. And if there is a great vein in the root of the scrofula, then do not need to cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall away harmlessly; then fill the wound with old cotton plunged in Egyptian oil, then cure it.
And if you cut the whole scrofula, then it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, since there is no longer any superfluity due to the greatness of the scrofula. It is necessary that you understand how to cut at its root and draw out what remains, and sew it as we have said. Those scrofulas that retain superfluity, burst open where it appears moist; and burst forth in this way like the one mentioned before, depending on it; then administer tentatives with oil and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then cure it with oil anointing flesh, until it is healed.
of scabies
The ancient ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and that is the writing of their word.
To those who have scabies, it is necessary that the incision of the throat called "epiglote" be opened; and one does not make aid by these means, because all the veins and the pomegranate of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in two armpits. When the disease is in the channel of the pomegranate, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to escape the destruction that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary, therefore, when we want to cut the epiglote, that we cut it below three circles or four a small incision across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the syphilitic sore, not in the cartilage;
and that one is suitable for the section of the epiglote so that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long in length.
And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to the entire circumference, then cuts the flesh as far as it reaches the channel; and stop the flow of blood, if you see anything, and then cut out the syphilitic sore, just as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the flesh of the channel which bursts forth through the torn ligament and by the failure of the voice;
and let the wound remain open for a while.
And when the hour has passed of which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound with care, and sew all around without leaving any cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until he is healed.
Also it is said that one should not do this just yet until the throat is entirely swelled, and the patient is judged to be on the point of death, and the breath fails. Then cut off the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death.
and for this reason the ancients command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or in four. And then they command to sew up the wound and heal it, until it is healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a maiden take one dagger and thrust it into her throat, and cut off part of the veins of the throat.
and I was called to cure her, and I found her just as dead.
I discovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and I saw well that she had not cut the vein nor conducted it far from the throat, and the veins were flowing freely through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and healed her until she was well.
and it happened to the maiden that she regained her voice, and returned to her usual condition after this.
therefore I say that in cutting off the epiglottis there is no need to be afraid.
of the thick throat
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess in a greenish color, and it is very common in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental; or the natural one has no cause.
And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is like fatty tumors, and the other manner is like an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear, and it is not necessary to operate unless the one that is small is fiery, and he proves and searches through all the entrails; if you find it just like a fat lump, and cannot be drawn by any vein, then cut it off, just as one cuts out the fat, and treat it with all its folds, if there is no other way. and search well everywhere, and cure it as it should be, until it is healed perfectly.
of the fat
There are many kinds of fat that I will tell you all about their likenesses;
and it is necessary for me to say the whole difference that is between fat and abscess.
I say that an abscess is hot and feverish, holding fast until the ebullition has passed, and the corruption is completed; then the fever and heat cease.
With the fat there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains one sac that is its own pouch and is according to the color of the flesh, and begins just like a green abscess, and becomes large.
and are according to two likenesses, either fat or moist, and much in color as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the fat, that you examine and inquire first through all the instruments called "entrails", according to what its form will be or chapter which comes after.
And the manner of inquiring about abscesses of fat is that you take or the wettest part that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers and fingers, until you know that the instruments have pierced through to the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
then extract the entrails, and take care in what jumps forth.
If the moist part is corrupt, whether it has any color, then treat it as I have said for other abscesses;
and if after extracting the entrails no moist part comes, know that it is fat, then treat it by scoring and pinching it, and scrape it lightly from each side and take care of the coat where it lies so that you can treat the fat with it.
and if you cannot treat it healthy, then cut it into pieces so that there is nothing left.
For if anything remains, then the fat will return many times;
and if even a small part remains and the blood grieves you, then apply the wound with some corrosive powders, and restrain the wound, and put on soothing things to the hot abscess, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
and if the fat is large, then sew up the two lips of the wound, and treat it with what grows flesh.
and if the vein beats against you or another thing that is contrary to you, or if you hurry and apply the lead of vitriol powder, and let it be for two days or three, until the wound purrs, and rest the ebullition of blood; then return to cutting off what remains of the fat.
See here the forms of the entrails instruments, and they are in three manners: great, middle, and small; and there are three squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three ways: great, middle, and small, to search for abscesses of fistula.
and they are also like the needles with which one sews suture holes, and they are of citrine bronze, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are most proven to find black pocks to search for the abscesses of fistula.
and they are in three manners: great, middle, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the holes.
The forms of the needles are of many likenesses, as you see here: great, middle, and small; and there are needles that have two black pocks of three manners.
and there are needles that have three black pocks, and they are also of three manners; and there are needles that have two black pocks, and single needles with one black pock, and they are all necessary in their place.
The head of these needles that we use are cutting ones, and there are some that do not cut much more than one side, with which we scrape off the fat, so that we do not cut the vein or the nerve.
and from these intervening things are the bandages replied in rags, so that the patient does not perceive anything at the opening of abscesses;
and there are three ways: great, small, and medium, as you see;
and one does not use more than in a well-oiled joint, such as knees, and arms, and shoulders, and at angles, and in similar joints;
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling the tips of fingers, according to this form, with which one staunches blood;
and one puts it sometimes in the place that heals with completeness of veins and arteries, and sometimes returns according to this great form;
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so that they seem like women's breasts;
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, it is necessary to do according to this form of this line up to the 7th; then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicated charcoal, then bring together the two lips of the wound to the seam, and cure it until it is healed;
and if the breast sags downward, and is puffed up because of its size like it has in women, then make two cuts above it, through two similar slits; so that one is joined to the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b up to line g; then scrape off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and all that is necessary for the cure, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or because of the discharging of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with wet cotton in corrosive oil; and leave it so that it mingles with the remaining fat and oil, then cure it until it is healed.
of abscesses on the hips
These abscesses that come under the hips are types of hard scrofulas with ridges, and some of them contain moisture.
Therefore, those that contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line b up to line g: And when all the swelling that is in the abscess has gone down, then fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment as needed, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of a similar kind to scrofulas, then do it as we have said in incisions for scrofulas, and if the wound swells, then apply fire cautery as we have said before.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is sewn up, then many times abscesses come forth, and just as it happens with an inflated vein and abscess;
and if one knows thus when it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep by far; and when you feel it in your abdomen, then you feel a strangeness; and when it is due to the vein, then there is pus appearing outside;
and it is foolish to cut into this abscess, and especially when it is under the hips and shoulders and at the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is necessary therefore to avoid the treatment of fire, and he who is at the head should also avoid it, and in that which is due to an inflated artery, make an incision above the skin as long.
It is necessary therefore to avoid the treatment of fire, and he who is at the head should also avoid it, and in that which is due to an inflated artery, make an incision above the skin as long. then work on the shape like a needle, and carefully part the artery from the surrounding tissue, until it is exposed.
then insert a needle underneath one edge, and make it pierce through to the other side, and tie off the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
then tie off the place between the two ties with a small instrument so that the blood that is there issues forth, and the abscess be relieved.
then apply the treatment that discharges swelling, until the tie falls off. then apply ointment as needed, until it is healed.
and if the abscess is due to the swelling of the vein, then it is necessary that you paint with your hand all that you can of the abscess on the entire skin, then insert the needle under the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce through, and have one double thread, so that you pull it from the other side. then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or tie one of the two parts to the two knots of the thread.
and if you doubt that the thread does not come out far enough, then rebute another needle at all one thread under all the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in four places.
then cut the abscess until the excess flows out, then cut the excess of fat and leave what is tied.
then put on a wet cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply treatments of tents and ointments until it is healed.
of abscesses on the knees
Just like abscesses come from the artery and vein, abscesses on the knees come when they are fatigued or from too much heavy labor, and similar things.
And this happens more often on the shoulders and knees and in all places where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the flesh, and it occurs in multiple dispositions without pain.
and when one strains strongly, then the patient feels pain, and it is not deep within the body, but beneath the fat.
and it hurts all around, and does not go forward or backward, nor above or below, and the one in joints should not be cut with iron at all: by chance there would be contraction.
and the one on the head or forehead, make the skin split open. If the abscess is small, then take hold of it with tweezers and cut off its root;
and if it is great, then suspend it to the splint, and flay it, then remove the flesh and stitch the wound at the seam, and care for it until it is healed.
of big boils hanging down It sometimes happens in bellies and not elsewhere at all, and it is a disease called "fungus" by its resemblance to them, and the roots are subtle, and the head big; and there are some small ones and very large ones.
and I saw one man who had two in his belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a small root, and were split open, and were oozing moisture.
I cut them open and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6, and the work of incision is such that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the articular flesh is white and moist and of subtle root;
if you cut it with a spatula that is large, and the cautery with fire is before you. For when cutting comes many times too great bleeding of blood, and if the blood overflows, then hurry to cauterize.
and if you see the patient espousing and fearful of the incision with iron, then take one piece of linen well made, and bind the articular flesh as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to strain the linen thread until it cuts through the articular flesh, and choose by its sense work; and if the roots are large, then be afraid to cut too much for the belly, but you can well cut half.
then cauterize it so that it does not relapse; then treat the wound, and take care that you do not cut through the flesh which is of mixed color, and of poor sense, and with no regard.
For it is an abscess enchanced, and I will come to the treatment of chancres here after.
when the boil has burst
If the appearance of the boil comes from a cautery of wound or incision of syphilitic sore, and it is on the belly and in some of the boils, just as it happens in other ulcers, or from blood which flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from windiness;
and if it is due to the ulcer of syphilis and by the exit of pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and open with diverse exits. And if it is due to the exit of intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press it at its sides it swells up, and then returns, and by chance it becomes hard, and greatly increases at the entrance of the bath and from great labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and open well when you press it with your hand, not at all constraining; and if it is due to blood, then it opens by these signs of the large and hard abscess, and fixed according to a quantity.
and if it is due to windiness, then it is sore when touched, and the work is such that you look to see if the appearance is due to the blood of an artery, or a vein, or windiness. So it is necessary to leave the wound alone. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, due to the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is due to intestine or pus, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his bowels, and be stretched out straight, then sign around all the boil. then command him to sit comfortably between your hands, then go around the place that you have signed with all the spatula. then expose half of the abscess above to the great splint;
then work on the half of the abscess extended above the bandage, and put your finger's index, and try to loosen the intestine; if you find it caught on the bandage, then loose it, and push the intestine back into the belly.
and if you find the pus, take it with the spatula, and cut off the superfluity;
and if the artery or vein gives you trouble, go around it nicely, then come back to your work and take two needles, and put two fine threads on them, and pass the two needles around what you have done in a cross shape as if you were piercing.
then strain the abscess in three places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the place be such that it can open, and choose the dead flesh by itself. or you cut it when it is subtle and open, then treat it as needed, and dry the abscess as we have said.
or you cut it when it is subtle and open, then treat it as needed, and dry the abscess as we have said. and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place as needed, and close the wound.
of chancres
We have said in the division about the likenesses of chancres, and how one should work with medicines, and how one must avoid iron treatment; and we say that chancres are born in the womb, and great caution is needed in its cure, and the ancients say that when chancres are on the skin or in a place where it can be scratched like chancres which are in the armpits, and in the groin, and in similar places, one must completely remove it when it begins; and when it is great and old, then it is not necessary to approach it, for I have never seen anyone cured of it; nor has anyone been healed before me.
And the work, when it is in a place or can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient with black coles once or twice; then make them healthy if they have manifest repletion; then dress the patient's wound well to do the work; then throw away your splints or chancres, and clean it from all sides, and remove it from all sides without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow fully, and press the wound gently with your hand or something else, and if the bleeding of blood makes you contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
dropsy We have said in the division the likenesses of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure that is made by medicines, and that which is cured by fire: it is said to be clear; and one should not touch with iron in these two likenesses: namely, tympanites and hypsarche, for it is a mortal thing; therefore, when you medicate this likeness of dropsy called "clear" by medicines, and the cure does not benefit, then look if the patient is weak or has another disease than dropsy, such as all stomach trouble and similar things; do not touch with iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient in good health, and he has no other disease than dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then thus proceed. Hold the patient upright on your hands, and the attendants press upon the belly by pushing out water to the lowest part of the bladder, then take the spineless thorn according to this form: And be cutting into two parts to a point, yet not so much that it may reach as far as the intestine when you insert it, nor can it harm.
Then look if the dropsy is flowing towards the intestines: if so, it is necessary that you cut above the mouth .iii. inches from below on the edge; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then your incision will be on the left side of the mouth .iii. inches; and if it is due to mucus, then it will be on the right side, and it is not necessary that the patient lies above the incision so that superfluities do not flow towards that weak place.
Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and bind it, and lift your hand to all the thorn between the skin and the fatty tissue just as when shearing to the quantity of a fingernail or around; then pierce the fatty tissue until the thorn comes to the right width, and that is the sign of water; then treat the wound, and insert this instrument according to its form: And it resembles a silver thread, subtle and made of iron or lead, with a small hole in the lower part; and on one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one on another; and the keys are cut like a feather, and that is the form of the incision by which writers fashion the quill.
At the top is the alembic, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it now descends on the instrument; empty then one-third or two-thirds of it, for if you empty more than is necessary at this hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of their spirit from the arm, or they may fall unconscious, or approach death.
But empty according to the quantity of their vigor, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and their pulses; then treat the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now for the key that closes the hole which is above the fatty tissue, about which I have spoken, so that you pierce in this manner; then resume the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw off a small quantity of water.
Do this day after day, and be careful not to drain more than a small amount of water. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave too much water, it will cause them to suffer from heat stroke or sunstroke, and by sweating or bathing in the sun, and if they become thirsty; and treat with drying medicines until they are healed, and cauterize on the stomach, liver, and spleen after the extraction of water, as I said before.
of the stopping of the penis Never are children born who do not have a small hole in the penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place. It is necessary that he be pierced at once with all .i. thorn very subtle according to this form: then put one small plug of lead into the hole and tie it and keep it thus for three days or four; and when he wants to urinate, take off the plug, let him urinate, and then put it back; and by chance it is not necessary, because the urine that comes out does not leave the plug closed. Those who have a small hole are treated with lead plugs, as we said, and it will expand. Those who do not have the hole in its place are harmed, for no one is born with the hole at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis high; and they cannot flow because the matter cannot come all the way to the end, and that is a bad disease.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on their back, and then the top of the penis is bent and cut like the shape of a pen nib, so that the hole opens in its place, as it should; and be careful not to disturb the blood that comes out many times, and if it happens, stop the bleeding with what stops bleeding, and cure the wound until they are healed.
of pustules on the penis These pustules often come on the penis, and it is a foul appearance; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; therefore, take them at one subtle poultice, and cut and clean all of them, then apply wet cotton in Egyptian ointment; then treat with divine ointment until they are healed. And if the pustule is malignant, with putrid color and odor, it is necessary that you apply a cautery. When you have cut it open, and if the pustule is on the skin of the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the pustule which is inside first; and when it is bound up, then treat the outside. For if you treat them together, the wound of the penis will not be secure, and there will be blackness and corruption in its place and on the coition; therefore, seek out all that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice made from the rind of pomegranates and vetches, and then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterizers help with two dispositions together: namely, with bleeding and corruption; and if the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you put a lead tube in the penis of the patient and make him urinate between his legs; and when the foreskin at the head of the penis has been flayed off, which has not been circumcised, or if there is a wound or aposteme, then it is necessary that you circumcise with a sharp instrument, so that the foreskin is detached and the penis is freed from all parts.
et se c'est grief chose de deviser ceu, if it is a grievous thing to discuss this
of the circumcision
Circumcision is not the severing of continuity like other wounds; however, when we do this work by our own desire and properly for children, it is necessary that we make the best work and the most gentle for salvation.
I say that the ancient ones did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
For I have wanted the greatest part of masters and seniors who performed circumcision around one inch, and with forces, and all a new needle; it would be cut because there are two layers, and by chance if you cut above and leave that below.
Or the recovery is to cut again, and there is double pain, and at the purification which is above the skin is not assuredly secure the point of the member; and at the purification of the wound by chance the iron escapes, and the work runs, and many times it happens thus that they have no need for purification and I want this.
Of the purification which is made with force, I have found the goodness of experience, for the forces cut equally well above and below.
For when you press your hand, so it cuts equally well in one stroke with all the strength of the tendons; but let the thread be well strained around the skin; and as for the manner of the first operation, it is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are not doing anything to him except tying the thread around the penis only, and then let it sit in all the ways that you can. then make it rest between your hands straight and put the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them nor any of the instruments; then place your hand on the penis and blow or cut, and pull it up as high as the head of the penis is; then clean well the dirt that has assembled there, then tie a double thread signet, then tie underneath one foot to another link; and hold with two thumbs by the second binding to the pouch and to the left index, and cut between the two links, then lift the skin above hastily and pull the head of the penis.
then make it rest between your hands straight and put the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them nor any of the instruments; then place your hand on the penis and blow or cut, and pull it up as high as the head of the penis is; then clean well the dirt that has assembled there, then tie a double thread signet, then tie underneath one foot to another link; and hold with two thumbs by the second binding to the pouch and to the left index, and cut between the two links, then lift the skin above hastily and pull the head of the penis. then let the blood flow slowly and slowly, for it is the mothers; and put powder on top and on top another layer of powdered egg yolk cooked with rose water, mixed with good and fresh olive oil, and leave it on until the next day, and then cure with another treatment until it is healed.
The form of the forces for purification is this: two fingers should be held and should be pressing, and they should be equal to the width of a thumb.
The error of purification is when the blood flows into the incision; therefore it is necessary that you stretch it to your finger, so that the lump makes an abscess; and cut equally, and if you cannot keep it at your finger, then hold with forceps, and then cut.
And if it exceeds three days, and what is below the penis is swollen, then leave it until the abscess is appeased, and lightly scrape; then cut as you can move, and be careful of the part of the penis, for it will harm nothing.
Cure then the wound with soothing powder, as we have said to treat powders, and if you cut too much from the skin, and it goes above, it will harm nothing; cure it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
of the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to obstruction of the kidney stone, or frozen blood, or bowel, or new flesh, or similar things, which we have said in the division;
and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to the stone in the groin or in the neck of the bladder, it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees; and have his feet placed on the back, and extend his belly from above the back to the part below, and restrain the patient's body as much as he can; and then constraining the neck of the bladder to express the stone above, whereby the urine is released.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instruments called "siringue", whereby there is this form: and it should be made of thin silver hair, like the feathers of a bird; and it should be one and a half palms long, and should be subtle at the head.
And the manner of urine issue is that you take a double thread, and tie one end to the head of a piece of wool or cotton, and insert the other end into the siringue; and cut off the excess thread so that it fits snugly at the head of the siringue, then anoint the siringue with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and tea water.
then place the siringue gently into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis above towards the mouth; then insert the siringue forward up to the bladder, and let the patient feel come close to the empty thing, and that is not done according to this order unless the guide or channel through which it goes is twisted; then stretch the thread all along the wool piece and piece, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and make the urine flow.
and repeat the siringue until the bladder is emptied, and have the patient relieved.
of the diseases of the bladder
When bleedings or blood comes into the bladder, or putrefaction is assembled there, and you see it dripping with waters and medicines, then do with all the instrument that is called "clepsedre", and this is its form:
It is closed, and has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the threads are trimmed so that the medicine flows well without adding anything to the penis, if we can then draw out the moisture and insert it when needed.
and when you see your medicines flowing into the bladder, place the tip of the catheter in the moisture, and pull out what is inside it; if you pull out the moisture through the catheter, then push strongly the piston inside; then the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
and this is the form of subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder: thus it is
And it is of silver or of archaic; and the head is higher; and underneath one breast or the cord falls; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture which you see enemas the bladder, then tie between two breasts with a good double thread, and heat one pouch with that moisture on the fire; then pour the head of the enema into the sheath; then strain your hand on the bladder to all the moisture beneficially, until the patient feels that that moisture has reached the bladder.
and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make one circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put in a strong thread into these perforations, then assemble the circle as one assembles a tile, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, by pressing your hand so that the moisture comes out at the bladder.
of stone
We have already said in the division the ways of stone and extraction together with medicines; and I said the difference between the stoned abscesses as regards rains, and all signs, and which kind of stone one should work on; and in the bladder, and in the sheath; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is stoned in the bladder happens more often to children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and it appears hare-like, and the patient's sheath swells, and he pees many times, and then becomes inflamed; and many of these stones are formed at the foundations; and it is lighter to heal children until they are three years old, and it is much more grievous in old men, and it is moderate in those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have a large stone than for those with a small one.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purify the patient by enema, in order to draw out all the bile that is in the intestines. For sometimes it hinders seeking out the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and lift him up and move him downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes slides from above; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely declining downward; then search for it and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone in its place, then hasten now to cut on the stone. And if it does not fall at all when touched, then moisten your two middle fingers with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or your two outer fingers, if the patient is a young adult; and pour it into his foundation, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, then bring it to the neck of the bladder; then press upon it on your finger, and push it forward outside where you see cutting.
And command the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the skin above in height, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the skin on the part where one makes the incision; then put in the spatula copant, which is this form:
And make a slit between what is between the skin and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left naively; and be straight on the stone, and your two fingers be beside the foundation, and be the incision of the traverse so that it be wide outside, and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
In case the press is made with the fingers that are at the foundation, it may jump forth too quickly; and know that there are such stones which have angles and margins: it is hard to get out; and if one is found which is soft, resembling a horn, and rounded, whose issue is easy.
To that one then where it has angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it does not jump forth, it is necessary that you strain upon the forceps which are like a file at the head, in order to press the stone so that it does not escape; or put beneath the one instrument a subtle curved corbel at the head; and if you cannot shape it thus, then widen one pouch the perforation, and if the sand decorticates, then strain it with vitriol.
And if there are more than one stone, then put the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then remove it forth, and the small ones afterwards if there are more. And if it is very large, then you must split it, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes out suddenly below where the flesh cannot heal; but nonetheless strive to extract it, or to break it with forceps, as long as you take it apart piece by piece.
And when you have completed your work, then apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put over it one damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to calm the hot aposteme; then revitalize the patient on his back, and do not untie the band until the third day.
And when you untie it, then raise the patient very well with oil and water, and then cure him with diaphrenic ointment and basilicon ointment, until he is healed.
And if apostemes, boils, and congealments of blood appear in the wound and corrosion, and it is retained by the urine which is gathered in such a way that it does not flow out with the urine: then put your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and ruin it.
Then lift the wound with water and egg white and vinegar, and help him in all ways that you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the works that you do to cure him, you bind his two thighs together, and assemble the medicines on the bed.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the sheath, and stuck inside, and the urine cannot come out; then cure him as I say, and cut the skin many times, or excuse yourself from cutting because of this cure. I have already tried it thus.
Take one iron rod according to this form and be fixed at three angles in one handle:
Here is the translation of the first sentence:
et if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then take one thread under the stone and another above, then make the stick end just between the two threads, then pull out the thread, loosen the ligament, and clean the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
of the stone of women
There often happens that the stone is inserted in women, and if it ever does, it is a grievous cure, and is defended by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who reveals herself to midwives, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a well-informed woman in this art of surgery; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more inward than the stone of the man, therefore it is necessary to make a deeper cut, and there is great fear.
And if necessity demands this, it is necessary that you take a midwife who knows well, and when you find one, you will know, and if you do not find one, just as much to get one skilled castor; and the present one should be a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you order from the examination of the stone.
and look very well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to thrust her husband's thing or foundation and search for the stone; and if she finds it, then constrain it under her husband's thing, and command her to thrust her husband's thing into the wound, and press her left hand on the bladder strongly.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then strike on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the con, there where it appears in its apparel, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her husband's thing above or below the stone, and make the incision the first time small.
then thrust the right in the incision, if you feel the stone so far into the wound that the stone can come out further, and know that many kinds of stones are: namely, small and great and rough and smooth, long and rounded, and those with ridges; thus know the likenesses to know the issue.
And if the blood flows, then put vitriol powder in its place, and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops; then come back to your work, until the stone is out, and have instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones from men to aid you in your work.
and if the blood flows and it is from the artery that was cut, then put powder on the place and strain of tents and bandages, and do not continue with this, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it again, lest by chance the patient would die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased and the place is clean, then come back to your work until the stone is out.
of fleshly hernia
Ramica aquosa is nothing else than a gathering of moisture or white fluid, which is beneath the skin of the testicles, that contains the egg; and it is called "syphac", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, as if it were another egg; and it's the skin of the testicle between the white syphac that we have said; and this does not happen unless one is not.
And the generation of this ramica is due to weakness that comes from the testicles, and it spreads that material.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: or it's declining to yellow, or it's without red, or black, or watered whites, and this happens more.
and these are the signs to know this gathering, for if it is white syphac that we have said, it is a swelling, a long one like the figure of an egg, and does not open the testicles, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper membrane, it is a swelling with a part of the egg, and for this one thinks that it's another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white syphac, you will know well; then when you see what color the moisture is, try everything that can be done to the surrounding quadrature, so that the shape is as before. Accordingly, what comes after the surrounding quadrature, judge of what is inside.
Accordingly, what comes after the surrounding quadrature, judge of what is inside. And when we cure it with iron, then it is necessary that the patient be healed according to our power and the replenishment of his body; then bind him on his back, on something a little high, and put many cloths under him.
then sit on her left side, and command the minister to sit on her right side, and extend the stick to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles;
then take the spatula left, and cut the skin of the testicles in between the long ones until just below the nail, and make your incision entirely straight in cutting through the skin of the testicles just up to the white syphac, and scrape it subtly according to our power.
then pierce the white syphac plain with water to one large pore, and draw out all the water, and then put in your needles, and stretch the white syphac upwards; and do not touch the skin of the testicles, but only the white syphac itself; cut it whole or in pieces, namely the side of it subtly, lest if you do not cut it well, the water will return.
and if the egg jumps out of your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work on the white syphac; then join the two flaps of the skin of the testicles with a suture, and then cure it as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you lift up the vessels that are suspended, in doubting the corruption of blood; then cut off the testicle to all the suspended part, and extract the egg, and cure it as we have said.
And if the water is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two ramices; then cut off the other part similarly to how you did the first one, and wash away the blood, and put a moist poultice of rose oil into the wound.
and put away another damp wool cloth in wine and oil, and put on the two cones, and put on double cloths, and tie it up to all the bandage that is according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and stuff them with wool yarn according to this likeness and be sewn together in the girdle of the braies, and one of the straps takes up on the foundation just to the back, and the other at the part of the pointing; and the other chief on the two armpits, and be all assembled into the restraint of the belt buckle.
and sometimes this medicine of cautery is done in place of iron surgery, and it is that you take one subtle surgical instrument, and cut the skin of the cones, and be heated as we have said, so that the white scab that contains water is uncovered.
so take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white scab into little holes, and scrape it off with this subtle hot cautery.
And cut in all the ways you can, until you have removed everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the yolk; and know that this work is more safe; and take care of avoiding decoration with blood, and more so than the works of surgery.
and if nothing else makes you contrary, or abscesses or bleeding or another thing, then care for what makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horror, then administer a perfusion, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that the ramica water is ready,
so make the patient sit on a low stool; then pierce the abscess in the part below all the way to the broad spatium, and put the perfusion through the length of the body; and be wide the holes, so that all the water can flow freely.
then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let the remaining water flow freely, then care for it until the wound is healed.
and if the white cloth does not allow water to flow out of the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you insert a probe or instrument used for drawing off the water from dropsy, as described above; and widen one poultice the wound, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after eight months or so, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
of the abscess of the cones
Know that in the section of this chapter there are more fears and dispositions, therefore it seems to me that one should not leave it.
and I will tell you the work and similarities of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and even to the cones; and this is by much chance.
It is known by excessive bitter and watery humor that spreads to the cones, or by percussion;
and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and does not find a pain, and is an heavy abscess.
and by chance some heavy abscesses are painful and piercing, and of foul color, and sometimes comes from a blockage of an artery, or swelling of a vein.
When it is due to a blockage of an artery, then it is known by the hot abscess, when you press it at your elbow. and it is not right that you touch it.
He who is made of swelling of a vein is known by his disposition at the expression of touching the elbow.
and can well perform surgery on this likeness, and on the other veins; and it is that you cut the skin of the cones, then raise the yolk high, and draw out the white scab, and deliver the suspensory from all parts of the yolk.
If the yolk is already solid with these veins, then it is necessary that you draw out the yolk and the skin.
and if it is inflamed on the scab, or in what is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that tension, and cut it again.
And if the birth of the vein is in the lower part, then it is necessary that you cut it all, and draw out the yolk, as we have said.
And when your work is complete, then dress the wound with damp wool cloth in rose oil and wine, and care for it with other cares until it is healed.
of the abscess of the cones
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to a bunch, with the softening of the cones, and if the patient grievously complains when walking.
and the cure for this disease is just as fearful as the one before.
and yet we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a low stool, then place the suspensory of the cones downward at your elbow. to all the vessels that are near the penis, and bind them with strips, and extend them properly.
then cut at the spatium trenchant, a broad passage in the middle of the vessels, until they are uncovered.
and then scrape off each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are on the temples.
then insert an awl where there is a doubled thread, and bind it to the first place where the blood has flowed, and bind it again at the other end. then cut them in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture.
then dress the wound as with others that are not yet bound together, so that no vessel bleeds that nourishes one of the cones.
for by this there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come blood, then it is necessary to draw out the cones from all the vessels. so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and become dry and cannot help themselves.
of the corruption of the scab The events of this chapter are by the section that comes from the scab, or the extension above the belly in the part of the armpits, therefore the intestines descend into that corruption at one of the cones.
and this corruption is from the scab, or from its extension, and comes in these two manners of many causes: by percussion, by jumping, by roaring, by lifting a heavy load, and by similar things.
and the signs when it is of the extension of syphilis, if it is that it has a little and a little, in long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal right up to the very front, because the syphilis presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is of the section of syphilis, which brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses have diverse appearances, just below the skin, and this is because of the issue from the intestine and the body being overcome by the syphilis.
And at times the ulcers go down to the intestine, and are retained there, and cause great pain to suffer in the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments, where there is fear, therefore one must take precautions.
And the manner of working is that you instruct the patient to reach inside the wound with his hand and try to get into the intestine if he can. then be steady on his neck between your hands, and lift up the ribs;
then raise the kerchief above, and cut all the skin of the scrotum along its length; then push the flesh of the abdomen into a bag according to what you need to open up the wound, and make it such that the bone can come out.
then scrape off the syphilis that is under the skin of the scrotum, until the white hard syphilis is uncovered from all sides.
then put your two fingers in the place where the scrotum ends, between the white hard syphilis that is under the skin of the testicle and the second syphilis.
and part what is behind the testicle, and between the second syphilis; and then move your right hand into the skin of the scrotum, and raise the white hard syphilis high up to your left hand, and lift the testicle away from all the syphilis towards the abdomen. and instruct the assistant to stretch the testicle up high and release what is above the bond.
and search with your fingers if there is any part of the intestine wrapped around or white hard syphilis, and if you find anything, then push it into the abdomen below.
then take a needle with which there is 10 threads made of 1 thread, and insert it into the back part of the syphilis, which is after the skin of the scrotum; then cut the strings that appear as threads, until there are 4 threads. then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the syphilis, which we have said is under the skin of the scrotum, with a strong bond of 2 parts. then wrap the strings of threads and bind them together with a bond of 2 parts, so that no vessels that nourish it can enter in there, lest the abscess does not become worse. and place the bandage on top of the bond according to the first long bond with 2 fingers, and after these 2 bonds leave a gap from the syphilis that is under the skin of the scrotum equal to the width of one finger.
and after that, do the same according to the roundness that the testicle bears; then cut in the part that is under the skin of the scrotum, until it is equal to the natural shape and size, as we have said before.
then apply moistened linen dipped in oil to the wounds, and put on the bandage that we have said. And sometimes it is necessary to cautery the white hard syphilis that we have said, after incision, due to fear of excessive bleeding.
For this often happens, and leave the bandage on until it falls off by itself; and if it takes too long to fall off, then wash with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it falls off.
then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is completely healed.
of fleshly hernia
In this remedy I have never seen anyone who dared to perform the treatment by fire.
And the ancient ones say that it is done in such a way as the remedy which is together with the vein, in the same manner that you bind the vessels, after cutting above and gently below.
then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess of one who works, until the vessels bleed; and then cure it as we have said, until he is completely healed.
Sometimes comes rupture in the groin, as we have said, and open up the wound; and none of the intestines descend to the scrotum, and if any do descend, it is little, and repair all hours.
and yet if he remains too long in this position, the wound or syphilis grows, until the intestine descends.
and this happens because of the extension of the syphilis that is in the groin, as we have said, for it spreads out, then becomes softened and inflamed the wound and opens up.
and the cure is done by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is not cured by fire in this manner.
and it is that the patient lies comfortably on his back between your hands, then cut the wound of the inflamed rupture from wide to narrow according to the length of 3 fingers.
and then extract the syphilis that is under the skin which follows it, and take the rod and place it on top of the wound that appears from the syphilis.
and press it all the way to the bottom of the abdomen, then cut the two wounds that appear from the syphilis on top of the head of the rod, and cut one and the other.
and then extract the head of the rod, and do not cut the syphilis nor extend the testicle, or any other thing, as I have made you aware in the cure of the remedy for the intestines.
and then treat it with the treatment for wounds. And when you cut the strings, have a nurse and treat the wound until it is healed.
The syphilis is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is more effective in this wound, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Many times the skin of the scrotum becomes soft in some men, because the contents inside are softened, and it is visible; and when one wants to cure it, one must make the patient lie on his back, and cut the soft skin above the natural skin; then assemble the two lips into a seam, and if you see fit, cut off the excess of the soft skin at 3 or 4 seams; then cut between the seams, and treat it as other wounds, until he is healed, and the thread falls.
The punishment
The punishment is reckoned in our law, and it would please me that I not speak of it at all in this book; and it is only necessary for two purposes: one is that the physicians respond to questions about it when asked, and provide a cure; and the other, because we often need to chastise certain beasts to help us, such as oxen and sheep and goats and other beasts. I say therefore that punishment is done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting. In the one where we do it by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and relaxed; then we take them in hand until they are remitted and you no longer feel them. About the castration of beasts: it is necessary that you grasp the beast, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut above each ball once when you have well bled them; and I leave some space between the syphac and the subtle syphac which is on the vas deferens; and this manner of punishment is milder than that which is done by attraction, because at attraction some thing from the testicles remains by chance, whereby the beast desires lust; then cure the wound until it is healed.
Of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodite is in two ways like a man: one way is when between the two testicles appears as much as the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and sometimes it urinates in court. And the other manner is in women, and it has on the fingernail as much as a penis and two testicles. And the cure for man and woman is that you cut off the excess skin all around, and cure it like other wounds; in the second way, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
Of the uterus
The uterus is a thickened skin over the natural part, as much as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that's the cure. It is necessary that you grasp the superfluity of the uterus with your hand or forceps, and cut it lightly; and do not go too deep in the flesh, lest bleeding occurs, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed; and there is another wound that arises at the mouth of the womb, and is filled, and by chance jumps forth, and is according to the likeness of a cow, and therefore they called it "cow disease" in olden times. It is necessary that you cut it, as we have said about the uterus, and treat it until it is healed.
Of the hare-lipped
The hare-lipped is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the lip is small; and it is a natural condition, or an accident caused by disease that has occurred; or it is due to a thickened skin, or from the subtle syphac or espace, and is done in depth in the womb, or in the sides, or below, or wherever; and it prevents conception, and childbirth, and by chance having flowers; and knowledge of this is by the inspection of the belly. If the swelling is apparent, then it goes to your fingers or the right. If it is from the subtle syphac, and it is near the two kidneys, you should hurry, and do as follows: place your two fingers together, and the woman should sit on her back, spreading her legs; then the two kidneys are formed, until the subtleties of the syphac are released, and the swelling is over; then take linen, and soak it in oil, and put it on the wound, and make the woman lie at home each day, so that she cannot solder. And if the syphac is hard and espace, you should cut it with a spatula like the leaf of myrtle. If the swelling is from born flesh, then suspend it to the forceps and cut it; and have medicines that stop blood, such as alum, dragon's blood, incense, and together with many eggs; then administer a bandage made of cloth wide enough so that the wound cannot solder; and thus be long-lasting, and administer another tent made of dry linen; then be cured by other treatments until it is healed. And when flesh is born in the womb, you should cut it according to this manner, unless it is an enchanted aposteme. For the aposteme that is enchanted in the womb should not be touched with fire.
Of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that do not normally close, and when they are old they become thickened; and we have said in the division what their appearances and signs are, and I will say here those which receive a cure. I say that hemorrhoids and thickening, when they are deep in the womb, and there is no sensation of pain, are not curable by fire. Those that are at the mouth of the womb can be felt, and are those that can be cured. It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, then make the thickened part into tongs, and cut it at its roots, then powder on medicines that restrain blood, such as alum and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bathe her feet for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding occurs, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and apple bark and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and oil, and make a poultice on her back. And if it stops bleeding, that is good. If not, then apply poultices to the back and breasts with no fire; then take linen, and soak it in plantain juice or elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the wound. And when the aposteme subsides, cure the wound with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a rough head, so it should be cut as I said about thickening; and then cure it until it is healed.
Of apostemes of the womb
Many types of apostemes come to the womb, such as chancre and pierous aposteme and herpes and swelling and fistulae and hemorrhoids and hot aposteme, and many other diseases that I have said in the division. It is necessary then that I say about the hot aposteme that comes to the womb, which is not one of the apostemes that are closed up with a bow; and if you want to know how to work with fire, look at whether the aposteme is agitated in its beginning, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it. Then don't hurry to cut it, but let it heal until the pain subsides; and then make the patient sit on a stool, and have two small stools or she reclines, and lean back onto her back and stretch out her legs away from the leg; and spread her thighs apart, and put her arms under her knees, and tie them well with a good cord; then place the birthing instrument towards the right side, and administer the instrument that is used to open the womb, so that the form comes forth; and it is necessary that when you are administering this instrument, you mark the first line on it to know the depth of the womb, so that what enters the instrument does not come deeper than it should, and does not harm the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the womb with cloths, so that the instrument does not cause her pain; and it is necessary to put the handle of the instrument on top and hold onto the instrument. And when the aposteme appears, and one makes a gentle motion with the hand, it is necessary to cut it at the head, with a spatula made like a lettuce leaf; and when the bowels are empty, it is necessary that you put a moist poultice in oil or rosewater on the wound, or in oil that has been cooked; and place the poultice above the wound at the bottom of the womb, and on top of the marris and on the elbow linen clean soaked in water or marshmallows are cooked; then cure it after two days with ointment suitable to what I have said, until it is healed.
of childbirth
It is necessary for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth and its signs; that is when you see the woman leaning forward and desiring to push; then the child hastens to come out forthwith; then you should know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and the issue is below his head, and the secondine with him; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on her belly so that the child comes out soon; for when it descends above his head, the secondine is with him, and the excesses of the mother are purged by good purging; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For it sometimes comes on its feet, or excessive in the body or shoulder, or hands, or on the belly, or some other place, and is converted by chance on his neck, and by other bad figures; therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures how one should aid her.
If the child comes out above his head in natural issue, and the woman gives birth grievously, and her virtues are weak, then make her sit on a stool or have women hold her; and anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek cooked, and then give the midwife a small spatula-shaped instrument, as shown here: and cut the afterbirth, and push with one finger as much as the moistors which are inside burst forth; and take hold of the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, it is necessary to purge the woman with fenugreek and oil of sesame; then make her take breath and stretch out in a comfortable position, and keep her mouth and nose shut for an hour: thus now the child is delivered. And if the two hands come forth, it is necessary that you gently guide them in and out; and if they cannot enter, put the woman on a stool, and lift up her feet high; then set the stool down on the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall over; and if the hands cannot enter and the child dies, cut off the hands at the knife that is placed before, and extract the child, and guide it evenly.
of the issue of the child on its feet When the child comes out on its feet, it is necessary to push it upwards; and then turn it a little bit and a little bit until it is even;
then take one of the feet and stretch it a little bit and a little bit.
Can he jump just to his thighs, if the mother is commanded to press, and she takes breath in a comfortable position; if it jumps too far, may God help.
And if it is not too far as we have said, then turn it a little bit and a little bit until it is according to the natural figure. For then it is easily fixed.
And if it does not come forth as we have said, then take fenugreek powder, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all together in one mortar; and put it on the woman's nature inside and outside with this ointment, then make her sit in cold water up to her navel.
and when she is moistened underneath, put a mire collar on her and place it underneath, and let her stay for an hour; then make her sit on a stool, then make her take breath and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press the belly, for now the child is jumping. of the issue of the child from its knees When the child comes in this form, then place the midwife's hands on it a little bit and a little bit;
of the issue of the child which comes forth with one hand hanging down it is necessary to contrive to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman stand up and walk;
if she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed, and straighten out her legs properly;
then administer the fenugreek that I have mentioned;
and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a stool, and study how to bring back the hand; and gently lift the child according to its natural figure, and make her take breath, and command that she take hold until the child comes forth.
of the issue of the child on its neck, and having spread out its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother it is necessary that the midwife takes hold of its hand, then turns it a little bit and a little bit, and gently lifts it.
and when it is even, then put on the natural powder of fenugreek and oil, as we have said, and command that she move a little bit and a little bit.
and when you have done this, then make her sit on a stool, and command that she take hold; and make her take breath. of the same manner with all the afterbirth
of the same manner with all the afterbirth When it comes forth in this way to all the afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth with one finger until the moistors are empty.
and if the child is placed on its face and neck, then cut from the mouth so that it is not retained, and kill the child.
then put the child inside, until you have placed it as is necessary, and command the woman to take hold at times:
of the issue of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not an unusual thing, and it happens often. Two are unusual things, and do not live if they do not have a name;
I know that they are multiplied, and are separated by the sac that divides them, which is connected to the mouth.
and sometimes they come forth naturally like all others under, as we have said.
And if they come forth with difficulty, then the treatment is as we have said, and be subtle in manner, and do quickly and lightly what she does; and do so as it is of use for salvation. of many children
of many children Sometimes they are formed in the womb in number one, or two, or three, or four, or five, or six, or seven, or more up to fifteen, and are all formed in the shape of an infant by the measurement of wise glory,
and it is necessary that the doctor knows all this, for by chance similar things happen to him; so do according to what is needed.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman who has given birth to a dead child or miscarriage, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained to work by hand; so it is necessary that you know if the woman has a healthy disposition and does not have an accident or fear of death;
so it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her shoulders inclined downward, and her legs lifted;
and the attendant takes hold of the woman by two parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not treated with the descent of the child;
then anoint the mouth of the womb with moist oil mixed with alum and fenugreek and flaxseed, then the doctor oils his hands with these oils and mixtures; then pour them into the womb lightly, then take one or two of those that are suitable for this use,
and watch carefully to see if the child is formed and descends onto her head; if you insert the cord in her ears or neck or mouth or palate or below the beard or in the navel or near the ribs;
and if the descent is on foot, then tie or prick it and make it come to the sides slowly;
and it is necessary that he holds the cord in his right hand and puts the curve between his left hand's fingers, and pours it all into his hand lightly, and inserts the cord into one of those places we have said until it comes to the empty thing;
then insert another cord in front of one, or the third that you have need for, so that the extractions are even;
and then stretch them equally by moving from one side to the other, so that the cords are bitten to hold in place, as is the form;
And if one part remains, then the doctor oils some of his fingers with oil and pours it into that part, and treats the other part;
and if there is no part left, then put this cord or more in a higher place, and do so until it all comes forth completely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back by stretching; so it is necessary that you wrap it on a cloth, so that it all comes out;
then cut at the joint of the foot or toe, and thus it is necessary that you do the same in the other hand, and with two feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is strained in the issue, or it has a sharp-angled skull assembled; so it is necessary that you insert the spatula-shaped spine between your fingers and shape the head and extract the liquid; or you round it with the instrument which is called "almidach", by which the shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and thus do the same if the child has a great natural head; and then treat the bones with pincers,
and if the head jumps out and it is strained at the navel, then be split, until the moisture that is in the issue comes forth;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces as much as you can;
and if it is inflated in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you make a hole until the moisture runs;
And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is gentle, and the direction to the mouth of the womb is gentle.
And if it is strained in the belly or navel, then it is necessary that you extract it onto a cloth wrapped around your hand; and shape the belly or navel until the moisture that is there runs.
and if other members are missing, and the head remains, then the doctor puts his hand into the womb to the depth of the womb, and treats it up to the mouth of the womb. then he inserts one or two cords, and extracts it.
and if the mouth of the womb is narrowed due to hot abscess that has come there, then it is not necessary to work at all. instead it is necessary to administer wet and greasy things; and the doctor applies ointments, and uses water-like, softening, and moistening substances.
And if the child is on its side, and you can make it equal, then administer what we have said for a living child.
and if one cannot do this, then cut it into pieces and leave nothing of the secondine.
And when you have done this, administer what we have said for hot abscesses that come into the womb.
and if bleeding comes from the decorrumens, then it should be put in cold water restricting, and administer other cures.
And I saw a woman who had a dead child in her womb, then she consulted another doctor on that one, and the other doctor refused to treat the dead child. After a long time, an abscess came in her backside and swelled up to the point where it opened, and began with great pain.
I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, and could not find a way to heal the wound.
I applied ointment with strong traction, and one bone came out, and after some days another. I was very amazed, because the belly had no bones.
So I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I cleansed the wound and extracted many bones until the woman was in better shape; and the woman lived long thus, and sometimes a little bit of bowel came out.
and I have not written this chapter except because when the master finds a strange thing, he knows how to put it right.
to bring back the joint to its place
Here comes the form of the pressor, with which we bind books; and to the second turning to the two heads of the two links. However, the combs should be more subtle than the restrainer, and should be made of ebony or boxwood.
and the mouth of the wood should be one and a half palms wide, and the margin of the trees one palm, and long one and a half palms. and between the two links there should be two joints of the same wood, which are tight in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more.
and these two joints are fitted in the mouth of the joint so that it can be opened when one turns the two combs.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in its appearance, should be made of wood from ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of pincers. and have two joints at the two heads, just like you see, one palm long and one and a half palms wide.
and when you see the joint open all the way to the instrument, then make the woman sit on one seat, with her feet bent and her legs spread out. then fit the two joints together in the joint, and hold the head of the instrument under between her thighs; then work your hand on the entire instrument, just like you have done with pincers evenly, according to the amount that you see opening the mouth of the joint, until the patient does what she wants.
These instruments are all mounted, and their shapes are multiplied; and when the mirrors have been prepared, then the work is faster, and higher for men according to their quantity.
So do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, because their needs are not excusable.
When the secondine is retained at childbirth, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to retain her urine, and then make her pass water in condition, and hold your hands at the mouth and navel. and if she passes it for that reason, well it is.
If not, then take a pot, and make a perforation or cover, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the joint, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury.
all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then put one end of the pot and the other head into the mouth of the joint.
and let it steep until the vapors come inside the joint; then make her pass water, as we have said. If the secondine comes out quickly. And if she remains after this treatment and is not fully cured, instruct the patient to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or with musk mallow of althea, and then apply it in its natural state.
and seek out the secondine; and when she has found it, then take hold of it and stretch it little by little straightly, so that the joint does not resist the extraction. but it must be moved slightly to the right and to the left, and then pulled; if it will come out and dislodge itself.
And if the mouth of the joint is too narrow, we have said the treatment for passing water, and for fumigation with herbs.
and if she is not from all that we have said, then beware that you do not force it at the pulling.
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the joint, you tie to the woman's thigh, then anoint her with ointment from four-fold pharmacist.
so it will set and reset her, and come out fully; but nevertheless, when she has burst forth, a foul smell comes to the stomach and head, and hurts the patient.
So it is necessary then to do fumigations suitable for this: none of the ancients have proven that fumigation with cress and dried figs works.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain her flowers and secondine is this:
And it resembles seeing a cord, and one puts the subtle head in its natural state, and the wide heads above the fire.
and let the fumigations be over the coals, and let it steep until it is exhausted, and begin another one.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but it is stopped by a subtle membrane. So it is necessary for the patient to pierce that membrane at her own door, and not pierce with sharp spatulae, and guard the opening so she does not touch it.
then put on a moist linen in wine and oil, then the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not stop, then put on a thread of flax, and let it stay for days, and be removed when the child wants to go into chambers.
And sometimes this swelling comes suddenly from a wound or abscess; then it is necessary to cover that swelling: then be cured, as we have said with the thread of flax.
of the fistula of the foundation Fistulas which come from under the foundation are nodulation, and grow bigger as they come from below the foundation to go away or in the space of the two parts.
so it has one or more fistulas; and when that nodulation is old, it works, and brings forth moisture white or subtle bowel.
and sometimes these fistulas are purulent; and they are known by this that it flows out or is ejected or ventilated when the patient has an emission, and by chance one jumps forth.
And if it has fistulas that pierce just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and they reach just to the junction of the thigh, and just not to the knee.
And thus one knows the purulent fistula at the foundation, and not purulent. and it is that you put your two fingers or foundation, and put a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no tortuousness.
And if there is tortuosity, then put on a subtle linen tent or one hair of horsehair until you feel the tent or hair at your own touch;
and if you don't feel it, and it doesn't come out through the anus or vomiting or urine, as we have said; know that it will not pass through; so hasten to treat.
And when the fistula is pierced all the way to the bladder or all the way to the urethral conduit, if it urinates and cannot be sealed by medicine.
If it is pierced all the way to the junction of the groin, then the tent comes up to its place; if there is no tortuosity and the origin of the pain around it, then it is that it will go away in a day or two, and neither medicine nor ointment can help.
and in these pierced fistulas there is no cure other than labor, and the vanity of foolish physicians who meddle with them.
In that which is not pierced and is not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced,
and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lifts his legs up to his groin, and has his groins inclined towards his belly; then put on a linen tent or one of earth if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels it around the fundament, then it is fitting that you put your two fingers there,
then sense immediately that the tent has pierced it; and be discovered where you feel between your finger and the skin or flesh, then know that it is pierced; if one does not work on it, one cannot heal it.
One says however that some can be well healed, but this is rare;
and the help one makes there, it is that one cauterizes the subtle fire according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and put it all hot in the fistula, until it comes near the fundament; and do this two or three times, until you know that those charred parts are burned, which are like the feathers of a bird;
and then treat with moist tents in butter, until those charred parts are gone; then treat with ointment anointing the char and closing.
If it is thus healed, that's good. If not, otherwise it cannot be healed;
and if the tent enters and does not pierce all the way to the skin which is at the fundament, and between your two fingers and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula where the covering of the key ends; then cut at the beginning of the fistula, and put it afterwards before the tent, and then apply the cautery after, until it comes to the head of the tent;
and will be delivered the tent, and it will fall; then remove those charred parts that resemble a bird's feather, and none will remain.
And if the blood flows, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine quickly.
For the fire cauterizes two main things: namely, the burning of those charred parts joined together, and the stopping of blood and the drying up of moisture.
then treat with moist tents in butter or in crushed hazelnuts, until the patient's flesh grows well, and the charred parts that were burned go away in the well.
then treat the wound with ointments that harden and dry out tough flesh, and are the drying medicines.
For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not come back again.
And if the fistula comes all the way down to the fundament, and is separated from the body, then put your two fingers on the fundament, and explore that part.
If you feel the tent and between two is the thread or skin or flesh, where it is about to pierce, then there should be only force that comes from faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it all the way to the bottom, or if you can, put tents and treat it as before.
and don't go too deep in the fundament, lest you cut the tenant that holds the fundament, and it will come out by involuntary evacuation. then treat it, as we have said;
then treat it, as we have said; by chance if it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it afterwards when it is cut near the fundament, by tent or by other instrument appointed. then remove that charred part which is in the wound, as much as you can.
then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the part beyond the fundament: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And no fistulas are according to this manner: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the fundament near the skin above. so take a pierced tent at the head according to this form: And I put one twisted thread in two, and put the tent all around the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
If she is pierced in the margin of the fundament inside, then pull out the thread from that perforation, so that you put your two fingers on the fundament.
and draw the head of the thread, and tie the two knots together, and strain one against the other, and leave it for one day or two.
and restrain it sometimes, until the thread cuts through those charred parts that are between two, and fall away.
then treat the wound until it is closed and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, then make it pierce in all the ways you can, if it is not too deep.
For it's not fitting to make a cut that is too deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spatula-like spine from which one makes the fistula is very rough in one place and hollowed out. and on the other side not, because of which one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
Bleedings are according to two manners: or they are inside the fundament, like a drop of resin, and there are small and great ones, and it cuts away slowly blood. and if there is one or more, and they are without foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are without foundation have little moisture,
and then again or a little bit of yellow water or a little blood, and they have the color of flesh;
and the treatment for those who have them inside the foundation, is that you instruct the patient to stretch themselves out in chambers, until the foundations come forth, and they are revealed by children; so hasten, and hold it with pincers or at your fingernail, then cut it in its roots;
and if the ligature cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take them up on one drapery, or on a cloth, or from a piece of cambric; and extract them to your hands, then cut, and powder them with some hot powders that are in place of cauterization; or you cauterize them as it is said or written in the chapter of cauterization, then treat with other treatments until they are healed;
and if the foundations cannot come out, then purgative him with a biting and sharp purge to wash away what is in the foundation, so that it may come out openly;
when the patient is prepared, and if the fibers are gone from the foundation, then the treatment is light; and that is that you take them at your fingernail or with pincers, and cut, then treat as we have said, until they are healed, and he fears the incision by iron.
and it is necessary that you bring the suture together in this manner: take one twisted thread, and put it into a needle, and then pull the thread upwards and cause the needle to pierce on the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread underneath the needle, and if it is of the length; and tie the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and pull out the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one for correcting any superfluity of blood;
then put on the foundation a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerate, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then let him be so long as he has a bowel movement, and when they will have ceased, then treat with ointment and other treatments, until he is healed.
of the scorching of the devil or foundation Many times it happens that scorching of the devil occurs in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is useless.
and it is necessary that you scrape off at the tip of a spatula or at your fingernail the scab above, which does not let it become moist. then treat him until he is sound as it befits;
and if he cannot become sound, then repeat the scraping more strongly than before, until he is healed and scabbed. then treat him until he is healed.
of the shivering Furuncle is a small appearance of abscess above the body, and goes very deep;
and sometimes the abscess freezes, and it feels like death from shivering, and comes throughout the body, and more on the hands than anywhere else.
And the treatment is that you take a goose quill or a strong turkey feather, and put that quill on the furuncle, until the circles around it are purple all over. then turn your hand around the whole quill until you cut all around the furuncle, and put it deep in, and extract the furuncle from its roots.
And if you see that it is necessary to do so with an iron or steel wire according to this form, and be subtle underneath and drawing upwards.
nor pierce, but keep it at the point of your finger, and press hard And if you see that, then cauterize the furuncle, as is written or described in the chapter on cauterization.
of the form of the purge Sometimes one makes a purge of silver or archaut, or melted iron or cloth; and sometimes one makes these small and large instruments, according to how they are prepared for use.
Those then that are prepared for the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful are small.
The form of the purge, whether small or great, is as follows: the belly is bound in this manner:
and if there is a deviation or the belly is bound, as you see, and the fibers are pierced within; and has on one side two perforations, and on the other one;
and if the belly or womb is opened, put in medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and be pierced all around with small perforations.
and have between each perforation one thread of esparto, then put in these perforations a strong thread twisted from coarse thread, either ten or twenty times around, and sew up the belly as if it were a goat. and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then purge; and that is the form of the circle:
and the medicine not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the purge with oil or egg white or something similar, then tie it loosely.
then instruct the attendants to hold it with their two hands together, until it is fully opened, then pull out the purge, and lift up the patient's legs to the appearance.
and if the medicine wants to come out, then tie it tightly as much as you can; and if he sleeps a whole night afterwards, it is greater help.
And if you purge him in a disease of gut obstruction, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until he is healed.
And if hemorrhoids are in the foundation or abscess, then the purge should be as subtle as for a child.
and that is the form of the subtle purge on which the skin is strained:
of wounds
We have said in the section on wounds: now we will tell you the cures of hands and medicines, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or locations where they are made, and according to how they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by striking with a stone, and cutting with a sword or knife, or with a lance or club or spear, or similar things;
wherever they are done according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or on the back, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and begin with the wounds of the head, simple ones, because the reminder will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it's from falling onto stone or similar things, and although the skin is torn and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt the abscess being hot: if you make it heal quickly, from the same head, even if it comes out with blood from the wound, and the healing is contrary to the injured part;
and instruct the patient to be filled with wine and large meats.
And if he does not wish to heal, then let his meat be reduced, and let him not drink wine, nor eat flesh.
and place it on the wound, if a hot abscess comes forth, with wet cotton in rose oil alone, or in vinegar.
and if there is no hot abscess, then place on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air or powder, which I will say a little further.
and if the abscess has been moved, then place on some ointments, until he is healed.
And if the wound is large like a cut from a sword and similar things, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together with suturing, just as I will say for wounds of the belly, by suturing.
If the wound is exposed to bone and bleeding, and holds together by only a little bit, then cut it open; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as cooked testicles and wheat, as well as fowl, and similar things.
And if you find a purulence on the skin, and it is not attached to the bone, then cut out the whole purulence, and let blood flow, then treat it.
and if it has an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be stopped with medicine, then cut the artery, and if you find it severed, tie it up with a thread. and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and that you put in this powder which hardens even when the abscess has been moved.
And the manner of the powder is this: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; three parts of live coal, and pound it subtly, and fill the wound, and bind it firmly, until it closes well and joins with all its blood.
and then bind it well, and let it be without loosening, unless it swells; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And one does this only with coal alone, when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but only when the abscess has moved the wound.
And if the abscess has moved the wound, and it is in this state, then do not put any of this powder.
but place on some digestive ointments or poultices made from wheat flour and water mixed with honey, until it discharges pus. then treat it with other treatments until he is healed.
And if the breakage of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle tweezers.
and I will tell you afterwards about the breaks of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, then there is no difference between it and one on the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it's the nerves, then there is no other remedy than to leave the wound alone and put nothing restraining, for it hurts the nerves and makes them retreat. and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but be the medicine soothing, such as coal washed in sweet water and mixed with rose oil, and also wash the cloth in sweet water. and other stones of my kind according to this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then sew it up and bind it with bandages, then treat it until he is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and are filled with pus and blood, then pierce or open them lower down.
and if the artery is cut and bleeding comes forth, then dissect it, tie it up, and cauterize it as needed.
and if the spine of the throat is cut or the cords are severed, and the conduit is preserved, by which the flesh goes. then sew the cord on the gasket of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back in its natural shape. and then bind it gently, and let it be for some days, then treat it with drying ointments until he is healed.
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then cut it. and if there are pieces of bone, then remove all that you can, and leave what you cannot until the wound has purged. and be severed and ligated the opening.
and if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder that I have said. And if there is bone in the wound and a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
of the wound of lance or dagger
If it's a wound from a lance or dagger, and the wound is deep, then look to see if there are symptoms that the patient will not recover: know then that the wound is mortal.
and if it's not deep, and it's fresh with all its blood, then don't put powder in at the first hour, nor bind it tightly because the blood would not have a chance to pour out deeply. and revive in the heart, and kill the patient. but I put an attractive ointment on it, and bind it twice a day.
and if you don't have oil, put old cotton in the wound to suck up moisture.
and make the patient sleep over the wound three days, or four, or more; if there is no convulsion, nor evil trembling of the heart, nor any sign of lunacy; and when you see good dispositions, then know that the wound is healed. Then cure it with tents and other treatments until he is well.
and if she cannot heal or work, then know that there is a fistula; and cure it as one should.
And if the wound is an incision from a sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse, on the front or back, then treat what is in front.
if it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder; and if it is pressed into the bone, and has split into pieces, then close the wound, and remove the flesh if it is separated. and if they are not separated, then let the wound dry out, so that it will ease the extractions;
and for other wounds on other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are great, middling, and small;
from the great wound some times the intestines or the membranes of the intestines burst, whereby their introduction occurs;
and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the great one,
therefore one should put the intestines back in gradually, rather than all at once. because the intestines swell immediately when they feel cold, so they enter more slowly.
and therefore the middle wound is worse, because one must reposition the intestine to its place, which takes longer than two.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to three manners:
the two common stitches occur in the stitching of the belly,
and the stitch of other wounds of the body and two other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
and yet they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will say each one and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine protrudes, and a greased thing is for putting back, this is by one of the two manners: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in such a way: soak a sponge or one cloth of linen in lukewarm water only, or you heat the water with warm things like aquant, cypress, and spike. and then reposition the intestine until the swelling is removed;
and sometimes this wine restrains and is more effective at deflating.
And when you see the swelling departing, then moisten the intestine with water or heat that has been cooked with ale and malt. because by this it is eased the entry of some things;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small opening in the wound with the instrument used to cut the hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is more effective than the cutting. than none should cut without great necessity being there;
and this is the instrument to split it:
so cut inside in the curvature and do not take out anything, but look at the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine protrudes further, then put it back in accordance with its natural shape in its proper place, if you have the power, because this is more effective.
When the wound is wide and it is in the part under the belly, so it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back. and place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part under the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts so place your attention so that the injured part is higher than the other.
and thus it is necessary to follow what I say about great and middle-sized wounds.
Put small wounds in the treatment that appears good to you,
then take into your hands one pitiful minister who holds all the rupture in his hand, and bring together the lips; and this is the common manner of stitching.
and this is the common manner of stitching. and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound one or two fingers' width, and insert a needle where there is a good strong thread; and pierce the two joints of the skin with the two joints of the siphac.
then strain it with a doubled thread around the needle in two parts, and bring together the two edges of the wound naturally,
and then leave one or two fingers' width, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do so according to how many needles you need. until the entire wound is restrained;
and be the needles of medium size, between fine and coarse. because the very fine needles cut through all the flesh, and those that are too coarse cannot enter well: therefore it is necessary that they be medium-sized.
and it is not good to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin,
so that they do not cut and open the wound before the stitches.
and then cut off the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient while he is sleeping, and I put tents or cloths on the ends of the needles to hold them in place. and leave them there until the wound is closed.
and this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because one or two needles suffice.
The second stitching is common, and it's that you tie the two skin stitches and the two skin stitches together with a needle that has one strong middle thread; and when you have pierced all these pieces three together,
and when you have pierced all these pieces three together, then tie the needle to the part where you began, in the manner that one sews clothes;
and put a space between each stitching the thickness of a minor denier;
this stitching is suitable for men,
and I sewed up a wound that one man had in his belly,
who was wounded by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm's width deep. and it exposed the intestines well two palms' width deep,
and the wound was in the abdomen. I brought back the intestine and it had been outside for 24 hours,
and the wound was healed in just 15 days, and I cured it, and he was well.
And the physician had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and I didn't cure him with ointment, because I was in one place where you couldn't find any, nor any medicine; and I put a cloth with old cotton on the wound two times a day, and washed it with honey water until he was well.
Now I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching:
take the needle and push it through to the inside from the outer part, just up to that point;
when it has pierced the flesh in a straight line, then tie the end of the skin or costet to where you inserted the needle;
and make it pierce from the other side of the inner part up to that point outside;
and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as peltiers do with furs, and that you leave the skin once on one side and then take it up again on the other, until the stitching is all complete.
The second method of stitching, which Galen calls properly,
is like what some people do, who join the two parts together naturally, and apply one end of the skin to the other end, in this manner:
insert a needle or chief of the mirror near, and make it pierce only that point; and leave the two skin stitches; then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outside part up to that point inside; like two skin stitches;
then make it pierce one and the other from the outside part up to that point inside, in two other skin stitches that are on the other side;
and this is the second method of stitching and the most common.
Galien says this phrase, and some testify to it,
one must sew the belly with two needles, each having thread;
and one must insert one needle from one side and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew leather;
and knows that when the rupture is within the belly, it is a stitching more difficult than in other places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as that of other wounds:
and it's that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, and the air has changed it, then put back the intestine and the skin; then place on top a powder of burnt charcoal,
then put back the intestine and the skin; then place on top a powder of burnt charcoal, and if the air has changed it, then put on some ointment that is available until the wound heals. and cut the thread, and tie together the skin and the flesh; then treat the wound as you do with others, until it is well.
and if you don't have medicine, then put on, as soon as it begins to heal, old cotton; and move it two times a day until he is well.
For you don't need any other medicine in many simple wound situations;
and if you doubt that the wound may cause community of members to principal parts, then it's good for you to moisten linen lightly with oil of temperate heat or rose oil, and place it around the angles and under the armpits;
and if he feels pain or torment in his bowels, and this often happens, then cleanse him with black wine vinegar, and similarly if the torment comes just to the intestine;
and make an incision inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine called "jun" cannot heal if it is wounded, and this is due to the plantiness of veins that are there, and due to the subtlety of all the body, and the approaching nature of its humors.
And if the intestine bursts forth from the wound, then put it back in place just like the intestine, as long as it is fresh.
and if it is old and has become green or black, then it's good that you stop the flow of blood from coming out. because there are veins and arteries;
then tie what is between the ligament, and put the two stitches hanging from the part below the wound up to the outside to ease the extraction when the intestines fall out, and the wound heals.
of the rupture of the belly
When the intestine is rent, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men,
because I have seen that a man was wounded in the belly by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and from there came the evacuation and flatulence;
I treated it according to what I knew how, and did not cease to subtlety until he was well and the flesh was joined.
And when I saw it healing, I doubted that the patient had pain in his belly; and there was no evil, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
and some experts say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in this way: take fresh figs from great testicles, then bind the lips of the wound, and when the fig has opened the mouth, put it on the two lips,
then put another fig behind in the same way as before, until the wound is completely covered;
and cover the wound. This remedy works well in the intestine and causes no harm to the patient,
and one can bind the intestine with a thin thread taken from the intestine of an animal,
in this way: take the end of this intestinal thread that is quite clean-shaven, and then tie to the end of this thread one thin twisted linen thread, then push the thread through the needle and sew up the intestine, and then tie it in a knot;
and this way of sewing with figs is nothing other than according to the way of hope and expectation;
and if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the intestinal grooves, there is no remedy or health, except for subtlety.
of fistula or whatever it may be Know that all wound or abscess, when it suppurates, is universally called "fistula", and even when it bursts and runs pus.
And fistula is according to the true nodulation, hard and white, or where one does not feel pain, and it bursts forth like the feathers of a bird;
and sometimes it runs clear pus, and other times thick. sometimes little, and other times enough;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not healed and has no scar, is nothing other than through one of the eight causes:
namely, by the smallness of blood or body; or because of its wickedness; or because there is hard scar tissue inside and above the lips that does not allow new flesh to grow; or because there is too much pus; or the humors are corrupted, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a manner of plague; or because of the property in the region, digestion is slow and health is delayed, and is naturally inflamed; or there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the remedies of medicine in the division.
or it is necessary that I make you aware of the treatment for fistula which is done by manual work.
Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the bladder, or to the intestine, or to the kidney, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are in this way are of great suffering, and there is nothing but toil and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come up to the level I have said, and you have faith in the treatment, and if you see it and know it, take a piece of iron or lead, if the fistula is straight, then pierce it;
and if the fistula is twisted, then search for a subtle instrument of steel. for the steel bends with ease around the twistiness;
and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well search it by instruments, then cleanse it through one of the openings;
for the moisture thus runs from one opening to another and cleanses it;
then pierce with all your might, knowing whether there is bone or nerve, and it bursts forth in the very depth.
and ask the patient well about the pain he feels as you apply pressure with your hand, and the location where he feels it;
and when you know truly the location where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the locations I have told you, then bind it according to what I have said;
or in any of the locations I have told you, then bind it according to what I have said; and remove the bad humors and corrupted flesh that are inside; and then treat it until it is healed,
and if the fistula is well opened from its proper place, then it is necessary that you open it further, as far as you can; then put in moistened instruments of medicine, and tie them just at the head of the fistula,
then put in moistened instruments of medicine, and tie them just at the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains at the bottom;
and then put in ointments and unguents of healthy flesh, until it is cleansed;
and if it is not cleansed by this, then cauterize it as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then bind it. If veins or nerves are not injured or principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, then remove it all until the corruption is gone. then treat with things of unguent flesh until it is cleansed;
and if it is not cleansed and bursts forth again as before, know that you are not yet arrived at the end:
uncover and pierce until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus cleansed, it is well. If not, know that the corruption is too deep in the bottom, and you cannot come to it; so there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature's will.
and if there is a small corrupted bone and you can remove it with pincers, then extract it with an instrument suitable for this purpose,
and if there are many of them, treat all together, leaving none.
and if the moisture makes you contrary, and there is no error or fear, so mix and moisten and char, and deliver the bones.
And if you can't remove them in an hour, place on the wound something that will cause rotting. and let it stay until the flesh is rotten around the bones.
and then they will have come loose from the bones more easily;
and if it's a great bone, such as one of the leg or thigh, so remove only the corrupt part until all the flesh is gone. then restore the wound;
and if there's a great part of the corrupt flesh and it comes just to the bone; so scrape and char everything up to the corruption, and then cure until it is bound.
and I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so take it as an example and help in your work.
He was a young man of about 30 years old who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body,
until the matter came to the leg and became swollen with a large abscess, and there was no reason to delay opening it;
but the barber, through his foolishness, cut too deeply so that the abscess opened. and a great deal of matter was flowing out, and it became a fistula, and there came many pus-filled boils that all flowed forth with foul discharge from the body.
and many barbers treated it for about two years, and there was no improvement in the art of healing,
until I was called, and I saw his leg and the medications with which he was being treated, and what flowed out through the boils was great in amount. and the skin of the young man turned red and had a yellowish hue.
I inserted a tent into one of those boils, and then searched out all the boils.
and I found that some were connected to others on all sides of the leg.
I hastened then and charred one of the boils until I discovered a part of the bone. and I found it to be rotten and perforated, and the corruption was coming right down to the bone inside.
I removed what appeared from the rotten bone and thought that there was no other corruption except for what I had removed.
and I began to restore the wound with soothing medications over a long time, but it would not heal;
and then I repeated the process, and discovered the bone just as before.
and I found the corruption continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then extracted it, and thought to set the joint.
but I could not until I charred around a palm of bone, and brought it to its very edge. then I restored it with medications; and it was healed and set quickly.
and there was no need to repeat the work except for the patient's weakness, who could not endure. and because of the fear of death that I had for him. For through the bloodletting it often bled out, but he was healed completely.
For through the bloodletting it often bled out, but he was healed completely. and in place of the bone a hard callus arose, and he was of good disposition and had no harm or obstacle from anywhere, neither going nor coming.
and stretch the top so that you pull the rotten flesh downwards. and uncover the bone on the spot where you see it needs to be scraped, so that the scraper does not harm the flesh. and place a hot iron or a piece of wood below the bone in order to heat up and dry out the rotten flesh. and it is necessary to scrape as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and scrape again another time.
And if the bone is rotten, and does not open up, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it. so uncover all the flesh; then place a hot iron below,
and then scrape from one part to the other the rotten flesh, and make sure the scraper is as long as the length of the corruption, just as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then char the rotten joint, and scrape the bone where it contains from the other side.
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other remedy than to char it.
and if the corruption is in the armpit of the hand or in the armpit of the foot, then that thing is very strong. but nonetheless it is necessary for you to inquire into that corrosion, how it opens up; and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve be contrary to you.
and know that the instruments and scrapers for cutting these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and their appearance. and their thickness and subtlety, and their largeness and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare an instrument for each kind of work.
and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art. and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so consider the instrument you need according to what it requires.
of fire The head of the shoulder can become dislocated due to a cause from within or due to a cause from without.
and when you have tried medicinal treatment for that corrosion, and it does not bring any benefit, then it is necessary to cut that member down to the point where the corruption comes. so that the patient escapes either by death or by malice, which is greater, due to the default of the member.
so that the patient escapes either by death or by malice, which is greater, due to the default of the member. and the signs are such that the member becomes black, so that it seems as though it has been burned by fire. and then after the darkness, then goes forth the corrosion of member to member, and takes throughout the body; if you hasten to cover.
and if it's by the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar ones.
if the corrosion is at the head of the joint, if he copes, and does not give him any space to come all the way to the hand.
And if it comes all the way to the hand, then he copes at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come all the way to the arm.
and if it comes to the arm, then he copes at the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, that's death. and there is no remedy except for the quantity of his virtue.
and so it does when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then he copes after the other joint.
and if it comes to the foot, then he copes all the foot; and if it goes up to the leg, then he copes at the knee joint.
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy except to let the patient die.
and the way of binding or wrapping the member is that you bind it above and below. and stretch one minister downwards with one band, and another minister upwards with the other band. and you separate the flesh that is between the two bands to one and a half spatula-widths wide, so that the bone is uncovered.
then he binds or wraps it, and places one linen cloth on each side, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy skin. and another wound and abscess arise in the patient.
And if bleeding occurs while you are working, then cauterize the area immediately. or put some restraining powders on top; then return to your medicine until it is completed.
then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to one man in summer fever:
he had a darkness that seemed like the burning of fire,
and that corruption came first to his foot's joint, so that it spread throughout all his foot.
and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to bind up his foot, and was healed.
and long afterwards, the corruption returned to the joint of his hand, and he came to me.
and I put on him things that would cause a reaction after the purification of the body, but the corruption could not cease.
and he said I should cut off his hand, and I did not agree, for I had hope of causing the matter to recede. and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would die. for the man's virtues were weak; and he became desperate altogether, and returned to his land. and he hastened to bind up his hand, and was healed.
and I told this story only because it is necessary to make other amends when needed.
At times an abscess forms in the fatty part of the skin, and stays so long that it makes a great gathering of pus. and then bursts and opens, and the pus jumps out, and the skin remains empty, just like a vessel. and the skin that is above is as subtle as one of those delicate drapery fabrics. and they do not reach all the way to the bone, nor all the way to the nerve, and such diseases are called "st. Augustine's".
but if it is so long that it comes all the way to the bone in front, then it is called a "fistula".
and the skin is like this: you wrap that skin all around, and even when it is subtle, just like a fabric. and does not harden because of its corruption.
And if you think the skin will harden, and the corruption is not in front. and the skin is thickened with flesh, so cure it with ointment thus:
look to see if the breasts are large, and the pus that flows from them has a foul smell. then use Egyptian medicine made thus: take aiseal, and oil, and lye, in equal parts, and put the mixture into one vessel over the fire. until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey.
and then take from this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey. and use the medicine to lubricate the breast, and stop the abscess. and leave the medicine in place for two hours, then remove it by dripping.
do this many times, until the breast is cleansed, and the pus is removed.
and at no time is it lubricated with ash water. when this medicine is not present, and you take ash from the vine's firewood, and pour water on top.
then let it flow, and lubricate, as much as you know that the breast is well cleansed.
and if the patient cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor ash water, then lubricate with water and honey, or if it has a little lye mixed in. or you lubricate with honey and wine honeyed, where the honey has the property of cleansing and washing. and the wine makes the skin fresh.
and when you have done this, and you are sure that the breast is well cleansed, then lubricate with what brings forth flesh in it.
and it is that you take defined diaphanum, and mix it with rose oil and wine. or you lubricate with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken the properties or treatment of ointments.
and if the abscess on the breast is small, and the tube of the lubricant cannot enter it, then enlarge it with a little iron, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment. or balsamic ointment, as much as it is enlarged.
and if the wound is too wide, then sew it up and leave just enough room for one place or the lubricant to enter,
and if the boil that drains pus is above, then cut or lower it to where it is. For when the boil is deep, do not allow raw flesh to remain. and if you cannot cut under the skin as you see so arrange it in such a way that the boil runs to the lowest part where it is.
and if you cannot cut under the skin as you see so arrange it in such a way that the boil runs down somewhat, and do not leave anything of the boil. and take consolidating medicines to put on the skin
and apply over one cloth of linen that covers all the skin then cut at the strongest part of the boil on the breast into a hole slightly larger than the first then apply gentle oil on another cloth according to the size of the boil and put it on the boil on the breast to ease the boil, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days once
and that one which is on the boil on the breast, often removes to take away the boil and know what flows from the boil, whether it is venom or pus or enough or digestible or indigestible
and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not
and when your medicine has spread in such a way and you see the nature that erupts on the boil on the breast so know that the skin is cleared, and approaches health
and then loosen it in the morning or the third day, and when you loosen the wound so change another cloth, and renew the oil.
And if the breast drains undigested pus after many days, know that the breast is not cleared. And if subtle poisons come out after a long time, do not despair of health
for health approaches. For there are people whose flesh does not heal in their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
and if undigested pus erupts from the breast after many days, know that the breast is not cleared.
and if the breast tars to heal and is far off, then add medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue. as defined by oil, for there is a great part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
take defined oil, and mix it with rose oil, and add equal parts of old wine.
then congeal it and use it; and this same thing makes honey cooked and thickened. when defined oil is not present,
or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is on the fire; and then wrap it in a cloth, and place it on the breast, and do not administer it for a long time nor often. and roots of lily, which is also like wheat flour and cinnabar;
and roots of lily, which is also like wheat flour and cinnabar; and use simple or compound medicines: grind them, make powder, and put it on the honey I mentioned, and use it; and if the wound is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment,
and if the wound is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then know that corruption has gone deep, and makes an impression on the bone, or causes hardening of the limbs, or stiffness; so treat the wound as we have said before.
of the abscess of the elbow
Fleabite is an abscess that grows under the elbow of the armpit of the hand, or of the foot, or by chance occurs in other joints;
and when it is neglected and not looked after, then a foul abscess comes. and runs and drains pus until it reaches the root of the elbow, and by chance may even drain all.
and comes to the corrosion just to the bone, so that it brings a stinking pain, and the joint of the joint is wide, and the color is flux.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit. so it is necessary that you cut away all the excess flesh that remains from the elbow. then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is a great help if the bone is sound, and the elbow joint is intact;
and if the joint begins to fester and start to prick and bleed. so it is necessary that you put a cloth under the elbow where the flesh is pricking. and tie it at the top, and cut away that subtle and delicate flesh. and put on the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything.
And if the corruption is in the bone, then cut it out, and treat further, for as long as the corrupt bone remains, it cannot heal.
and if you see the joint corroding, then cut it out in one piece just as it is said before. then treat until it is healed.
and if it is hard and bound up, and he feels great pain, then it is necessary that you first heal him. then cut the elbow of the spatula at an angle across above.
and take care that the incision does not come close to the flesh that is under the elbow, for the patient would feel too great pain.
and if it happens, then put something on top that soothes.
The joints that occur in some people's hands by chance are all fleshy. and by chance there is such a joint where it has bones, and sometimes it has no elbow.
and some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some of the joints of the fingers. The one that occurs in any part of the finger does not move. and the one that occurs at the joint of the finger, by chance, moves.
the cut of the one who is fleshy is light, in such a way: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
The one that occurs in the root of the joint is hard to cure: if you are hesitant to cut.
In he who is born or will die soon, it is necessary that you cut first the skin around just to the bone. Then cut the bone to a suitable thread for him, then cure until he is healed.
The swellings that come together must be gathered from birth, or from a wound, or from burning by fire, or from similar things.
It is necessary that you cut the swelling, and then repair it according to its natural forms; Then put between two tents or moistened cloths dipped in rose oil, so that they do not stick together. Or you put between two thin pieces of cloth, until the wound is closed, as it should be.
If swelling comes to any of his hands with the palm, then cut that swelling as it should be.
Note: It seems like you've provided only "Des vils" which is likely a mistake. The original text was divided into lines, and this line seems to be missing some part of the sentence. Please provide the complete sentence if possible.
Veins are swollen large and puffed out, full of superfluous melancholic things, that come to many members of the body;
and it is more common in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
It is necessary then that you administer to him sometimes purging of bile, and then the medicine of basil.
The iron cure is according to two manners: one is when you cut them, and then treat the black blood that flows out; and the other manner is that you open the vein, and let all the blood flow.
The cutting is according to this manner: first arise the leg with hot water very strongly, until the thick blood becomes thinned. then strain the patient's leg from above the knee down to the part below the kneecap; then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a broad incision,
then lift and let flow the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood has flowed out as the patient can bear.
and then tie it up, and command him to eat meat causing black bile.
and recommence the evacuation and healing when the veins are full, and is harmful to the patient.
The removal of the abscess is according to this manner: rise the patient's leg, if there are many hairs. then put it in a bath, and rise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell.
and if you don't have a bath, then heat it over the fire, and then cut around the vein of the long bone at the top of the kneecap, or in the part below to the ankle.
then apply oil to the skin, and scrape the vein from each side, until it becomes apparent when one feels it.
and you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white cord.
then tie the remainder below, until it is lifted from the skin, and then dip it in oil lightly.
then cut in another place above three times; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears. then lift it up to the thread, just as you did, and dip it in another oil, just as you did first.
then cut another incision, or more if you need it, then lift it, and cut at the heel of the foot.
then treat and lift up to the second incision; then pull out from incision to incision until it flows all out, then cut.
and if you cannot treat and lift it, then insert an awl into every strong thread doubled. and tie and treat it, and insert below one thread, and turn your hand from side to side until it flows out. and take care that it does not cut, for if it cuts, then one cannot treat or lift it, and it comes to harm the patient.
and when you have treated it all, then put on the place of the wound moist wool in wine and rose oil; and cure until he is healed.
And if the vein is contracted and twisted and puffed out together, and it is not straight, just as we have said, then it is necessary that you cut it twistedly, but do not cut it off; and treat it just as we have said before.
then it is necessary that you cut it twistedly, but do not cut it off; and treat it just as we have said before. The form of the iron with which you cut the vein is curved, and does not cut straight, so that it cuts the vein.
and is of great curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is the form:
Note: It seems like you've provided only "De la voinne civile" which is likely a mistake. The original text was divided into lines, and this line seems to be missing some part of the sentence. Please provide the complete sentence if possible.
This vein is engendered in legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs nor trees, and in land where there is no moisture.
and by chance it may be found elsewhere than in legs, and this happens because of the impurity that comes from below the skin.
as if it came from within the body as a serpent or a worm, engendered between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg with a very great inflammation, then the swelling changes and the vein begins to come out, just like the root of a plant.
When the swelling opens up, then it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of cloth from one and a half to two and a half inches, and tie it.
and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it becomes undone, wrap it around the cloth again, and tie it. and if it is too long, then cut off a part and wrap the remaining portion, and do not cut off its root until it has come out entirely. for if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh and cause an abscess and impurity in that place, and a bad disease.
therefore it is necessary that it be treated gradually up to the top, and leave none of it in the body.
and sometimes this vein is when it is treated for five or ten palms in length, and one man came to me, whose it was that issued from ten palms in length, and when you cut it, he inserted a thread or a pipe, and pierced it down to the bottom.
So that everything be; and let the matter inside be empty, and bring to place medicines that can prevent any harm for a year, then care for it as if it were an abscess.
And at no time to this vein many streams, and likewise when it opens in the joint of the foot or the foot. and there comes out much pus, and from which many streams come forth; then cure it as we have said before.
Of worms that are born between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "bovine sickness", because it often afflicts oxen.
and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes up and down through the entire body. and it is felt well from one member to another, until it reaches the skin where it goes, and bursts forth.
and is caused by the corruption of some humors, such as worms, serpents, lice, and ascarids or those in the belly.
and doubt is had about its wickedness, for when it goes through the body and climbs to the head and comes to the eye. by chance it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it cured and pulled out, one can't avoid but when it goes:
so then you must tie the place above and below with a strong band tightly.
then cut above and pull it out, and if the worm is deep in the flesh and you can't find it, then cauterize it with fire above until it dies.
and the greatest harm that it does is that it destroys the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the head close to the eye, then hold a strong band below it, then cut above and pull it out;
and it is necessary to use the patient with purging of the body's medicines which dissolve bad humors.
and beware of meat that can prevent harm.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called in our land "vacirir", and is a pain that comes to some members, and then spreads from member to member; and I have seen what I am telling you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
and soon after, I saw it rising like a worm on the shoulder. more quickly than anything else, like vivid silver when it cuts from one place to another;
the pain departed from that place and settled in the shoulder.
and then a little while after it ran through the entire body, until it came to the other arm;
then she told me that it was twisting around the body, just as I saw it.
I was greatly amazed at how she moved thus from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner before. However, I had heard of many that had indeed experienced pain moving from one place to another, but I had never seen it myself, just as I saw it in the woman.
and I thought to myself that this was because the woman had a thin body and her veins were uncovered. and therefore this windiness appeared constrained;
and do not appear according to this reason for those who are luxurious, and who have moist bodies and veins that are closed.
And when you see this disease cured, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens up as we have said, then tie above and below quickly, and then cut above until that constrained windiness bursts forth. and cauterize the place; and if you don't see it to your eyes,
then treat it with what hinders windiness, such as fetid pills and serpent's pill, and similar others.
Of arrows
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they strike.
The diversity of theirs is that there are some with large points, and small ones, and those with barbs, and those with shafts; and of those that have two angles, and of those that have tongues, and of those that are broken into pieces; and that which strikes some member does so in two ways: either it enters the principal member, or it breaks off;
such as brain, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it strikes then in some place of these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you later appears: so it is necessary to beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death follows in many dispositions. and if this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and the skull bursts forth which is above the brain. is when there is blindness and madness and bewilderment and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and commotion of understanding, and vomiting of gall. and by chance it is without further breath from the nostrils, or the ears; and by chance perturbs speech and voice. and bursts forth with a moist white wound resembling boils, and bursts out like a stream of flesh.
and if this sign appears to you, then take care of the cure, and pull out the arrow if it's not stuck.
The sign of the arrow when it strikes the heart is that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty. and by chance the arrow becomes still like boils, and flows with black blood, and brings coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: then know without doubt that death ensues.
And the sign of the arrow when the kidney is hit is that without any foam it bursts forth from the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's color changes, and sighs deeply and seeks cold air.
And if the arrow strikes in the covering of the breastbone, it is near the little ribs; and vomits a great deal of yellow bile and great pain and sighs; and all the members of the shoulders are moved.
And if an arrow strikes the stomach by chance, so that something from the undigested meat falls out of the wound.
And if an arrow strikes the belly, and a piece of bowstring jumps out through the intestines without any hope for treatment or extraction of the arrow.
And if an arrow strikes the bladder, and urine jumps out and flows forth, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other limbs, such as the face and shoulders and throat and shoulder blade and armrest and spine of the back and forehead and hips and thighs and legs, and a similar limb, are safe according to many conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
It happened to me once when an arrow struck the shoulder in the root of the nose: I tried to remove it and pulled it out from under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without numbness.
And I drew out an arrow that struck in the fatty part of the eye under the paper-thin skin, and the arrow was stuck, and I could not pull it out except for a small portion towards the wood. and the arrow was as big as a Turkish bow, very light without iron tips; the wound was healed, and no bad accident occurred to him.
And I pulled out an arrow from the neck of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with iron tips:
I loosened the barbs, and pulled it out slowly until I pulled it out, and the Christian was healed.
And I pulled out an arrow from a man who had been struck in the belly, and thought he was dying;
and then after he had passed 30 days, his condition did not change at all; I cut into the arrow, and extracted it, and pulled it out further, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see a man who has been struck by an arrow on the back, and the wound is sealed above;
and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change his natural disposition, nor did he find harm in any of his natural works.
And if you see another man who has been struck by an arrow on his face, and the wound is sealed;
and remained thus without suffering great pain; and many similar ones.
And I pulled out an arrow from the king of the princes, who had been struck near the nose, and was slightly bent to the right side; and the arrow was completely stuck.
I was called for the treatment after it had been struck three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I searched for it with a very fine touch, and did not feel it; and he felt a pricking and pain under his right ear. I thought it was from the point of the arrow
I put on the wound a plaster that attracts and digests, because the flesh did not swell; and the arrow's point appeared.
and the arrow's point appeared. I put on the plaster for many days, and the wound was resolved above, and remained thus the patient a long time,
so that he felt the arrow one day inside his nose; and he told me this. I put on the wound medicinal corrosive mixture for many days, until it was opened.
and I tried to remove it, and felt the head of the arrow which was stuck at the wound; then I inserted it into the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly.
and passed well beyond the term for 3 months,
and then it sloughed off so much that I inserted the forceps, and pulled at it from one side and the other, but it could not come out;
then I did not cease to search and extract it by means of instruments, until I took hold of it one day with the well-made forceps, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, so that I pulled it out and restored the wound.
And the doctor judged that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sealed, and the patient was completely healed.
Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your care on what I do not say, for books cannot entirely comprehend;
but wise masters can grasp something very small, and that which is present and failing. nine works, and nine instruments, in the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not exit from the limbs where they are stuck except according to two manners: or by the way they enter, or by another part;
and that which jumps out from where it enters is an arrow entering flesh and jumping out at times.
And if it doesn't jump now, then let it remain until the flesh is pierced around, and the exit is opened.
and also if it's stuck in the bone and can't come out, then let it remain like that for some days, and move it each day.
and then it jumps out, and if it doesn't, then pierce around with a very fine point, until the flesh around is stretched out, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is lodged in its place within the body so that it cannot be seen, then it seeks out the entire tent. and if you feel it, then draw it out with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow; and if there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut so that the wound will be large; and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow as to why it stays there,
and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow as to why it stays there, so remove the flesh that is stuck between two parts of the wound as far as you can; and then break or bend the ears of the arrow so that you can draw it out;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow so that you can draw it out; and be subtle so that you do not break the arrow, but rather pull it out more gently.
And if you cannot do it at once, then leave it until the next day and pull it out, for the extraction will be easier. And if the bleeding of blood makes you contrary, then follow what we have said about treatment in its chapter;
and beware of the incision of the nerve and vein, and put in place how you can draw out the arrow without danger;
or soon or late, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow struck him. for it is the greatest help that can be, and if you cannot, then place him according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another part, or if it touches anything of his, or the skin is swollen in front where one can see or feel something abnormal;
cut then on top, as far as the forceps can take hold, and then pull it out: if it jumps forth now.
And if it is retained in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, as far as it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, then leave it still, and then recommence the extraction until it comes forth;
and if the head of the arrow is stuck, then push it through to the whole length;
and if the head breaks off, and you wish to administer a poultice, then apply one instrument with a cloth; so that the point of the arrow enters into the cloth of the instrument; and then push forth;
and if the arrow is broken, then apply one instrument with a pointed end into it, to facilitate extraction.
And if the arrow is embedded, then it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can. then treat the wound as is fitting.
And if the arrow breaks or splits open in the back, belly, bladder, or side, and it is nearby, and you can cut above, then cut.
and take care not to cut the vein or nerve, and then pull it out, and then cut the wound, if necessary; and treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps with which one treats arrows are similar to the beak of a bird, and look at this form:
And there are many kinds: large, small, and petty, according to the size of the arrow.
of the common veins of the body Of the veins by which one is healed there are 31, of which 16 are in the head.
that is to say: two jugular veins that are located after the ears, which are called "herbech" in pairs; and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing; and two veins that are in the two eyelids of the two eyes, which are called "aspirés"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two jugular veins that are in the neck; and the two veins that are on the upper lip above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins by which one is healed commonly are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side of the arm, and people commonly call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "faste", and is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and people commonly call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is on the right side. and people commonly call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the elbow. and it is that by which one is healed, which appears manifestly above the armpit.
And the saphena vein is the one that is between the ulnar and radial veins, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and foot are three veins: one is below the fold of the armpit on the left side, and the second saphena which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein that is called "nese", which is in the ankle of the other side.
and in the other leg are three veins below those.
The healing of the veins that are after the ears helps the ancient catharrics and migraines; and the quality of the healer, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the quality of the healer, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and wipe the skin or veins with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a screw. until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending from the head: which then comes to your hand, and where you feel the pulse below your hand, if it signals by pulling;
then take the lancet, and push it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand above the entire vein; and cut and the skin and the vein well for two hands of traverse, and make the blood come out as far as you see;
then tighten and bind it, so that it is healed.
and I have already said the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The vein of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is worth to migrate anciently, and when sore and obtalmic, accustomed to the eyes;
and the qualities of the blood are such as I say: and it is that the patient stretches his neck, so that the two veins appear openly; and feels the pulse below the tongue, and then signs off;
then lift the key above the vein at the top of the tongue's index, and put the lancet below; and lift the vein above, and cut it, just as you did with the two other veins, and make the incision of blood according to your need;
then release the patient, and put your tongue on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton;
and then bind it firmly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their binding and extraction, at the beginning of this book.
The vein of the forehead is worth as much as the cephalic vein in ancient diseases of the face, and to migrate and to blush;
and it is that the patient stretches his neck while twisting, so that the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fossor", whose form is:
and put the point on the vein, and press with your hand or other thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; then release the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it is healed, and never once to open a wide opening.
However, it is not necessary that the opening be too wide; and the wound to cross, because the bone is pressed, and by chance break the opening when it is subtle.
The vein of the two veins that are in the two tear ducts is helpful to the eyes, and to the typhoid fever, and to the blush, and to the jaundice in the eye, and to diseases of the face;
and the qualities of their vein are such that the patient stretches his neck while twisting without any bond, just as before;
then let it be, and be the vein of the traverse, about a little bit long and a little bit wide, because there is no fat.
And if the opening is subtle, by chance it will break; then make an incision of blood, until you have need of it, and then bind on cotton, and bind well.
The vein of the navel is worth to evacuate, and to unblock, and to diseases of the face, just as migraine and blush that comes in the face, and similarly when it is ancient;
and the qualities of the vein are such that the patient stretches his neck, then strains his navel to your left hand; and take the subtle and long opening, and insert it between the two nostrils in the space that is between the two naris; for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and do not go too deep in, and let the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for a night, because it is very soon restored;
The vein of the two groins is helpful to the obstruction of the womb, and to the beginning of menstruation, and to many diseases, and to constipation, and to corrosion, and to herpes, and to ulcers;
and the qualities of the vein are such that the patient stretches his neck below one and the other, just as we have said; and let the master be standing on the head of the patient, and the patient sit down on one seat;
then let out the vein of the long opening a little bit widely, then draw out the blood temperately, or as much as is needed;
then do the other side in the other vein, then release the ligament, and bind the veins moderately; so that the patient does not choke; and leave it until morning, when the wound is healed.
The vein of the liver The vein of the upper lips is helpful to purging in the mouth, and to corrupting of gums, and breaking of lips, and around the navel.
and the qualities of the vein are such that make the patient sit down before you, and strain his neck just as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and you can recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins: then cut one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
then cut one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, then cut the largest one on each side, and similarly make of the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
The vein under the tongue The vein under the tongue is helpful after the cephalic vein, and it is for the obstruction of the throat, and for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of the vein are such that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts up his tongue, and looks under each side to find a black vein:
then cut one and the other, and do not go too deep in, because underneath are the arteries.
The veins of the neck which we commonly bleed are veins that are bled according to two methods:
or in piercing a wide and deep opening, or an olive-like subtle one as cutlers cut, and is called "anasil"; and they are large and subtle according to the wideness and narrowness of the veins. The form of the wide opening is well-known, and it is wide as you see:
And it is necessary to open the veins that are filled with thick blood, and that contain thick and troubled blood; and this is the form of the olive-like opening:
and it is more subtle and pointed, and is for bleeding the subtle veins, or where there is subtle yellowish blood.
The bleeding of the Basilic vein, which is one of these veins, is helpful for diseases that are under the throat, and in the neck, and in the breast, and in the belly;
It is necessary for the surgeon to bleed him slightly, and beware of the artery that is below. And if he cuts the artery, and a lot of blood comes out, then it is necessary to stop it, as I have said; and it should not be pinched with the flame, but cut like ash.
And if the basilica does not open obviously, then it is necessary to remove it, and change another; or you want any part of it, or you bleed in its place the vein in the arm: it opens obviously; and cut with the flame like ash, as we have said.
And if you know the place of the vein, then it is necessary that you remove the arm, so that you touch the place as long as you know the pulsation; then mark the place with a marker, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with the flame like ash;
and beware that you do not hit the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is the artery: stop then.
And if you see it flow upwards like a child's urine, and the blood is red and fine, know that it is the artery's blood; Hurry then, and put your finger above for a long time, then take away your finger if the blood ceases, as often happens;
and bind the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and be above fear, and do not move him until he is healed.
And if the blood is not ceased, and it complains to you, and the remedy is not present, then cut the artery if it opens, for the head of it retires; and cease the blood.
And take a wrapping of fustic, and cut it, and take one of the halves and bind it well up to the other day;
if the blood is ceased, it's good; if not, then cure him, as we have said, with powders that cease blood;
and the ceasing is not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the power of the bandage on the arm.
The vein of the blood in the middle so helps that it takes away blood from the head above and from the belly below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to beware of the nerve that is below, and if it points too deep inside, and he finds the nerve, and it swells up and the patient's health is grievous, and by chance cannot heal;
and this nerve appears many times, and if it does not appear in some people due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you loosen the nerves with the instrument like ash; and stop the nerve at your power.
And if there is vein between the two nerves, then cut the long piece.
The vein of the cephalic so helps that it takes away blood from the head and aids the eyes;
and it is necessary to bleed slightly with the olive flame or with the myrrh flame, for it is the most safe of all the veins, for it does not have below the nerve nor artery.
However, it is necessary to seek out the lighter place, and do not hurt anything if one should fail the first time, and one begins again; and by chance some people's places swell up, so that one may fail the first time, but it does not hurt anything. The quality of the blood is according to your opinion.
The first thing you should know about bleeding, is that bleeding is not done for anything else but to preserve health.
and to prevent illnesses from coming; and let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins that are used: namely, cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and one should bleed in the beginning of pentecosts to clean, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears;
and one should bleed on the first or third day, after 2 hours or 3 of the day.
The bleeding that is administered for illnesses has no fixed determination, but when there is need by day or night, in all hours and at all times;
and it is not necessary to bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman carrying more than the fourth month up to the seventh; Nor should one bleed elderly people who have passed 60 years.
And when someone wants to be bled, in whatever way it may be, then it is necessary that they purge the intestines with a light clyster; if he has many bad humors retained, so that the veins do not take away from the intestines the superfluities which are hurtful to the principal members;
nor does one bleed one who is too fat from meats, nor one who is drunk, until they are sober and free from dropsy;
and beware of bleeding after a passion of the colon, and vomiting, and purging of the belly, and frequent coitus with women, and travail, watching, and sleeping, and all that pertains to the virtue, or by something of the arm or body;
then subtlety the humors, if the blood is thick, by meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power;
then put him in a bath, unless something prevents it, to subtlety the blood;
and bleed from the vein of the bladder around the third, as we have said;
and keep that day free from work, and toil, and lust, and similar things;
and be lazy and joyful, and let the bleeding be higher than that person to whom one is bleeding, and rub the arm two or three times;
then remove the bandage gradually, for if it is too tight or too loose, the blood will not flow;
and then rub the place with your hands, until the veins swell up, and one can feel it;
then moisten the bleeding area with the flame of an old oil, then put your thumb on your left hand on that vein below the place where you want to bleed, so that the vein does not flee and fail at the moment of bleeding. For there are veins that flee like strings when one is bleeding, and some that are full of windiness; so when one applies the caustic, it takes back to itself and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of those.
and if it opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, therefore it is necessary that the surgeons be aware of these things.
And if the vein opens at first time, that is good; if not, then it starts again a little below or above quickly, as long as the swelling is not present.
And if the swelling is present and the patient is frightened, then leave it for one or two days and do not bind the arm: by chance an abscess will form; do not enter into a bath, then begin the treatment again if it pleases him;
and if the opening is small, or the wound is not bleeding subtly and you doubt that it will not bleed so much as you see, then trust in that same opening to all the fire directly;
and work a little quickly, so long as the swelling is present; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the swelling, then do not begin the treatment again, and apply a little bit of oil, for it lightens the body from blood, and is helpful in this swelling to bind that which the oil binds;
and thus administer the oil binding in each treatment of veins that you heal the wounds, to stop the flow of blood;
and this same thing is done for a triangle and a bowl of eyes, when it is applied to the swelling; then subtly the blood flows out and spreads when it becomes too large.
And if there comes a big abscess, which often happens, especially when it is not treated except at that time or the opening of the vein is small, so hasten and apply a moist sponge to the swelling in water and silk, and bind it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the issue of blood from the vein, and if it remains at the swelling for several days with no blackness or greenness, then it does not harm him; and if you see, apply something of aloe or myrrh dissolved in camel's milk, mixture, or similar.
And many times there is an abscess and appearance at the wound of the basilica; then place your hand on it, and if you find the swelling soft to the pressure of the hand, that is the bad appearance. Therefore do not apply anything of what we have said, for by chance it may cause constriction of the artery; but make a dry poultice to harden the swelling, then treat with another treatment until it is healed.
And treat each of the blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it become thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for one who is full and strong, and has need of bloodletting, to make the wound larger, and let the caustics be wide.
and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and have him heal little by little, and it is necessary to have him heal by cutting across, not by piercing;
and this manner of healing is safe from hemorrhage and numbness of the nerve, and is worth more than the healing of the long or wide wound.
And for one whose body is failing at the wound, it is necessary to give wet bread in the juice of ripe pomegranates; if he is overheated, then treat with bloodletting three or four times.
And if he is of cold complexion, then moisten the bread before the wound with a sweet syrup, or with an aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cresses, and a well-odored syrup.
And if he belches at the wound, after the flow of much blood, then it is necessary that he drinks a broth of bone and a subtle, well-odored syrup.
and use the other things we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wants to bend his arm and heal another time, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bloodletting, that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue, continuously.
And if he wants to bend his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then he heals in seven hours after the first bleeding, or after nine hours.
And if one wants to heal from another side, then he must heal on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood inside the body that is already overheated and makes one come down with a fever; then it is necessary to draw out a great quantity, and enlarge the opening until it becomes a pomegranate. then you reward all the conditions of healing, and place your hand on the pulse when it is healing, so that death may not come instead of a pomegranate. and this happens many times, when the surgeon is negligent;
and it is not necessary when you see that the arm should be loosened, and blood let out a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press strongly upon. unless it is curved, then he should straighten his arm quickly, for it would be bad;
but let him heal the second time; or you should put it at the tip of the caustic, until the blood which is frozen at the opening of the vein flows freely, and apply a little bit of silk soaked in water, and press lightly upon.
And if the vein is swollen, then leave it alone and do not bind it tightly, until the abscess is appeased.
And if necessity requires bleeding a second time, then let the blood flow in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The veins on the arm are healed at the place of the main vein because it is composed.
And the manner of healing is that the patient puts their hand in hot water until the scab becomes red;
then it is bound gently so that the veins appear well, then he heals now across, not long or wide.
and the opening is wide, and heals well near the joint of the hand, and if there is no more blood to come out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
And if this is in summer, do not throw the hand into hot water, for it is put more in winter than in summer;
and the vein of this vine is saved from all other veins, since it has no artery or nerve.
The vein of the right arm is worth to all liver diseases, and this is the manner:
strain the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is emptied, so that one can see it; and if the vein crosses over, and you take it all out in one, then nothing troubles it;
and do not go too deep into the flesh, for the nerves are beneath all the stripped away flesh,
and then put the hand in hot water, if the wound is frozen in the incision, and cannot come out.
And when you have drained the blood as much as needed, put oil and silk on the vein to cauterize quickly, and thus do for each wound.
The vein of the left hand is worth to the disease of the mouse, and do the same as I told you for the right hand.
The vein of the Sophen is worth to all diseases that are under the body, such as diseases of the kidneys, and retention of urine, and disease of the reins, and groins, and ancient legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of this vein is that the patient puts their foot in hot water and rubs it on the vein until it breaks. and lies above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot many rains go.
then it is good for the larger rain or the one at the ankle that is worth more.
And if you make it on the foot, beware of the nerves that are below, and the vein should go across as in cutting; and let there be no inflammation.
And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot back in water and let the vein empty well.
And if the bleeding fails at first, then repeat it a second time above by a little, for the flesh is salty; nor be afraid of nerves, as we have said, and do likewise with the Sophen of the other foot equally.
The flesh of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of the thigh, and its vein is worth for the pain in the hip when it is full of blood.
And the quality of this vein is that the patient goes in or out of a bath and stretches above the ankle four fingers by twisting.
for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then cause it to bleed in all ways that you can, and by crossing. and is worth more than you can cut it, for the flesh is sound, and it is very responsive to many hands.
and is worth more than you can cut it, for the flesh is sound, and it is very responsive to many hands. And if you do not find it, then cause some other vein to open on the back of the foot or towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
and cause as much blood to flow as you see, and then loosen the ligament, and put cotton on it and restrain it; now it is healed.
(The phrase "Des sainies de ventouse" appears to be a section header or title, indicating that the following text will discuss the subject of wound dressings using cupping glass)
Cupping glasses are made of horns, or iron, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by making an incision and drawing blood, or without making an incision.
And this cupping that is done without making an incision is in two ways: either it is done with fire, or without fire;
and two others in the two sides of the neck; and the cupping below the chin; and the cupping on both shoulders; and the cupping above the hips; and the cuppings in both arms; and the cuppings in both legs; and the cuppings of the two ankles; and the cupping does not treat blood, unless it is from small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh,
and therefore one should not be afraid of it, just as one would with a vein dressing; and it is not necessary that it be administered, whether with fire or without fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until all the body is emptied.
And if it is necessary to cup due to the severity of diseases or for habit, then we should administer it each hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in between and every time.
for there are some who, when they need to cup, have a heavy head;
and there are some who find repletion and darkness in their face, and head, and neck, and in their eyes;
and there are some who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have the tongue swollen, and bleed freely; and there are some who dream, and see through blood and wounded and dead and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we command them to cup after three hours of the day.
The vein of the Muse helps with the headache that comes to one's eyes, and it is not necessary for this to happen after the evacuation of all the body.
and this cupping is in place of the vein of the Cephalic.
and it is not necessary for someone with a cold complexion or who has chattering (probably referring to St. Vitus' dance) to do this, as it would cause them great harm.
and therefore it is not necessary for the elderly or those with cold diseases of the head to use this treatment.
And those who are often cured with this method will become forgetful, and because of this it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the fear of forgetfulness.
The cupping on the neck is in place of the vein of the head and Basilica, and because of this it is worth for the constriction of the belly. and to splitting of the channel of the womb, and all over, and to repletion;
and it is necessary to apply a little pressure, for if it holds too tightly, it will cause forgetfulness or obstruction of the stomach and heart.
The hiccoughs with the two ribs of the neck if they are worth the pains of the head, and obtalmic eye and migraine, and in strangulation, and in pain to the roots of the teeth.
and it is in the place of the saintly basilica; and it is necessary that you instruct the surgeon to express his hand when he puts it, so that he does not cut the artery, and does not bring forth copious blood.
The hiccoughs under the chin if they are worth a disease of the mouth, and corruption of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the cures of the two lips.
The hiccoughs of the shoulders are worth a disease that comes from heat and swelling.
The hiccoughs of the sides are worth as much as three veins of the arm. for it brings forth blood from these large veins;
and instruct the surgeon not to cut too deep for fear, because the flesh is bare of fat, and there are nerves and arteries underneath.
The hemorrhoids that are on the backside are worth hemorrhoids of the fundament, and diseases below, and it is necessary that the hemorrhoid be large, and be of earth, so it has need to well draw out; and by chance, if they were subtle, they would break; and there would be great wounds.
The hemorrhoids of the legs are clearly healed, for they bring forth blood from all the body, and are worth the ancient pains of the kidneys, bladder, and urinary tract, and restore the flowers; and they are in the place of the two shins, and two ankles, and yet they weaken the body after long use, and cause to come forth pus in many dispositions.
The manner of applying the poultice is that you put it on first empty, and then succeed in a timely way, and apply it quickly, and move it evenly, and do not cease to do so until you see the place red and swollen, and behold the bleeding of blood; then cut, and remove the poultices, and take heed to the condition of the body, for there are some who have hard flesh, and clear pores: thus it is necessary to wound only once, and necessary to make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
And if the blood is thick, then it is necessary to wound twice: the first time to subtlety the path of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, then it is necessary to wound a third time; and when we wish to draw out the blood little by little, then we should be satisfied only once.
And if we wish to draw out a lot of blood, then we often recommence; and if the blood is thick, then cut deeply, and finish so that the veins are pierced suddenly.
and it is necessary for him who has thick skin and hard flesh, and who have large pores, that you anoint the places of the poultices with oil that is appetizing and dissolving. if it's in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or seed of gourd oil;
and if it's in winter, with oil of wormseed, or lily, or chamomile, or another similar one.
And if the superfluities are thick and cold, then take bitter oil, or balm oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
And if the one who is being cured has tender flesh and large pores, there's no need to put any oil.
but it is necessary to wash afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or another similar one.
And he who has much moisture, should wash with ease, or with myrtle water, and sumac water, and similar things.
And those who have thick superfluities should wash with old wine, or with water of sycamore, or with a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things;
and it is not necessary to wash with a poultice before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and do not sleep at all after the application.
and it is necessary that he washes, when he should be poulticed and when he is being poulticed. And beware if the one who is being cured is choleric, and the blood is too abundant and inflamed. and it is necessary that he takes cold things, such as green grapes and endive and lettuce in ease, and similar things;
and then take a little, and meat of castrated animals, and moist flesh.
And he who has a cold complexion, should take honey syrup, and aromatic wine that is midway between old and new, and eat little by little, and eat small birds and young pigeons.
and the day he will be poulticed, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give certain people at times treacle or muscat before the poulticing, or afterwards, to comfort the main members. and let the blood be subtlety drawn out, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
The poultices that are applied without wounding are those that are applied on the liver, and on the kidneys, and podagra, and on the belly and the navel and the kidneys and the loin, for these members do not suffer to be wounded in this way.
and it is done only so that blood can be drawn out from member to member. such as we apply to the mammary glands when the child is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, just as we put poultices on the belly and navel to diminish the member.
and removes the pain when there is inflammation or piercing; and by its attractive virtue it may attract the inflammation, or dislodge the piercing from its place.
and thus it does when one applies it to the liver and kidneys when there is retained poultice-like substance.
and these poultices are administered empty to suck for as long as only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes plain water.
such as in diseases of the pustules, and in this manner one fills the poultice with hot water alone, or with water that has cooked herbs suitable for this purpose.
The form of the poultice administered at fire is thus:
And it should be half a palm wide and one-quarter of an inch thick, and have a rounded edge all around the periphery, just like for inserting a needle.
and let it be of earth, soft beforehand so that it does not harm the patient when putting on the limb.
and have in medium a cross-shaped piece of earth or iron to put a candle in hold.
and let them be great and small according to the illnesses and age of those who take them;
for children's poultices are different from old people's, and lean ones' from fat ones'.
And one should put this poultice thus on the limb:
take the candle of wax or one lining, and put it in the poultice across the piece that is inside the poultice. so that the light is at the bottom of the poultice so it does not burn the patient;
and then put it on the limb, and it should be on the boil that we have said, so that when one wants to, if there is steam, and remove the poultice;
and take the lining again just like before, and continue it often, if you need to.
In the poultice then which is administered in illness of pleurisy, it has no cross or boil, and is not administered at all except when it is full of water, and is put on the limb alone.
and that's the form:
Poultices are not administered at all except in limbs where one cannot put poultices because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in bare bones without flesh, such as arms or legs, and other similar ones;
and the quality of the user is that when you find poultices that are in pure and clear water without any putridity, take them;
and put them in sweet water until they are familiar and have nothing in their bellies; and then be washed with wine and poultice, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the poultices;
and when they are full and bursting, if it's a place where one can put poultices, then put them, because this is worth much afterwards.
If not, then take away the bone with ease and then with water, very well, and then bind it;
and if the bone heals too late after the poultices' removal, then soak one cloth of linen in cold water, and put it on, until the poultice is shriveled.
and if the bone is multiplied, then put on vitriol pounded or gallstones and similar things, until it is shriveled.
or you put on the bone half of peeled broad beans and leave them until they are absorbed by the bone, so it will dry now;
and if you need more, then take other poultices.
And if the poultices do not want to take, then rub the bone with fresh blood, or put a needle in it until the pus comes out. and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will absorb;
and when you see that they are flowing, then powder on a little bit of alum and powdered silk or ashes, so they will dry now.
The book of fractures begins here.
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is a treatment for fracture and desolation.
Learn, dear son, that the foolish man will fall into this chapter, for he has never seen any of the old books nor read a letter;
and because of this reason is the art estranged in our land, for I never found any good.
and I know nothing except by the science of the old books, or that which I have studied and treated, and through experience, and through the custom of my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and abridged at the end, and have shown clearly the forms of instruments that are administered, just as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is then necessary that we say the prologue to this book, the summary of the word and the chapters where wise men put their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or distortion comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient from one side and the other, unless something else entirely, such as weakness of the body, or children, or old men.
or if the weather is not very cold or too hot; and moderate choleric heats, that is to say, cold flushes, and flesh of hare and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not overfill with meat which fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about a hot abscess or expansion of matter in the member; then restore the patient to his former government as he has used.
And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or have viscosity, such as boiled wheat in water, and rice, and testes, and peas, and beef's belly, and eel, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For with such nourishment the bones mend more quickly and sooner the fracture.
And know that the bones of old and decrepit people cannot be well reunited or mended according to their nature due to the weakness of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
but don't care, reset on the broken bone a big splint that sets and joins the member together, until it becomes strong as before; and do not give up from his work, and for this reason it is necessary to nourish him with thick meats, such as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is one thing and the fracture of the back or leg another, and I will tell you in this chapter all manner of fractures. For there are fractures that occur when an arrow hits, and another when something is sharpened, like the cutting edge of a quill for writing.
For there are fractures that occur when an arrow hits, and another when something is sharpened, like the cutting edge of a quill for writing. And then there is a fracture with wound, and a fracture in a small crack throughout.
And each manner has its own device, and proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory comes into place.
and it is known that the breaking of the bone occurs because the joint is twisted, and it becomes clear by the absence, and sounds under the pressure of the hand;
and when there is no twisting nor touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no breaking;
but it can well have twisting, or a crack, or a small break. But you must not move by hand, but put on the medications that come afterwards, and then restrain it now subtly.
And know that the breakage that occurs in arvol, and are the two parts separated, it is necessary to set them now in equal point, so that abscesses do not come alive.
and if abscesses hot come forth, then let it be left alone for a day, until the abscess is calmed. then set it in equal to the mold that you can do lightly and skillfully, and know that the restoration of this is more light than the restorations of those who have fragments; then restrain it, as it is necessary afterwards.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, and they are stretched by two parts, whether it is hands or feet, or at your hand if it is small members, or by two strings, or by one string and your hand.
and set the member according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the member are dislocated, then reunite by all means the additions in their places to the mold that you can, and take care that through your work there does not come to the patient injury or pain.
and join well the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
And make it well by hand if it seems to you that it is not well: then shape it nicely and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who bring forth abscesses hot and contractions in the member, as we have often experienced.
And when the member is in place, then chastise the patient well that it does not move, nor in sleeping or waking, nor in turning or in any other way; and take care that the member is so secure that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, then it is not yet at the right point, and it is necessary to put it in such a condition that it does not feel any pain;
For when it feels no pain, then it is not yet at the right point, and it is necessary to put it in such a condition that it does not feel any pain; and take care that it be set correctly, lest twisting come there when it is restored.
and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Know that the broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar ones: so it is necessary to envelop them in soft and subtle linen cloths.
and those that are great, such as thighs and leg: so it is necessary to envelop them in a broad and strong linen, for the broad linens embrace all the great member and restrain it evenly from all parts, so that there is no gap.
then wrap it around with light bandages, three or four turns depending on the member, and hold your hand lightly to the whole bandage, then go above the break and restrain it less, so that the break may recede a little.
and make the bandage slightly soft and soft, until you take a great part of the healthy place, then take another bandage and wrap it around again above the broken bone.
then return to the part below the break, and restrain it moderately, not too strongly nor too softly, as we have said in the first lesson above.
then put between the bandages pieces of linen or cloths, until it is all even, then tie everything above with one gauze, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, then put on something calming the hot abscess, and which takes away the swelling, and let it be like that for some days;
then restrain on your splints, and be of the middle part of a well-seasoned cane, or of elm wood from which one makes cleats, or of palm reeds, and be according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the splint which one puts on the break be a little bit larger and wider than the others;
and be as long as it needs to be for the small or great member.
then restrain on the splints as you did in the first lesson, then tie above with a thread smoothly, just as in the first lesson above the break.
and the more it is tight above, the less below; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen.
for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of foolish people who make their bands with twisted linen cords, and that's a great error, because the band cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it is not necessary that there should be less than two fingers' width between each splint.
And if the patient is injured by the splints' edges after the restraining in the healthy places, then put below them bandages of linen or woolen cloth, so that it does not get cut.
When the wound is with the breakage, and the skin is torn, I will say the cure hereafter.
And know that it is not necessary to restrain all broken members with splints on the first day. For when the members are great, it is not necessary to put splints on them except after five or seven days, or more according to your security regarding hot abscesses that may occur;
and see here the manner of ancient plasters to restore breaks, dislocations, and twisting: and it is that you take flour that remains by the walls of the mill, and mix it with a great deal of egg, and put this concoction, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and that's the common manner of the plaster restoring the break in various ways, and especially for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of plaster restoring breaks, dislocations, and twisting: take aloes, ladani, and asphodel, and gum arabic, and mugwort, each 10 times; myrrh and aloe, each 5 times; and alchemil 8 times; and grind into powder, and mix with a great deal of egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is worth to many men.
Another way to embalm that is good for twisting: take mugwort and wormwood, 10 parts; myrrh and aloes, 8 parts; acaica, 5 parts; Armenian balm, 10 parts, and crush well, and mix with vinegar or abundance of egg white, and administer.
Another way to embalm for joints and bones that have separated from their places, and soothes the pain occurring, and the usage of the bone and the breaking: take fresh linen, and soak it in vinegar and cooked oil, and put it on the place. These emplasters do not restore at all, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses, and properly taking away pains.
Another way to embalm that restores broken bones: take dried leaves of fig tree and leaves of earthy parsley, and crush them together, and make an emplaster.
Another way to embalm for the restoration of bone breaking and to soften the remaining abscess. Take root of wormwood, camomile, violet flowers, and vetch flour, each one part; and crush, and mix with wine, and if the member is heated, mix it with moist coriander water or water, and use.
Another way to embalm even stronger than the first one, when abscesses that are hard to come back to the restoration of the member. Take roots of wormwood, and flax seeds, balauston, mellilot, and sansho, and violet and camomile flowers, each one part; and crush, and mix with salt water or sweet water or with wine, according to the warmth of the member and its rest.
Hippocrates writes in his book that one should not put on the broken member to restore it with anything other than a wax and oil mixture, and nothing more, and he says that it should be between two extremes, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken member to restore it with dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, just as we have said.
Another way to embalm that is good for lesions and pain: take mugwort and horse's mane, or bird feathers, and wormwood, in equal parts, and crush them, and make an emplaster and apply it.
And then loosen a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone returned to its place; if not, do not loosen for four days.
And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hasten, and loosen it, and remove the emplaster now; and take a light cloth, and a wet sea sponge, and plunge into water, and lift up the place until the itching ceases, and the pain is soothed. then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it with a nut, until you are sure of hot abscess.
and let the inflammation of the member rest, and be taken away the pain, then recommence the gentle binding, and a little emplaster, and do not strain it so hard as before; and bind subtly until it is healed.
And if you see that the hot abscess and redness and pain and swelling are all gone, and you need to apply an emplaster and binding, then begin again, as you did initially.
And if none of what we have said comes to the member, then do not loosen it for more than three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes let it rest twenty days, according to what is seen, until the breakage is settled, and approaches the joining of the flesh above.
Then apply the restraint more than initially, and let the swelling decrease in meat, just as I said before; and if you see the place drying out more than is necessary, know that no nourishment can come. And then arise the liquid with hot water each time you loosen it, and let it be every third day, and ease off a little bit on the binding.
Through this work, then, cut off the nourishment to the member, and hasten to do what foolish surgeons do, who leave the member twisted: that is bad, and it is a woeful occupation, and I see nothing else but languishing and working improperly.
Various ways of breaking There are many ways of breakages, and various shapes, and the causes are determined.
For there are breakages that are caused by the percussion of a sword, and the collar bone is broken, with all the bone up to the socket which is below the bone, as if struck by a hammer or mallet; and because of this it is called "hauching" or "hammering".
Or the sword strikes the bone above without piercing, and it is called this manner of breaking "absolute"; and the wound from these two breakings can be great or small.
And if there is a thrusting blow, or a split or breakage of the collarbone, or falling on stone, or from jumping down steps, or similar things.
And if there is a breaking that presses, which approaches just to the skin that is below the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound can be great or small.
And if there is a wound that is opened in the bone as thin as a hair, and it is a small split, and because of this it is called this breaking "capillary".
and if the wound is made or caused by hitting with a stone, or falling, or similar thing, and makes the bone piece go down, and it looks like what blacksmiths do when they hammer on the furnaces; so the stone goes inside.
And these things happen more often to those who have or have had moist skulls, like those of children.
and these things happen in all these ways of breaking, where small pieces are separated like that; and I will speak about it in its place.
And we know all ways of breaking by subtraction on them, and inquiry at the tests, and through the corrupted flesh that is above.
The capillary resemblance is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and strokes it with a cloth above, then the black breakage appears.
In the treatment of the breakage, take care to note the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting blood, loss of understanding, extension, paralysis, fever, and the like coming out and reddening, and other similar things in more or less disposition, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see an unforeseen accident, and you expect salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when wounds come to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the 14th day from the time you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the 7th day, lest the flesh beneath the bone be corrupted, and come the accidents that we have said.
And if the break in the bone comes just to the flesh that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you cut the broken part thus: and that you take hold of the patient's head, and uncover above the bone in all ways that you can, and above the shape of the wound as gently as you can.
and if the flow of blood comes to reveal the bone, or an abscess appears, then apply the remedy that is needed, and it is that you fill the place with moistened cloths in rose oil. and make the wound rest until the abscess is appeased and you are assured of no further bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone, and it is done in two ways of work: one manner is that you cut the removal narrow beforehand, and this is the form:
And then put one other cutting larger than the first one.
And the second manner is that you have a number of diverse cuttings, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron sharp; and work lightly, lest you wound the head.
And if the bone is hard and tough, then it is necessary that you pierce around it, so that you administer cuttings with tarers, not too deep lest they penetrate beyond the bone of the skull, and it should have above the point a margin or one circle, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each comes to its place in the shape of the bone, so that you have tarers for all tests; and this is the form of the three manners of tarers:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put one tare above the bone, and turn it to your two sides until you know the bone is pierced; then place the tare elsewhere a little later, and do this all around, then cut out the incisors the space of the bone which is between the pertu, and make it as subtle as you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as forceps, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sacral vertebra.
And when you have the bone pierced and trimmed, then it is necessary that you reset the apposition that remains of the bone to all other instruments similar to an incisor, but it should be more taut and more subtle than the other incisor.
and if there remains nothing of the small bones or scales, then remove them lightly with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with poultices and ointments that we have said.
And the other manner of work is that which Gauls say, which is more sure; and it is very strong, and this is their word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break appears, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this incisor-like instrument, and this is its form:
And do not cut from one side, and this is the part that is aged in two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you cut lightly around the bone, and take good care of the flesh that is beneath.
if it is attached to the bone, then remove it lightly, for one removes it without harm and without fear.
And if the break in the bone does not penetrate to the flesh, and the bone is cut only above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and to remove the scales with a subtle scraper of which you should have various quantities, so as to apply the most suitable remedy in each place, according to the work and the figure of the break.
So scrape first with great scrapers, and then with more subtle ones, and do not stop until it is well.
In each of the other delicate cuttings and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you apply remedy according to its direction; and this is something that is not easily grasped by one who has put their study into this art.
And if the sacrum is uncovered, then it is necessary that you take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; Then take another cloth doubled in two or three layers, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so that you do not wound the sacrum, then administer above one layer of linen, and do not stretch it too tightly except to keep the wound alone.
and let it be thus for one day or two days, until the abscess is appeased, then loosen it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, and vetch flour, and incense powder, and aristology, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and administer gradually medicines without biting.
and be sure that the wound is gradually clean, and do not leave any ointment, nor allow it to assemble with flesh, for when flesh assembles above the skin of the brain, they corrupt and perish, and bring great harm to the patient; for when something biting is placed on the sacrum, it kills above.
Therefore, take heed if any bad accidents befall the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without a doubt.
And if nothing worse comes except through the medicine that has been put on, which has such virtue, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glue one cloth, and place it on the sacrum; then perform the cure by means of cures that are necessary, until he is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the neck above are broken, or one by itself, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, but only becomes bent or twisted, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, so it is necessary that you make your little nail or perforation in the neck, and place equal that break within your nail index, and at the pocket by fleeing, until the neck returns to its natural shape. and do this lightly, and take care that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the part above the neck, and cannot come back into place, so it is necessary that you put it equal to the head of a small rod.
And if the break is in two parts, so do it again, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can.
if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is cooled down, then put a cloth of linen on the head of the neck, if the break is in one part.
Or you put another of the other part, if there is a break there; and let the tents be so big that they fill the perforations of the neck.
And certain restorers say that one should moisten the tents with butter and change each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened in the concoction of hen's egg white, and miller's powder; then leave the tent, until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes one puts a goose's neck in place of tents, and if it has a soft cloth around it, and the break is held, and blows on the patient between; then do as you see.
And if abscesses appear on the neck while you are working there, put cerate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a small quantity of aquilina.
And if abscesses do not appear there, put an emplaster away from it, made of spelt flour and incense powder, mixed with hen's egg white, then place light poultices on top, and do not bind the neck.
and if the break of the neck is small and it is broken into little pieces, then draw it out with suitable instruments for that, then close the cut, and care for things as they grow together in flesh, and soldering, just as with emplasters and ointments suitable for that.
and if there is no wound inside the neck, then care for tents and put poultices of wool, until he is healed.
of the jaw's dislocation
When the jaw is dislocated below, and there is no wound outside, and the break is outside only so far as to be felt internally, but is not broken in two, except that it is swollen inside, then one knows it lightly.
It is necessary, if the break is in the right side, that you put your little finger index in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left jaw, then put your little finger index of the right hand, and gently push the break inside, and adjust it with the other hand away from it, and make equal.
And if the break of the jaw is dislocated in two parts, so it is necessary that you administer an extension of two parts, until it becomes equal.
And if the movement of teeth occurs, or dislocation, then bind them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw cerate, and put on one double cloth; and put on the cloth a great piece well made, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it up as much as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and feed him light foods.
And if you see that the figure changes, then release it on the third day, and then put back what has changed; and put an emplaster on, made of miller's powder with hen's egg white or spelt flour, after you have removed the cerate; and put a light linen cloth on top, and if the emplasters dry up, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it so until he is healed; many times he is healed in three weeks.
And if abscesses appear, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, then return none of the bone that has been removed; but subtlety in removing with suitable instruments for that.
And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it by degrees according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and there is none left, then close the wound, if it is wide, and put on one or more suitable emplasters to bring about flesh growth, until he is healed.
of the fracture The fracture breaks in several places before the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners: or it is broken and dislocated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the easiest to restore; or it has a break with a wound.
And the work is such when the break has no wound, that you have two attendants, one of whom holds the shoulder piece that feels the fractured forcele; and the other stretches the neck towards the part; then put the break equal to your fingers, so that the form be as it should be, and there be neither appearance nor unevenness.
And if you need to extend further, then put under the shoulder of the patient a rounded spear of cloth or linen, and make it as thick as your necessity demands; and stretch and lift the forcele, and hold the spear in your hand, so that you place the break equal, as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the forcele away from the outside, because it comes from deep down, then it is necessary that the patient lies comfortably on his bedstead, and put a middle pillow under the shoulder; and have the attendants lower the shoulder so that the bone of the forcele is raised.
And then bring the break to your fingers, and if you find it debrisied, so it is necessary that you split it open; and draw forth the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join by any means, then cut off at one of the incisors you have; but put this instrument under the forcele, to ward off the syphilitic.
and appears like a spoon, and is not rough, and be as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two handles, as you see, and one be wide and the other be narrow, just like the dislocation of the wound that you made when you cut into the bones.
and when you are certain of a hot abscess, if it is to be cut, and the ulceration is small, or you doubt whether it is a hot abscess, if you employ the wound with cloths and tents, according to its size.
And if a cold abscess comes, then moisten it with cloths in oil of rose, and aloe, and wine, and put on top.
The binding of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a plaster made from mill powder and egg white, and put on light poultices above, and put a spear under the splint, if you need to. Then take a very wide band of palm, then put one cloth double over the poultices and plaster; then take a fine roll three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that band, so that the top of the band is hanging. and put the roll on the gash, and turn the band around the collarbone, and under the splint of the well person, and under the splint of the sick person; and rewrap each part, and when you see that the band holds the gash in good condition, and you see clearly that the roll is not moving on the broken bone, then reward it each day, and when the band loosens, then restrain it.
and make the sick person sit on his back, and put a small pillow under the splint, so that he can lift the aid in high; thus alleviate the breakage of the collarbone by aligning the shoulder, or bind the arm to the neck, and do not release it unless bad accidents come, until 20 days.
then reapply the plaster if you see that it is needed, and tighten it and leave it thus, until he is restored; and she is restored in about 28 days, and to some people less.
of the shoulder break
It sometimes happens that the shoulder breaks or becomes wide and does not fit well; nor is it swollen except by touch; then arrange according to the figure of the break, and rewrap according to its natural form in all ways you can; then put on the skin powder made from mill dust with egg white, and light poultices, and put a double cloth on top; then put on a wide and fine roll, a little larger than the shoulder, and if there is a swelling anywhere on the shoulder below the roll, use that swelling to apply linen bandages so that the roll remains even; and then bind it all with a strong band tightly, so that the roll does not move from its place, and check the band each day; and every time it becomes swollen, bind it again, and put the roll back in its place if it has moved from its place, and make the patient sit on his side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25. And when this number is completed, then release it, and be careful, for it is not the bone that becomes loose easily.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward and points below the key, then do this, and the bone, and do what we have said in the break of the collarbone to soothe a hot abscess.
of the rib break
The ribs are sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but they often break at the back. And when it is broken in the middle, it descends below and the patient feels great pain, and lacks breath, and all around, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the swelling on the broken bone, and one feels well.
And the restoration is that the patient sits on their back, and puts a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the ribs of the two sides with your hands, and gently puts it even in all ways you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then put on plasters and poultices above the fine roll of salt, or other light stuff, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the band around again at the back, and bind it well, and reward each hour the bandage, and if it becomes swollen, then bind it again; and if it needs to be released because of corrosion or itching that comes to the area, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and release it, and scrape off the plaster, and address what has come forth with regards to cures; then rewrap the plaster, and bind it until they are healed.
of the rib break
Know that the breakage of the ribs does not come from anything other than large blows after the back, and from the top inside, and do not bend except because they are swollen; and one feels well in the investigation at the back.
And the restoration is that you put the breakage even, as it should be. And then put on a plaster, and bind with a roll, if you need to.
And if the breakage of the ribs is declining inwardly, then the patient feels very great pain and piercing, as from pleurisy, for the bone pierces the fabric; and breathes with difficulty, and all around, and vomits a great quantity of blood, and this is a grievous sickness, and the ancients have put great wit into it.
And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that inflate the belly to push back the breakage forward.
We do not do this, unless hot abscesses come, if they have come. And if it has come, then let him be healed.
And some of us say that you put poultices on the place to draw forth strongly, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the poultice will attract the superfluities to the place due to the weakness of the flesh.
And some of us say that one should cover the place with moist linen in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to put even the bandage around, then be careful about the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear through the bone which pierces the fabric, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to open up on the broken rib, and put below a tool to ward off the shrapnel; and then one must cut the bone, and pull it lightly, and then sew together the two lips of the wound, if they are large, and cure with plasters until he is healed. And if hot abscesses come, then put on moist cloths in rose oil, and put on the place; and cure meanwhile the place as it needs for abscess, and be careful to sit above the back where it should, until he is healed.
of the breaking of the neck
No time comes that breaks at the bone of the neck, and then it bends; and also at the spine of the back. And when this happens to anyone, and you wish to know if they will recover or not, if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if he moves them and feels well when one strains and pricks them, know that the joints of the bone are saved, and the patient will be cured if one puts care into it.
And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you wish to know if it will recover or not, if take heed if his feet are softened, and if the accident is in his hands and on his back there is windiness and emission without volition; and when one has soothed him on his belly, then there is emission without volition. And when he is soothed on his back and he wants to be eased, he cannot. Know that it is mortal: if one does not labor in his cure.
And if this accident does not come to him, then the thing is more easy.
And the cure is that you rub if there is a warm abscess, then put oil of rose or oil of egg yolk on the spine until it is calmed; then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not let him sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is cured. And if some bone is dislocated, you should cover it with the key; and remove the bone, then assemble the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a seam, then apply an ointment releasing fat, until he is cured; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the jaw", take your pouch from your left hand and put it even with your right hand as far as you can, then apply the poultice and bandage on it, if needed; then restrain it, and if there are dislocated bones, do so, and remove them, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the breaking of the bone of the hip
It often happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it does, then there is a slight diminution at the head; and it swells along, and declines in the pelvis, and comes to the patient's pain at the location, and pricks, and inflames what breaks.
And the restoration is that you stretch out your hand on top, as far as you are above the breakage; and know what kind of breakage it is and its shape; and if the breakage is only at the head, then put equal pressure on that breakage, until it returns to its natural figure.
And if the breakage is of the long bone, or it declines inside, then make the patient lie on his belly, until the restoration of that breakage becomes apparent to you. And when you have made it equal, then put on a poultice, then put on a bandage of wood or key, and restrain the breakage, so that it does not move; and bind the location below the ribs, until the limbs are even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or back.
And if warm abscesses come, do not touch them, until the warm abscess is calmed, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and restrain it as needed, if there is no bad accident; and that is the manner.
of the breaking of the shoulder
The shoulder is what is between the arm and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then it must be restored according to one of the two manners: one of which is that you take one piece of wood smooth and full of growth, according to this shape:
And bind the two shoulders with two bands, and stretch them up high, and make the patient sit on one chair; then throw his broken arm onto the wood, until it comes to the level, and has about a half a curve of wood, then stretch onto some heavy thing or have the assistants extend downwards; then put the mirror under the breakage equal to their hands together, until the breakage returns as needed.
And the other manner is that one soothes the patient on his hayre, and binds his hand to his neck, then commands two assistants to have one hold what is on the breakage with their hands, and the others hold below each band, and stretch each one to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, then bind one band below the breakage and on top of the breakage, and have each assistant stretch to their part. And if the breakage is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put one band midway under the armpit, and another towards the arm, under the breakage; and also if the breakage is towards the arm, it is necessary to put one light band, without labor, until the breakage is even on the top and on the arm; then make the breakage equal as needed, and bind it, if warm abscesses do not come.
And if warm abscesses come, do not bind it at all until seven days, and put on a damp linen cloth in oil and rosewater, until the warm abscess is calmed; then bind it, and the manner of binding is that you put the poultice on the breakage, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; and apply the compress, and bind on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in a position to be straightened without being hindered by anything, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use strait bands, and put on the breakage a band wider and stronger than the others, with two or three fingerbreadths between each band, and have each band so large that it passes over the breakage three fingers from each side; then bind on the bands, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the breakage, stronger and less strait.
And if you see the sores and stiffness, as we have said, in the healing of the broken member, and you doubt the warm abscess, then leave it alone until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each band every three days to see that there is no itching or swelling that comes to the limb, or that numbness cannot come to the member because it is too tight. If so, address it as we have said.
Et si nulz telz accidens ni vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;
of the breaking of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile", where one is small and is the one that supports the pouch; and the other is large, and is the one that is below, towards the little thumb; by chance, it breaks the large foscile alone, or the small, and by chance both together.
When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light and the healing; and when the large ones are broken, the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are both broken together. If it is the small bone that is broken alone, then you must gently extend it a little and make equal.
And if it is the large bones, then you must strain more strongly; and extend it on one cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the little thumbs lower than the other thumbs, and have the patient cross over himself, with a cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then stretch the assistant's arm to the part below his hand, or to one of its joints, and another assistant above. And then set it equal, according to its best form.
And if in the break there are pieces, then set each one in its place, and if any are loose that can be pulled out, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a new one and use the bone, as we said before.
And if you have spoken of the break with a wound in a singular chapter, then take care.
And if in the beginning of the restoration there are abscesses that arise, then take a cloth made of wax made from oil and white wax, which is not too hard or too soft; and wrap the cloth subtly over the abscesses, until they are calmed. And then remove the wax, and put an ointment made with flour of the mill mixed with egg whites on it; and set the splints, and let the splint of the break be a little stronger and a bit wider than the others; and know that it should have 7 splints or more in different dispositions: whether the break is in one bone or two; and strain more over the break than any other part, and always less as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths be above the break soft and moist, not hard or rough; and let the thread, from which it is strained, be made of linen, not too thick or too thin, as we have said. And reward the member and the joint after some days. And if some bad accidents happen to the member, such as pruritus that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you bathe the member in warm water, until those prurites are calmed; and let the member rest not too tightly. And then resume the straining, and if the joint is softened and the bones loosened, and similar things, then address them.
And if you take care that the stiffness cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you loosen it a little, and let it be like that for some days, until the stiffness goes away, and then strain.
And if none of the things we have said come to the patient, then do not remove the bandage until 20 days or so, and then let the hands be at his neck, and let his necks be equal, and beware of movement and gesture, and sleep on his back; and know that this break is restored in 30 days or 35 days, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
of the breaking of the hand
Know that in the back of the hand and as to the thumbs, there are many breakings, and it does not come but that pleasure comes many times.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, then it is necessary that the patient sit cross-legged, and sit directly in front of him evenly; then put his hand on the stretched cloth, and stretch out the assistants to the broken bones, and set them equal with the mirror, until they are well joined; and apply the plaster and poultices, if abscesses do not come, then place a splint according to the size of the limb; and let it be wrapped in a cloth made of linen.
And if the break is on the edge of the palm around the belly of the hand, then make a sphere of cloths, and instruct the patient to wrap it around his broken hand; and then strain with a long cloth, and let the splint be as soft as the palm of the hand, and strain, as it is necessary.
And if the break is at the far end, then it is necessary that you put a splint on top and another one below in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the joint between the thumbs.
And if the break comes to any of our thumbs, such as the index or one of the others, then set it straight and equal, as it is necessary; and strain with the palm, and if you see that you put a small straight splint to lift the break, and it does not move; and if the break is at the other thumb, then set it straight and equal, and tie it with the healthy thumb that comes after; or you tie them all together in one holding, as it seems best, or you put a splint on top, such as the pouchet; and take care of the restoration and the disposition of the hot abscess, and attend to what comes, as I said.
of the broken toe
The bone of the toe is many times broken, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is such that one thread is tied above the break, and another below. And the patient lies on his face, then stretches each assistant's thread to its equal part; and this is when the break is in the bone.
And if the break is near to the root of the toe, then one of the threads should be towards the little finger, and the other threads below the break. And also if it is near to the ankle, and then it should be the thread beneath the ankle, and the extension downwards; then set the mirror so that the bone is equal to its two hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and tie it, if hot abscesses do not come.
And if there is a hot abscess, then let it be calmed first and then return to your work and care; the binding is done in the same manner. It covient that thou envelops upon the binding .i. bandages doubled in two or three, and removest the superfluities, then turn thy leg so that the heels come to the root of the knee, and put one long thread between the crotch and the leg, below the knee, and let the chief of the thread come above; then turn upon the leg and upon the crotch the bandage, then set upon the binding stays, and set one stay upon the bone of the leg; then take hold the space eight days between the leg and the crotch with soft cloths to make equal the straining, then begin to bind strongly three or four turns upon the binding; and when thou goest further up on the binding, and less the straining; then hearken to the two heels of the thread that thou hast put between the leg and the crotch, and bind three stays that are above, then return below to the chief of the thread, until thou comest below the foot; and the straining, if it doth not move from its place, then leave it thus, lest it come aposteme or inflammation or any such thing.
And if there is, then loosen it, and adjust what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that pinch, then it is necessary to remove them if possible; and if not possible, then it is necessary to cut the flesh and draw out the force; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
And once the crotch is broken like this, one puts stays in it, as in an aid and on the arm; however, in this restoration made, the patient does not ache.
And know that the crotch is restored in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversities of temperaments.
of the hollow of the knee
Know that in the hollow of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, then it is not more than a cleft or a perforation, and has to all wounds, and without wound, and this one knows well.
And the restoration is that one makes equal what is bent to its knees, so that it can be assembled as much as possible; then put the plaster, and I put a rounded stay, if you have need of it, and the straining as it should be, then reward all the dispositions that we have said in other breakages, such as aposteme, heat, and any such thing; then apply to each accident what is needed, until it is healed.
of the breaking of the leg
Know that in the leg are two bones, of which one is called "tibia" and the other is called "femur"; and all the breakages of the leg are like those of the arm, and for this reason the restoration is equally so, and all the work is thus.
And if the two bones are broken together, then turn the leg from all parts.
And if the subtle bone is broken, then turn it forward.
And if the thick bone is broken, then one feels great pain and it can be seen well; and turn below. Then make an extension, and put it equal, and bind the stays equally; but nevertheless, it is necessary to see if the breakage is ugly, and there are many pieces, that the extension be less and more gentle; and alleviate according to your strength.
And when you have completed all your work, then take two pieces of fust covered with linen that surround the leg on one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee down to the ankle; then wrap in two places one bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle, and so the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is well; and some give a support of fust along the length of the leg, and it is of linen, and put the leg to prevent movement, and properly make what is in the breakage where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is aposteme, heat or any other accident; then cure it until it is healed.
of the breaking of the bones of the foot
The ankle does not come from a breakage, but the bones of the foot sometimes break and bend a little, and there is no more harm than just stiffness in several positions.
And if the bones of the foot break, and you see these bones rising one above the other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if they were about to walk, and then place your own foot beside theirs where the bones are lifted, and press down until they return to their places; then apply plaster and compresses above, and below the belly of the foot a small pad with two full sheets, then bind the foot properly, and when you have wrapped drapes around it, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days will have passed, then loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are some of the toes broken, then restore them, as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then put on each broken toe a stay according to the length of the toe, and be a little bit wider, then place below the foot that pad which I said, and bind it properly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken toes, then put on each toe a stay according to its quantity, wrapped in one sheet of linen, and bind the pad below the foot; and let it be so that it holds well at the top of the pad above the belly of the foot.
And it is necessary that you not forget the other things I have said about other breakages, as we have said; and take care of each accident as it requires.
of the breaking of the bone of the finger
When the bone of a woman's natural form is broken, then make her sit enlarged, and incline her to the part of the back, and be held by the rear; then fill the hole with cotton, and put in as much as one stone; then remove the woman, and lift the back a little bit at a time, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the natural form, and returns the bone with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, take away the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back on, and do this for seven days or around: the breakage will be restored, and if you see, take a sheep's bladder, and tie a cord to the puncture, and pour all the bladder into the natural form; then blow into the cord strongly, until the bladder is inflated inside: the natural form will return to the breakage; then fill with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thumb of man is broken, or that of woman, so restore it as we have said in the bone of the ham; and these breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study and use there, and reads my book. For the break signifies more than one disposition to the right path of restoration: heed then.
In the arm, when it is broken, take a goose's gizzard and insert it into the arm; then wrap cloth around it three days or more, and it will be healed hastily.
of break with wound
It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, even if it is great, such as the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, to be healed immediately, so that the wounds that we have said testify.
And if the wound heals, and then remains raw with vitriol, or you have nothing else to do, then begin again to restore the break in the same hour, or on that same day, lest apostemes come there.
And if apostemes come there, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the apostemes are calmed down, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring forth a bad accident.
And if the broken bone appears on the surface above the skin uncovered, it is necessary that you put a small pin into it gently with your hands, at a slight extension.
And if the extension is not prepared to be put in equal with your hands, then take this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight inches of length, and its width is according to the size of the wound; and for that reason it is necessary for the surgeon to take three or four, according as he needs them in each treatment of breakage; and be round and a little bit thick, so it does not bend much under compression on the member at your work, and be pointed forward, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche", for which reason the curved key must be placed on the top of the apparent bone; and insert it once, until it yields, and be equal to one another. And if the break is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then you should file down the top of the bone, until the instruments have possession.
And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, then file it down with a suitable instrument, or chisel or scraper, to your ability; and then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small scraps.
And when the bone is restored and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. So do what you can to get it back to its place, then soak a cloth in black stiptic wine and apply it properly if possible; and do not put any ointment or other substance on the wound where there is oil, lest you bring forth rot and corruption; then administer these remedies when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and file down the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the break; and many times this has been done by foolish surgeons, and has brought death or corruption upon the patient at least once; and be the straining more gentle and soothing than other breaks.
And if the wound is foul or great, and you fear that bad accidents may come, as we have said, and you find pain at the place, then do not put on these remedies; but wrap around, in place of these remedies, hard cloths and tie them. And when you see after one day or two days a bow forming at the wound, then take away what you have put on and apply healing ointment for wounds, such as tetrafarmac's ointment and similar things.
And it is necessary that you loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is solidified and healed.
And it is necessary that the limbs be aligned in such a way that the bows bend downward slightly.
And if many days pass and it cannot heal but instead forms a bow, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which reason you must wash the wound with tent, and remove all these splintered bones that bring forth that pain.
And if an abscess comes to the place or another kind of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it according to what is written in this chapter before. And when the bone is broken and appears on the member, such as the bone of the hip or shoulder, and similar ones of the great members, do not pull it away; for many times death comes from it, but leave it until it purges; perhaps it will fall off after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
of bruises that come on the swelling
We often come across after the healing of the breakage, especially when it is near the jointure, and it is a sad thing to see the figure of the member; and by chance the member cannot perform its natural actions.
Take heed then if it is fresh: administer stiptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acaica, and similar others, in the way that you take any of these things or all together, and mix them with black wine or egg white or oil; and put them on the night in saucers, and strain it well, and do not remove it for three days; then release it, and begin another one, until the swellings are removed; or you may apply a piece of linen well made; for the properties of linen are such that they remove all swelling from the members; and if the nodation has already become hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then file down on top, and make the superfluity apparent; or have it removed by a barber, until it is removed, and cure it as long as it is needed.
When the break of the bone is restored and remains after the members are weak and subtle, it happens for many reasons: one reason is because it was tied too tightly, and not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many ties, and could not come to the nourishment of the member; or due to excessive swelling; or due to very great movements, not in its time; or because it has a little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat and have their body relaxed, until their blood is multiplied in them; and administer baths to them, and give them joy and ease; then apply poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the swelling often with cool water, until the nourishment flows to the member; and restore it to its natural figure.
The injured limb after health
When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone broken open, and the form of the limb ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: so do not believe those who say one should break the limb all over again; many fools have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and great evils come from it, and sometimes even death; however, if the swellings and tortures are fresh, then they must be raised with hot water, or herbs that soften, such as dill leaves, roots, and mellilot, and similar things; and a mollifying plaster, like well-made dyaquilon, and take the juice of dill, and mix it with goose grease or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top; or take fat figs, and grind them with henbane fiber, and similar medicines that hasten the healing.
And never is the swelling removed by continuous and prolonged rubbing with wet hands. And be careful to move the limb every hour.
And if the twisting is hardened and indurated like stone, and needs to be removed with iron, then it must be cut all the way to the bone, lightly cutting with a subtle incision; and put attention and study into the treatment.
The book of dislocations begins here
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to someone, then it must be brought back into place promptly.
For if one waits, the swelling grows, and by chance it sets into a lump at the joint; therefore it is not good to move it to the outside when it is swollen: many times this brings shame and other pains;
However, when this happens, one should make the patient well, then leave them, until the abscess has been appeased; then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and care for each member as the treatment comes to its place.
And I have arranged the chapters of dislocations from head to foot.
of jawbones
It often happens that the jawbones are dislocated downwards, and the dislocation of both is in two ways: or they are slightly pulled out of their place and softened somewhat; or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the chest, and the saliva from the mouth flows so much that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and wraps around his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself in a few arrangements.
And if it is complete and finished, then it must be reset hastily, and not delay.
and in such a way that the attendants hold the head of the patient, and push the fingers of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jawbone within the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other two hands should be away, to make equal; and instruct the patient to relax his jawbones, and move them from all parts.
And the fingers place it evenly, until it returns to its place.
And if it is difficult to reset, especially if the two jawbones are together, then raise them with hot water and oil, until they reset slightly; nor delay in resetting, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well with gentle softening, then place moist cloths on top in a paste made of rose oil and wax, and bind it lightly with soft ties.
and the patient sleeps on his back, with his legs between two pillows, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor does he try to swallow, but takes light food until the pains are gone and the jawbones are set.
and then gently chew what he wants to eat, and does not trouble himself to open his mouth to eat or drink, until the jawbone is well set and healed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be brought back to their place within an hour, and are not converted to their natural state, then fevers and severe constipation come, and by chance, dissolution of the bowels, and by chance, vomiting of pure gall.
And when you see this, then know that it is a misfortune; and many times the person to whom it happens dies within eight days.
of the shoulder
The shoulder cannot dislocate from the front side within its continuity and towards the chest, and is sometimes dislocated to the back, and one can feel it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and stretches out their arms; then presses the joint firmly onto your palm, and it will return; then apply a plaster and bind it tightly, and restrain.
and the head of the shoulder that is towards the back cannot dislocate; if it does not, but if it does dislocate, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then apply a plaster and bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed.
and similarly is reset the head of the scapula when it is dislocated from its place.
of the shoulder dislocation
Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways: one is when it dislocates at the lower part of the arm; and the second is at the chest; and by chance, it dislocates above, and this happens rarely;
and does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor dislocate inside for the nerves; and many times dislocates downwards towards the arm, especially in those who have little flesh, for they jump out quickly; in those who have enough flesh, it jumps out slowly and returns slowly.
And by chance it happens to some men that they receive a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and think it is dislocated because of this.
It is therefore necessary that you examine it thoroughly until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that the dislocation occurs when it goes down towards the arm, and makes a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among their diversity evident. and you will find a depression at the top of the shoulder, and below the arm at the point where the top of the shoulder touches it, just like an ox; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor make any movements.
and also if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden because you find it manifestly by touching;
and this kind of dislocation is not for returning, when it is new or the patient is ill.
And the manner is that the servant lifts the patient's hand up high, then puts his fingers underneath it and lifts the jointure upwards to its place; and the servant lifts his hand and stretches it up high, then puts it underneath; so it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we said in two days afterwards, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and the servant should arise smoothly and soothingly, just like a decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilotus in water, and bring it.
then the patient should be covered on his back, and put a piece of equal wool underneath the shoulder blade, not too soft nor too hard, then place the mirror's foot on the piece, and lift the head of the shoulder virtuously, and draw the patient's hand.
and another servant holds the patient's head, so that he does not move downward; then the shoulder returns now, and if you see it, you should reset it in this manner.
and it is that you make someone who is bigger than the patient be present; and he should stand straight towards the side, and push the patient's shoulder underneath the shoulder blade of the patient, and lift the shoulder up high, so that the patient hangs in the air. and another servant draws the patient's hand down towards their belly. And if the patient is too light, then let something heavy fall on them, and the dislocation will return now.
And reset it in another manner: and it is that you stick a long iron rod into the earth, so that the tip is as round as a pistol, and not too big nor too thin; then be placed underneath the patient, but that it has a soft cloth on top, and the patient's hand is stretched out from the end of the wood; then stretch their hand down from the other side formingly, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not return after all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a rod of two arms and three fists in width, which has the head rounded so that it can enter smoothly underneath the shoulder blade, according to this form:
then tie a soft cloth on top of the head of the wood, so that the wood does not hurt the patient, then place it underneath the shoulder blade of the patient; and stretch your arm up over the long wood, and hold the assistant's hand on top of the wood, and the arm to the tip of the hand; then put the arm on one shoulder of a board two fists in width, and let the hands hang down, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is so, in whatever way, then it is necessary that you put underneath the shoulder blade a sphere of equal wool, then place the poultice around with powder from the mill, with incense and an egg yolk, on all the shoulder and around; then stretch it underneath the shoulder blade gently, and turn the cloth over the poultice, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that you massage it little, until the limbs are comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then massage more after five days or seven, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
And if the joint is displaced from its place due to moisture that has come in, or for another reason, then it is necessary that you administer fire cauterizations to three pores, as is described before this chapter on cauterization.
And if you do all this and it does not hold after seven days, and the joint is not held, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the breast or the armpits, or behind, is caused by impulse and stretching of hands, and one should administer another treatment; and cure until it is healed.
And if after healing comes swelling in the limb and delayed movement, then have the patient take many baths until that swelling is alleviated, and returns to its original nature.
of the shoulder dislocation
Know that the jointure of the shoulder is dislocated in points and comes back in points; and it has been dislocated from all parts, and indeed both before and behind, and the dislocation is not responded, because one sees well and feels well; and becomes dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the sick shoulder with the sound one, then it can be seen openly. For the joint is broken, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it as soon as the abscess comes to life, for if the abscess comes to life, then it would be grievous to reset; and by chance cannot be reset at all, especially when it is in the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration is this: when it is such that one can reset it, then you stretch his hand to your two hands; and his arms should be spread out, and his hands of the mirror according to the shoulder around, above, and below, and push the joint into its places together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he doubles his hand to his own hand, and fixes at the root of the palm the shoulder that is displaced.
And if it does not return to its place, then administer strong extension; and it is that two servants stretch the arm, and hold it tightly, so that it does not move at all; then turn the arm on each side, after you have wrapped a double-layered cloth around it long and wide.
and when the mirror has joined the joint to her hand, then she anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, and pushes it formidably, until it returns.
and when it is at its place, then apply poultice with an egg yolk on top, and strain formidably, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then release it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then separate the bond and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not fit well, then reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then separate it.
And if he feels grief after the setting of the joint, and it swells, then bathe him and rub gently, and press until it is relieved; or you put a sheep's fat snow on the joint, then leave it one day and one night, then take it off, and let him enter the bath. and when he sweats, then gently rub the joint, then put the snow back on, and then enter the bath; and do so two or three times, until he is healed; and if you see fit, then put moist heated vetch straw on it, and hold it there; and it will return to its natural state.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and the swelling is light, more so than other joints Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place hastily, in the same hour that it dislocates, before the swelling becomes inflamed or an abscess forms hot.
And the returning is that you put the ailing hand on a board, and stretch out the fingers, and make the thumb equal, so that it places its palm on the appearance of the joint, and holds it until it comes back.
Nevertheless, you must see if it is well in place; then put the patient's back of their hand on a board for extension and return. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the patient's back of their hand on the board, and make the fingers go on that appearance of the joint. If it comes back now, it is well.
If not, then apply soothing plasters to hot abscesses, and leave it thus without reapplying.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot set the joint in place after some days, then the joint will remain twisted.
and nothing else can harm the patient except that his hands are numb, and he cannot move anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; if there is no other remedy except to extract by fire cautery in such a case, and by chance there is not any other cure.
And when the hands are in place, then put on the plaster that we have said, and strain it and leave it five days, then take it off and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is some swelling, then apply warm water, and rub it until he is healed.
of the dislocation of the wrist of the hand
Sometimes the wrist of the hand is dislocated to each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or on the front.
then straighten the wrist and hold the dislocation to your fingers until it comes back, then support the head of the wrist and bend it towards the part where it is separated.
and leave it two days, and then put it back in its place that same day; and bind with a bandage, as we have said, and take it off the next day, and make it moveable, and relive the nut; and do this often until it is straight.
and do the same thing if it is dislocated at the front of the hand, and do so just as you have done here before, until he is healed; and do the same thing when it is dislocated on the other side.
of the dislocation of the coccyx of the back
When the coccyx of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are multiple dislocations, then there is no cure, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations jump forth without will, nor can it be held, and many times some member is softened, or the two shoulders or one arm.
And many times the coccyx moves into four parts; that which moves at the back is called "gilbositez".
The cure is that you reward if the gilbositez has come from childhood: if there is no cure nor healing of all.
And that which comes from falling or beatings or similar things, the old ways of cures by great words, where there is no great benefit in all.
but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gilbositis that comes at the front of the chest, there is no remedy nor healing;
and also that which comes directly in two sides, and one cannot cure anything except that which comes at the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient be stretched out on their face in one place equal, and have some pressure under them, so that they do not get hurt.
then stick one iron rod into the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a bandage around the patient's ankles, and calves, and shins.
and two attendants know the bands, one at the head and another at the feet, between the two iron rods.
and be well tightened, the iron rods as we have said, and the fingers place their palms on the spine firmly, until it comes back.
And if it does not come back with this cure, then take a three-branched board of long length, and hollow out the middle, and have the patient sit sideways, and place the head of the board on the back, then put the middle of the board on the spine. and have the fingers place their feet on the other head of the board, and press well, until it comes back to its place; and if you see fit, then do it with a turner that turns to the hand.
And it is that you stick two iron rods into the head of the patient's arm, one at each side, and have between each rod, above and below, a palm-sized piece of esparto of long length.
and have in each rod one pit, where the turner runs, and let the rods be firmly stuck into the earth, so that they do not move; and between each two rods is a turning rod, on which the bandage turns, and have in each of the two turnings two small iron rods of one palm length, to turn the turner.
and then tie the ligament that is between the assemblages at the top of the head, and the other ligament towards the feet at the other top, and each of the ministers turns his top to the entire ligament, and the master sets the spine equal just as we have said.
And when it is equal, he sets on dry powder with abundance of egg white, and then binds it, and then the splint from a plank three inches long, which will take the place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine sound, then ties with a ligament, just as we have said, and uses the patient to subtle nourishment, until he is healed.
and if nothing comes to the end of healing, it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines with the splint we have said before; and sometimes one administers a piece of board.
and sometimes there appears in the back of the spine of the back, and one thinks it is dislocation; but it is the bone that opens, for which one should not have any presumption: by chance it would bring death.
of dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder do not come together except in dislocation alone, nor does it happen like with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to three parts: inward and outward, and before and behind; and more inwardly than outwardly, and less dislocated before and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inward is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the diseased knee than the healthy one, and the diseased person cannot bend his knee over fire. and it is the place that is below swollen abscesses hot, because the head of the crix comes there.
And the sign of him to whom it happens outward is that this accident is contrary to those before.
And the sign of him to whom it happens before is that his leg is well-shaped according to completion; however, he does not bend his knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot do so beforehand, and retains his urine, and swells the groin, and when he walks, it passes above the ankle.
And the sign of him to whom it happens behind is that he cannot spread his knee, nor bend it, and is that leg more crooked than the other, and the groin is softened, and is the head of the crix at the place below the ribs.
The remedies for this resemblance of dislocation are that you return if the dislocation is ancient and it remains according to its disposition, so there is no care; and one should not have any presumption.
And in that one whose dislocation is fresh and it's of the three manners of dislocation, you hasten to return the joint, and the splint inward and outward, and adjust it to the right and left; by chance it will return, and there is no need for another care.
And if it does not return in this way, it is necessary that you appear one strong minister, and place the leg strongly on two hands, or on one ligament tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand above in such a way that he puts his hands under his armpits, then tightens it with a soft ligament on the crix; and another takes hold of the head of the ligament.
and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground all at once, and remains hanging.
This manner of stretching is common to the three likenesses, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If not, it is necessary to take care of its resemblance. When the dislocation is in the inward direction, you should make the patient lie on his healthy side, then place the ligament on the root of the crix, and the place that is below the groin, then stretch the ligament upwards towards the groin and the pubic bone.
then take hold of another minister's arms, and encircle the thick place of the diseased crix, and stretch it outward strongly: it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary to bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft ligament on the two heels, and on the two knees, and let the diseased leg be stretched two inches more than the others.
then be suspended from the top of a beam, and be above the ground two arms long; then command one minister to encircle the head of the crix, and have another minister hanging with the patient, who encircles strongly the crix, for the joint returns now hastily.
And when the dislocation is outward, the patient lies down, as we have said in the one with gibbosity, and stretches one ligament properly on the diseased leg, and also on the belly.
then place two spits, one at the head and one at the feet, then stick one spit between the patient's thighs in the middle form. and have planted damp cloths around, so that the patient does not get hurt, then each minister stretches towards him, and the doctor sets the dislocation equal to his hand.
If it returns, that's good. If not, place on a board and press in this way as we have said in the gibbosity, and make the patient lie down on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the diseased leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and make the doctor place his hand on the diseased groin, then press with the other hand, and stretch downward towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is outward, it is not necessary to stretch the patient downward, nor lift him up off the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip were dislocated outward, as we have said about the bed on two hips; and be on his face, and the ligament stretched as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table.
and it will be fixed when the patient stretches his legs and they are equal; then join the crixes, and apply the poultice, and strain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
and if it rests for three days or four, then release the bandage, and apply the poultice on top; and if you see that they are equal, strain as before, and leave it. Three days; then release, and make him walk nicely, until the limbs are comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The kneecap is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward and forward, and backward; and does not come undone before.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg to their groin, and if it does not come back to its place, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and stretch their leg if they can, and place your back against their face, and put their foot on your feet.
then take the knee in your palms and bring it between your knees, then bend the two sides of the knee strongly; and another assistant stretches their foot, so that the kneecap returns to its place, and the sign is that it bends back to its groove slightly.
and apply the poultice on top, and have the leg return to its groove, and tie it firmly for three or four days, then release it; and do not trouble the patient to move around until the limb is comforted.
And if the limb is not yet straight, administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heel is sometimes sprained and sometimes fully dislocated, inwardly and outwardly.
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and tender before the part where it is dislocated:
The recovery is slow, and one must stretch it slowly with their hands when it is only sprained.
And when it is fully dislocated, you must make the patient sit straight, and have one assistant hold them firmly by the leg, above the ankle;
then bring the foot to your right hand, and then to your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and push the foot up well.
and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, then start again, for it will return.
and if it cannot return thus, make the patient sit on their back on the ground, and put one pillow firmly in the ground between their thighs, and tie bands around, so that they do not harm the patient.
then have one assistant hold the thigh, and another assistant stretch the foot to their hands or to a strap, which they tie around the ankle of the foot. then stretch each assistant evenly, and the pillows be placed between the patient's thighs to retain the patient when one is stretching.
then place the mirrors evenly on the dislocation in their hands, and one other assistant holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at point, then apply the poultice and bandage on top, and tie strongly, and bind the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves which are behind the ankle, so that the ligament is not too tight.
then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligament has loosened, then strain it; then release it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient to walk for three days. and if they go before that term, it is not surety that it will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses come up, then you must calm them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
of the elbows
When the elbows are dislocated, it is well to stretch them gently without effort, and that is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back of the foot, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on one level or on a table completely straight, and place your foot on what appears to be these joints, then press with your foot strongly, until it returns.
and when it is straight and there is nothing apparent, then place under the sole of the foot a board on two chairs, then strain strongly, and leave it for three days, then release it; and let it rest until it is healed.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and slow, nor hasty.
and at the beginning, use soothing things on the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you do not see hope of recovery. and when you see hope, then reset the member to its place, as long as the abscess is coming.
and when the member is at its place, then administer soothing things to the abscess, and treat the wound with dried ointments, as is fitting.
and if there is breaking with the dislocation, and small bones dislocated, then set them, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
and beware of falling into a path of fear, as I have said, for this is worthily done according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your arm and body. Amen.
