Here is the translation: And it came to me in a vision that I would accomplish it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from everything, thus the science is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of the fuels except for the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this comes the error and vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is alienated.
It seems to me that I will vivify it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of the remedies of cautery, and of other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, it is the art of medicine that is prolonged. And it is necessary for the one who undertakes to be skilled in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and brains and the number of holes, and the movement and of moving and resting veins, and the issue from there.
And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name with the name is not much, and with the work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, beware lest he fall into error and lest he harm men; thus I have wanted to warn many times those who undertake this science and abandon their sense and their experience.
Here is the translation:
And he saw another wonder who treated a stone of a man's urine, and the stone was large; if he carried with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within 22 hours.
And I had already been called by the surgeon, and I saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and if they had removed it well, he would have died.
And I saw another wonder who took in care a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the surgeon, plain of ignorance, held the break steady on the wound as it was strongly swollen, and did not leave the wound untouched, and left it thus terminated; and he commanded that he should not dislocate it again; and remained thus until the leg became entirely inflamed and the foot came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come and dislocate the leg; and when I had dislocated it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But all the way the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the limb was almost completely lost.
And I saw another wound that burst into a swelling abscess, and then became inflamed due to the evil of its sovereignty.
For cancer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not matter if one touches it with iron unless it is in a place where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
And for this reason, three-faced son, you are beset by the need to know that the work of hands is divided into four divisions: namely, to know, to avoid where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
Because it is necessary for you to take care of them, so that the foolish doctor cannot speak badly of you.
Take your arms in consideration, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and be praised; and abandon the troublesome diseases of grievous sanity; and remove your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galien says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of a bad illness, lest you be called a foolish doctor."
I have divided this treatise into twelve chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cautery and medical cautery, and this chapter is organized from the head to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the ways of cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping glasses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is organized and about the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from the head to the feet, and about the forms of instruments.
Thus we remember in our work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of aid and do no harm are the longest and most subtle science and secret responses; and from this the wisest speak the most, and agree to this; and I am not bothered by their words, for I reduce the length.
I say that fire cautery universally aids every complexion where there is matter, because there are two complexions: it is to know that hot complexions lack matter, and dry complexions lack matter.
In hot and dry complexions, they lack matter, some say that fire cautery is great aid; and others say the opposite: that fire cautery is not good for diseases that come from cold and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be cured by cold for a hot disease, nor by dryness; and he who says the opposite that fire cautery makes great aid to hot and dry diseases that come in the bodies of men. For when you examine the body of man and its moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body chilled.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it true many times by experience.
And all the way, no one interferes with him who has experienced it, and who knows by long usage the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the events and the space of the tense; we have no fear of other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses. And all the mirrors gathered and agreed with the cautery.
And know, son, that fire cautery is one of the secrets of cures, and has greater goodness than medical burning remedies.
For fire is simple, and does not come except to the limb that is cooked, and does not harm another limb unless it is named.
The burning remedies come from one limb to another by touching, and bring to the limb evil diseases of bitter healing; and sometimes kill the patient.
The fire is for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not do this, if it has no excess.
And this I have found by experiment and by the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it is established on the truth of things; and for this I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I should reveal the secret which is deposited in fire, and the quality of the work, how it debuts the diseases of bodies, as the philosopher said in demonstrating; or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agree on what time the cauterizations should be done, and they choose the opportune moments.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries are immediately cured by the aid of cauterization; and meanwhile the cauterizations are for necessary pains and urgent cases that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
And do not think anything, dear son, as fools often do; for the disease that is treated by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that are the cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine for the haste of its value, and for the virtue of its work and its mastery.
And it is possible that the disease returns at some time according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue; and are assembled in him the superfluities by the acquisition of foods and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered in the place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauteries of density for pain, and similar things, and that pain does not return again; but this happens little.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we have administered ways of cures in some disease and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it is worth. Then it appears clearly that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
The ancients said that cauteries of gold instrument are more effective than those of iron, and they didn't say this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the eyes of the cautery do not make putrefaction, but it is not true as I have experienced, and found that it is true in some homes; and cauteries of gold are worth more than those of iron, just as they loud said.
And however when you heat the instrument of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and it has cooled down quickly; and if they heat it too much; then they make it at the fire; and thus there is enough of hindrance.
And for this reason we do not use cauteries of iron that we have made appear in our work.
Here I have ordered this chapter of the loud chief just at the foot, because it is easier to find the way.
For the fire olive oil treatment,
Fire cautery is suitable for moisture and coldness on the brain, and in it there are two things done because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend to the head as eyes, and ears, and for multitude of sounds and pain of teeth and pain of throat, and also for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by medicine solutive modifying the head, 9 or 10 days, according to what the strength and age and the acclimation of the patient can suffer; and then make a retreat from the head of the patient.
And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands on the soles of his feet; afterwards put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes; and there where the two veins meet, if it bleeds from the nail, then heat up the cautery which is called "olivare", of which this is the form:
And place the sign of ink on the location, and make a slight incision and stretching with your hand little by little while turning; then withdraw your hand slowly, and look at the location to see if you see the bone small; and if you do not see it, start the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take a little silk, and put in soft and moldy cotton inside, and place on the location, and let it be for three days; afterwards put on a warm compress; and leave on until the swelling subsides; afterwards cure the wound of the joint which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
And so said the old ones, that the more you delay opening the wound, the more it suppurates; and for this reason it hinders many.
And some of these said that one should leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
And others said that one should leave the cautery so long on, and press so hard that one abates from the bone as large as the vertebrae that women put in their fuseaux (pockets) because the humors issue forth; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one should cure and solder.
And these two types of cautery do not seem to me to be entirely good, except in certain homes where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; because the head is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we testify in other limbs; and it seems to me when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more salvaging and mending for me, and that's why I usually work in assembling health.
of the old pain of the head
When the entire head comes to chronic pain, and lasts a long time, then the patient should use yolks and pills which are called "cochie", and of purging the head and eyes and of ointments; and if one does the cautery that we have mentioned before, and it is not effective.
Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then afterwards cauterize beneath that cautery a little which we have mentioned above.
After doing cautery on each corner of the head just to the bone, as we have said before, and do .i. cautery where it is called "vasselz"; and it is .i. in this way that one puts ventouses; and hold your hand so that you do not touch just to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it seems that the cauteries of the corners are more subtle than those where one cauteries the moisture of the head, and this is the form:
for fire cautery of the head When in one part of the head there is sudden pain, and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is purged with Mondifian medicines, and other treatments that I mentioned in the division of diseases are made, but none of these profit: then you should do cauteries according to .ij. methods, that is to know of medicine ague and fire.
The cauteries of medicine ague are that you take a sweet almond, and remove the shell and recover .i. a little as .ij. heads, and then make the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can replace the sweet almond under the skin; and when it is replaced, bind it well and leave it thus .xij. hours; and then release it and treat it with the sweet almond, and leave the wound thus .ij. days or .iij.; then put a cotton plug in butter until it is poured into it.
After the treatment of ointment as long as it is healthy; and if you see that this does some of the combined medicines that I have written or described in the treatise on combined medicines.
Here is the translation:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a hook or it has little curvature, and it appears small; and put it on the painful place, and hold with your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that most of the space of the scar becomes clear; and lift your hand that the artery does not harden, which is deficient, and abundance of blood flows.
After putting cotton in the vein of the seat, and put it on the painful place for three days; then I put moist cotton in a bundle, and then cure the place of ointment until it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this migration with the cautery that is called "cultellare", at every point, and be careful not to touch the artery in this migration which is not ancient.
of the migration
When you cure migration as we have said before in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not profit, and you see that the cauteries before said about medicine and iron do not suffice, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and sign also on the painful place a line of half a finger's length, and lift your hand once, and hold so that you do not touch the artery and do not come near to the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when one eats, and the nerves do not have regard for the movement and spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the flow of blood from the artery when it is touched, or touching has great fear and shame for him who does not know himself, and who is not a student and experienced; and leave the vein in the middle way; but I will tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is touched, and I will show you on the place where it appears in this book.
And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the enemy in the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. handles; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
from the pain of the ears due to coldness
When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has applied solutive medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery which is called "points", because it is its form:
After pointoie all around the sick ear, or around the .ij. where the pain takes in both, and you detach a little from the root of the ear before you have signed the place of the injection; and it has .x. points around each ear; after cure the place until it is healthy.
from the torment of the mouth
Torture that should be cured by fire cautery is not fiercer than those that move with flow, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not perform cautery on similar things that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
When you cure this kind of torture that moves with flow, of ydres and purgings of head and gurgling, and it does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with .iij. cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little above the temple, and the third at the adjustment of the .ij. lips; and put the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery exactly at the head of the ear just above a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery until most of the blood is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the similarity of the cutting that we have placed before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the cutting instrument be a little larger; after curing the patient as I have said before, until they are healthy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then you make three cauteries: one on the three horns of the head, and one in the head, and one on the vessel called "vasselz" as we have previously mentioned, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and so treat thus as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this malady it is necessary to give the patient large draughts and mondified pills to clear the brain; afterwards, place on the head of the patient all the emplasters written or treated in the treatise on emplasters; and that is the manner of cautery: if you do as I have said.
If he is thus, it is good; and if not, make three cauteries in the head descending just to the neck, and leave a space of two fingers between each cautery; and treat as the others, and if you see that they are suffocating, make one cautery in the middle; and if need be, another on the three horns, and treat until he is sane; and so it is the cautery called "olivare", as I have said before.
of the coldness of the head It is necessary that the head be cleaned of years and of what we have said before; after warming the head of the patient, then do fire cautery on the head and on each horn, and behind and on the spine of the neck; and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is fierce, do four cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the worst heat is gone, and lift your hand; after curing so that it may be healthy, and may the cautery which is called "olivare" which we have said before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first clean the brain of years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and suffers from taking medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot yet suffer, make them gargle and chew softening the brain with good bones of meat; afterwards they raise their head in the middle, and make fire cautery according to what we have said before, and make fire cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffers, make them undergo fire cautery as I have said to one who has paralyzed and mollified their body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the olive oil fire cautery be according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is an infant, make them undergo subtle fire cautery according to this manner:
When the cause of melancholy is superfluities or corrupted and gross moisture, then cauterize with such fire cauteries as we have said to one who has paralyzed.
And if the cause of melancholy is declining superfluities into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink which will purify their brain, according to what has been said before in the division.
Here is the translation:
Where you want to cauterize, make many points with the cautery tool. This type of cautery humidifies the brain immediately; and then put cotton wool in the burrow and in fat of a hen.
of the opening of the eyes When the opening of the eyes comes first through the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient thing humidifying the head, and ward off all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe many times a day.
After commanding him to rear his head, and make him cauterize within the head, and make him .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples if the descent of the opening of the eyes is in .ij. eyes together, or if the descent is in one; and cover all the cauteries all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of the corruption of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then stop the flow of blood as you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision of the cautery, how you will anoint it; and no one does cautery or touches behind the eyes below.
at the course of the tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that appear at the top of the forehead; and one sees that it is from superfluous cold humors, then I do the cautery as I said at the beginning of the work descending to the eyes: .i. cautery in the head, and .ij. cauteries on the temples, and .ij. cauteries or touching behind the eyes; and if there is need for more, if you cautiously cauterize above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
at the course of the tears through the depths of the eyes
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit at all, then give a drink to the patient .iii. nine potions; afterwards take hold of the head, and make a fire cautery or a mild olive oil cautery; and make .iii. cauteries of the cautery that is called "clavilis" on the .iii. sorcils, a little below the eyebrows; and beware of the artery that you do not pierce. And it is the shape of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
When the skin of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery that is called "olive". because it is the shape:
And if you see that they make .iii. cauteries on the .iii. sorcils as long as the sorcils are; and do not leave your hand there except until the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair that pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted into pains, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries in several ways: namely with fire or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient in good health; afterwards, sign on the parchment of the eyes a figure that is like the leaf of a dead tree, and let it be the beginning of the sign of the hairs; then put moistened cotton in the glare of an egg and musk perfume on the eye, then heat up the cautery to the form:
After cautery on the figure that you have signified little by little many times, so that the heart be at rest in that place; and the signs of the health of the vein are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs rise to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it thus for three days, then put wet cotton on a wound so that the scab is removed; after the treatment of the joint so that it be healthy.
And after the hairs grow, and the skin is softened then recommence the cautery on the same place, just as you did previously; and if the hairs are defective, then cauterize until the skin is raised to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
The cauterers of medicine are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as large and even as possible, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and living charcoal, one half ounce of each, and mix well together; and apply it quickly, so it does not cool down, then spread on the shape you made like the leaf of myrtle, and put on the skin of the eyes; and if the disease holds in one eye only, then one should operate on one, and if on both sides as well; and put under the eye a cotton pad soaked in water of lilies; and the head of the patient should be in your care and show your finger on the medicine, and press one pouce and loosen all the times that the patient feels discomfort from the medicine, for they feel discomfort just like fire. When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger. And when the discomfort has passed, lift the skin of the eye, and see if you see the skin lifted as it was lifted by constraining force of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good. If not, then reapply the medicine on the same place where the medicine did not work, until your operations are even, and your eyes are at a point; then put cotton soaked in borage water as long as the bitter tastes are expelled, after curing the eye of the disease which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
And if you need to take care of yourself well in your work with great care so that it doesn't happen to the medicine as eyes.  And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the medicine on the one who is softened by the proper paper, thus as you have done before; after the cure until they are healthy; and this is the form of the leaf of mirte:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and adjust your constraints accordingly; and do not miss the right path for him who is the student of this art.
of the treatment of fistulas by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not profit, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this method.
Here is the translation:
After the fistula is uncovered, and the putridity is drained, and the dryness; and if it is closed, so the work, and drain further the blow; after set fire to the hot cauterizing iron, and hold your hand on the cauterizing iron at the part of the nail next to the eye, so your hands do not make a fool; and set the cauterizing iron in the fat of the eye, and corrupts.
If you come to the beginning of the cauterization up to the bone, it would be good. If not, if you recommence the cauterization once again, and another time you have mastery, and let it be eight days; after I set fire to a cotton wad in a poultice, and cure the ointment of the desiccative until it is healthy, and if ten days pass and it is not healthy, I set fire to medicine with corrosive power so that the bone may be uncovered; and I reckon according to what comes into its chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. Then I touch the fistula, and feel the place; after set fire to the subtle camomile, which is the form of this: and they make the quantity of a .З. of poultice; and hold your hand or camomile firmly, and do not move the patient at all points, so that the poultice does not fall from its place; and it is suitable to put on the eye a cotton wad in a stream of water or in awe: the poultice thus artfully covers the place of the fistula, and keeps healthy through marvelous sanitation.
And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have mentioned, it's good. If not, then one must administer pertus to the nose, and bring the fistula back to its proper place according to what it needs in its own body.
of cracks in the lips Many times cracks occur on the lips that are called "hairs", and similarly on the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks with what we have said in divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then burn it with a small cautery iron according to this form:
And apply heat quickly to those hollows as long as it comes just to the fontanelle; afterwards cure the sore spot thoroughly so it is healthy.
of the abscess on the throat
When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth, afterwards it makes putridity and rot and becomes festering; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit at all: then it is necessary that you have fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; afterwards apply a poultice or plaster on the fistula, and hold your hand so long as the iron rod comes to the fontanelle, and remove the rear of the limb; and do thus one time or two, afterwards curing what we have said in cures, so it is healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the limb and cut out the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not help, then place the head of the patient in a healthy position; afterwards heat the cautery to the point where it comes thus in such manner that you apply a cane over the tooth; and insert the hot cautery hastily, and hold it as long as the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards release your hand and recommence the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour and firmly fixed.
And in such manner the teeth which were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupt moisture dries up.
from the pain of the teeth
When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or vein, and the treatments with medicines are not effective, then it is necessary to use cautery according to their manner: and cautery of blistering and cautery of fire.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
When the scabs are of a flow and cold moistures, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then burn with fire cautery what comes after, and it has two openings for the fumes to exit from the cautery of the other part; and put the hot cautery on the abscess once, or as much as is needed, so that it reaches the source of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then put cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days; and put on a moist cloth wrapped in a bundle so that the discharge is removed; after curing the wounds with ointments and tents as much as they are healthy.
When the moistures accumulate on the channels of the arm, and likewise when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first with solutive medicines; afterwards do fire cautery at the root of the throat, and beware that you do not come too close to the throat, and do not harden the skin but just a little. Afterwards do another cautery at the jointure of the neck at the head of the spine, and it is the cautery which is called "clavile" from what we have said before; and cure the wound as we have said before so that it becomes healthy.
of the thumb When all the diseases of the arm are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or shivering, and it is an old disease, then make two cauterizations on the forearm in their veins; and another cautery between the muscles; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form mentioned beforehand.
And if you see, make a cautery by pricking at the whole cautery which is called "poins" because the form is thus beforehand in the disease of the ears; and let the poins be just below ..., or wherever it hurts. After curing the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be at three joints according to this form:
And because they are the lighter cauterizations, because you make them in three places at once.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After the patient is aware of his back and side; after he raises the heart which is within the swollen area as close to the tip of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery which has .ij. nerves that are numb because it is in this form:
and cauterize the heart as much as it penetrates just to the side, and the figure of the cautery would be assembled with three cauteries; and because it is made with the cautery which has .iij. nerves, for the figure of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tendon and that is the form of the cautery which has .iij. nerves:
And often it is adjusted on this nerve because it has seven cauterizations.
After putting the fire cautery on the painful spots with oil; then make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little things happen soon, then make a cautery on the thick part of the clave cautery, or many cauterizations in pricking. For the joint is reframed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
of the cautery of pleurisy
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
of the wound
When you treat the wound of the mouse of what we have said as divisions of treatments, and it does not profit at all, then they add three manners of fire cautery that are good for everything.
One of these manners is that you make three fire cauteries, or four, in a line according to the length of the wound, according to the figure of the fire cautery of the liver that we have spoken of before; and do not press your hand on all the fire cauteries, and let the patient be comfortable on their back;
and another manner of fire cautery is that you heat the fire cautery which has three nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is near the wound, or where the pain of the patient comes from the left side, and let the elevations that you lift the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the fire cautery be according to the width of the body.
Here is the translation:
of dropsy
Cautery is of no value to the dropsical, except in the manner that is called "asclytes". When you treat them according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the bowel, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the thigh; and let the cauteries be very close to the affected area of the heart.
After that, let the cautery open by girth for a long time, and do not leave the treatment of the patient's illness after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the four intentions will be assembled with the aid of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be the clavele that we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been put here beforehand.
of the inflammation of the feet When the feet are inflamed in one who is dropsical, and are full of yellow watery fluid, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular; and hold your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not insert too much into the fontanel, lest the yellow watery fluid should be disturbed, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
Afterwards, do the same on both legs, making two cauterizations on each leg at the point of the cutellaire; and let the cauterizations be done from top to bottom, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauterizations uncovered for a long time without moving, so that the fluid can issue forth; afterwards, cure with the other cures that we have said.
of the swelling
When the belly pain comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong virtue, if you do. Make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before or cautery of the stomach, at the circular cautery; and three cauteries around the subtle bowel in every place, a subtle clave cautery, and two cauteries on the flanks.
And if you see the abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make them a cautery on the finger, and one cautery on each of those places, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the great one, for the cure is profitable when it has good help.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or one or more, and are ancient and consist of gross cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit, if you make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, which is all defused beneath the almond date a little and a little in triangular, and one cautery beneath the bowel, two fingers.
and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face inflate, then one should apply a great cautery to the stomach, as it was said before, and another to the liver, and another to the spleen with all the clavile cauteries; and let the cautery be applied for a long time. After curing the limb so that it is healthy.
of the fleshiness which is named "thelul"
When you cut into the fleshiness which is named "thelul", if you heat the cautery that seems to be rough, and then apply it all inflamed on that cut fleshiness; and let it stay there until your hand feels the cauteries coming to the origin of the vein, from which the blood flows out; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of "thelul", then cauterize each one as we have said; after curing the painful limbs profitably so that they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a great cautery on the Achilles' tendon, it will be of greater aid.
of a badly cured wound
When the patient cannot suffer touching or pressure, which we will recount in its place, if it comes to such a disease that cannot be healed unless by cautery.
When a fistula comes, and it is wrapped and gushes with putrid and corrupt matter, if you prove it to be an entire tent-shaped thing, and take care to know the extent of its depth. Afterwards, heat the cautery that seems suitable, and apply it to the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and continue the cautery until the putrid and corrupt flesh is burned away, once, or twice, or three times, according to the amount of one's need; and be careful about the surrounding nerves, and the large veins. If the fistula goes towards the bladder and intestines, be careful about these places, and do not make false passages in the flesh, and think that it is not entirely pierced; afterwards cure the flesh until it is healthy, and if the flesh is whole, and the matters are removed from long tension, then know that the flesh is entirely healthy; and if the matters are not removed, know that the flesh is troubled, and corrupts the bone at the base; and thus one of those things that we will relate in its place.
of kidney disease When pain of the loins comes from cold and great windiness, and does not take such a woman's talent, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to the loins on one side and the other side with the clavile cautery that we have mentioned before; and if our cautery zones are in a good place, they will have three cauteries in a line, and they will do more great aid.
of the vessel When the vessel is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you make a cautery on the affected part above the vessel, where the hairs of the finger begin, and on the right and on the left, and let each cautery be as long as our thumb; and you make a cautery above the back, or if you need to; and let the cauteries be arranged according to the form mentioned before.
of the marrow When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow it to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their terminations delayed; and when they come, so great pain is felt: then you must make three cauteries around the belly, as we have said or a cautery of the vessel, and two cauteries above the back; and let the cauteries be arranged according to what we have said.
of the handle
When the viscous moistures descend to the handle of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measuring them together; and it is found that the joints of the department are twisted, so you must cauterize the patient on the handle of the hip with a cautery similar to a circle, and mark before the joint around the handle as it turns, so that the handle is within the circle; and if the cauteries are such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not present to you, make three cauteries of large olive-trees, and let the cauteries be as profound as all the veins; and heal until it is healthy.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes to the box of the hip, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated for what we have said in the division and the treatment is not working, and the illness is ancient: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
After the fire cautery; and the manner of doing cautery is in two ways: it is to know that assembled medicines are burning, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is in many ways, one of which is such: that you cauterize on the box of the hip three cauteries triangularly according to this form, and make a good profundity and greatness, and have between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive; no time do they do cautery in the middle on the head of the hip, because there are three according to this form.
And if you see, that you cauterize at the cautery of the circle which we have previously said in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire hip, and all the spaces of the circle are burned.
And it is the manner in which they do in sciatica, when pain holds in the hip, and does not reach just to the thigh nor just to the leg. And if it reaches the thigh and the leg, then you make three cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds, and one cautery above the knee two fingers, a little to the left; and let the cauteries be cutellaire, and let the spaces of the circle be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends just to two toes or near the ankle, then you cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four at the cautery which is called "points".
And if the masters are, they do more; and if it is known that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, they make a cautery at the cutaneous or circular cautery, and you must carefully guard in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient greater nuisance and contraction.
And I have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the feet also, and was perforated and corrupted all the way to the feet. After a flow of belly which he got death.
And if the pains are in two parties together, make a cautery on one and on the other, in this manner. // And the wise men say about the cautery of the thigh, that it is done in this way, make an iron instrument thus large as a small nail of a date tree, or a little less, and be inserted between the skin and the flesh, and be spaced like a nut's breadth; and let the insertions be above two inches, and be also like nails, and have an iron handle well made; and this is the form:
And let it be heated until it is entirely red and gives off a sweet smell, and then place it on the affected thigh, and turn it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with three cauteries in a row and leave them for three days; and then apply a plaster of borax, and leave the wound uncovered for a long time; after the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of his glance, and we see few who use it; and however this is one of the good cauteries, which can suffer him, and there where he gets accustomed.
from the pain of two teeth
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or percussion or by too great an evacuation, or by similar things of cold matter spread out, none of these similarities is worth cauteries, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after this that the patient is void of fetid pills or other similar things, that one makes on his back, where the pain holds, three lines signed in an inch, and in each line 5 or more cauteries according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let it be made with the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make 3 or 4 cauteries at the cautious clave moiens according to this form:
Here is the translation:
When you see this and you want to cure it, if you cauterize with the cautery of that one according to this form.
If the cautery burns some part of the spine badly. And if you want to cauterize around the spine with a poignant cautery .ij. lines or .iij., and let the points be near one another. After curing the limb so that it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware not to apply cautery in gibbosity which is in spasm of nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When the pain of joints is from moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes on foot, which the physician calls "podagra" properly, and when it is from cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make a mound of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-like according to this form.
And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make a cautery at every point where they call "point". And if pains come near the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then make a cautery on each knee, three or four cauteries for each part, all the way to the olive tree; and if you have more mastery, do more, but do not hold your hand firmly except as long as the space of the heart is ready.
And if the pains descend near the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we mentioned in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the fingers nine lines; and if there remains a point of pain in both, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come near the sides or near the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good governance to the patient and prepare medicines. For if you make good governance and you purge the flux, it will be healthy with the help of God.
of the rupture of the vein
When the rupture comes in anguish, and the veins descend to the hips and it is new, then you should know that when you want to cure it, do not neglect that day; and use things that loosen the belly, so that the farts come out of their belly; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm as long as the vein is repaired, and remake with both fingers, and sign underneath the rupture on the bone of the thumb, and at all a sign that should be similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery in the form of:
until he is white and throws out filth. Then reset the bulbs to their place; and hold the ministers' hand so they do not return back; and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put underneath him .i. cushion and .i. sergeant on the thighs, and .i. another on the pis who holds the hands; then put the cautery on the sign to all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again until you feel up to the bone; and be subtly wary that the bulb does not burst when you do the cautery; so you do not burn them; and so the patient does not die, or another evil.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your works are worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauteries for children be subtle according to the measure of their age, and for big people also big according to their measure; after .iij. days cure the limb with a gentle cautery so that the inflammation is removed; after curing other wounds so that they are healthy, and make the patient lie .xl. days on his back so that the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that their bandages be loosened for a long time, so that the bulb does not burst when they prepare to go into chambers.
And after .xl. days, when he wants to get up, a well-made bandage is applied to him, and for .xl. other days; and let him have good rest, so that he works little and is wary of too great repletion of drinking and eating, and of too high excitement; and when he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healthy. And I will describe hereafter the treatment of cutting into his chapter. of the treatment of the belly
When treatments come to other bellies and are connected, and you see that they do not grow anymore, make them ready. Make the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let it be the third part of the heart; after the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at the cautery at three angles according to this form:
but first mark the place of the inch and make a line according to the width above the treatment, and another below, and hold your hand in all the cauterized parts with a claw-like instrument. But the first cauteries are lighter and more flexible.
of ancient pain in no member When pain comes to a member, whether from falling or striking, and that pain holds for a long time, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and let the cauteries be according to the length and smallness and weakness and virtue and location of twisting and of its pain. If it is healthy from the first cautery, that's good; if not, start another cautery on top of it, for it is customary that it should move to the member that is close by, because it is necessary that you do the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
of the disease
The diseases are often aided by cautery with great help, and especially the disease that comes from the putrefaction of flux and melancholy. When you see the cautery, take care that the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor stay, and you fear that the corruption will not spread throughout the disease, then you make .v. cauteries on the head: .i. in the middle of the head anew, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; and .ij. on the .ij. horns, and .i. behind on the temple; and leave your hand so that the cautery comes just to the bone, and until the scabs issue forth as if the vapors of the gross humors could come out; and you cauterialize on the mouse according to what it is before.
And if the disease is scattered throughout; and it perturbs manifestly, then you must cautelize with these cauteries that we have said on the head, and .i. cautery in some of the nostrils, and .ij. cauteries on the spine of the neck, and .vj. cauteries on the spine of the back, and .i. great on the crown and .i. another on the loins, and .ij. on the shoulders; and .ij. on the hips, and .ij. on the tendons of the foot, and .i. on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the back of the heel, lest you burn them; and often make a cautery on the bone of the finger, and .i. another on the bone of the stomach, and .i. another on the liver.
And know that the more you make a cautery, the more it helps, and it profits; and know that the patients do not feel any pain from the cautery if they are healthy, because the body is already totally corrupted. And it is necessary that the cautery be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manners of the ferments. After curing the leprosy with flour of farina and other cures as much as it is healthy.
of inflammation
When inflammation occurs in a limb and is treated with medicines and oils and emplasters, but it is not healthy, then one makes cauteries on the limb according to its size and the smallness of the member; and let the cautery be a little inside the skin of the heart; then cure the swelling as much as it is healthy. And often one makes cautery at the hand and foot and back, at the issue of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if the inflammation is removed; and never get involved unless you are familiar with the limbs and the issues of the moving nerves of the body.
of abscesses
When the disease called "abscesses" is enveloped, and the engine of medicine does not help, then cauterize with a cautery a little deeply, according to the quantity of the skin of the heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes; then cure with flour of veal and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of almonds, each one part; and mix everything together, and bind with a dressing, and apply to the limb until it is healthy.
the treatment of cancer by cautery
When cancer begins to develop, and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with a cautery that forms a circle around the entire tumor. And some wise men say that one should make a cautery in the middle of the cancer; but this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will not be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen; and more rightfully, it is cauterized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said about many cauteries.
of the inflammation that cannot be reduced
When some people have a disease that is called "adubelati", and it delays in being reduced or because of the superfluity that it makes or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say, too old) and he has little blood, or because of the tension; and you want to hasten its reduction: then cauterize around many small cauteries in pricking; afterwards let it be thus. For it will hasten its reduction.
And if you perceive to pierce through all the fire cautery, heat up the fire cautery according to its form:
And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" so that the fire cautery penetrates the heart, and be such the fire cautery that the patient feels relieved in some manner so that the course of the purification is alleviated. After the treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
The treatment with fire by iron
Another manner of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a withering of the members, for it withers the members just as fire withers dry wood. If you see this disease in the patient who can suffer from fire cautery, then heat up the small and large cauteries according to what is needed for the patient or the disease; after cauterizing all parts so that you remove all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that all that is corrupted is removed. And then leave it three days, and put on the cauteries that suffer burning with oil until the fire burns are removed, and all corruption. After the treatment, new flesh grows.  And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's bad; and if not, start again the cautery on what remains of the corrupted limbs. And this withering is never cured by medicine except by fire cautery; but nonetheless fire cautery is of great aid, and I have already said the treatment of medicine in the division: take as much as you need to master it.
of the pores that come to the feet
Many times it happens that the feet are affected by a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a big faulty thing that whitens the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are in two manners. It's to know fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is that you heat .i. cautery as if it were a pen of vaulted iron, and make it from good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail on all sides, and that it has subtle edges; afterwards put it all hot upon the nail, and turn your hand totally around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and let it thus for .iij. days until it begins to rot and decay; then make an emplaster of evil savages with elder, and leave the emplaster on all night, and the nail will fall off and be disrooted from its roots. Then cure the foot's joint by anointing it so much that it be healthy.
And if they are converted by the fault of the body, and many times it happens in the hands and feet, then you must apply hot water cautery; and it is in this manner: take a cane of iron or a pen of vaulted iron, and put it upon the nail and the skin, that is to say pores of warts; and put the cane thus that it pierces all around, then you put a little hot water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and finds the hot water deeply until it reaches the root; and let the patient suffer a little the biting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will disroot itself from all its roots. Thus do afterwards, as much as you can, those that are in the body, then cure the joints that generate char.
the cure of trembling
When some people shiver with cold or nerves, or quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you do them three fire cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one fire cautery between each spine; and one fire cautery or foot, and one on the stomach for an olive-tree cautery; if you leave the shivering, and hasten the health of the cold disease.
of pus-filled pustules
No times appear by default on the bathed bodies, or pus-filled pustules, that come from gross corrupted materials. If it is necessary at first when they appear that you do fire cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle fire cautery of myrtle wood, where the point is taken in fire, or root of aristologe long, or lenticular cautery. And no times are they cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow inward beforehand, but are dislodged from the superfluous things that come from them, and are healthy; but it is necessary that it be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times there occur great deteriorations of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from the outer layers, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to staunch.
And always when it happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your finger index on the wound of the vein, and hold very tight so that the blood is appeased under your finger, and no more issue comes out; then apply the olive oil cautery, more or less small and large as it becomes all red; then take .i., or great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is located, and apply the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery so long as the blood is stanched.
And if it happens that you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is stanched; and beware that you do not harm the nerve that is nearby, and that another evil does not come upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be well stanched unless it is through one of the three methods that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines applied which have power to staunch blood; and thus it will be bound and held in place.
Who administers the treatment of tight bandages or of putting hot things on, or similar things, does not profit if not done carefully.
And if it happens to no one and there is no better medicine present, one should put their finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch well so that it is restrained above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but the mole of the cold water which is very cold so that the blood is congealed and thickened and restrained; and make inquiries beforehand about those who need cauteries and medicines.
We have said in the first chapter all about the diseases for which it is necessary to use fire cautery, or hot medicines, and the instruments and causes and the tools and forms of cauteries; and I put that chapter among the chief justifications, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method because it is easier to find what one wants.
And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the previous cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake foolishness. For many kinds of people come for cures. If they come from those who have hurt themselves with their disease, they die easily due to the violence which they find in their disease, and due to the greatness of their evil; and one should fear this. And of these, there is one who gives you his sense, and says: "Wait, I am cured"; and the disease is despised. It does not become necessary that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but place greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely about what you are certain of, and what you can take and lose; and use prediction and indication in the cures of your diseases where salvation may be converted; and this will aid you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and long memory.
Very dear son, Our Fathers give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what is before or the chapter of cauterizations, that I have devised from head to feet, because you will find it easier to learn what you will need to master.
from the head full of water
Know that this disease comes very often to children in infancy, and when the vein holds the child's head too tightly; and it never comes from a known cause that one does not know.
And I never saw this disease except in children, and among all those that I have seen, they hastened to death; and therefore it seems to me that it is worth leaving off the work in certain treatments.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head grew so much each day that it could not support its own weight; and the moisture was so great that it was mortal, and this moisture was gathered beneath the bone under the siphac, between the heart and the bone; and the treatment is such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and let it be as long as we need, until the moisture flows; and see there the form of the spatula.
If the moisture increases, and the abscess becomes larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head affected by each part, and the water flows forth when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
And after the incision remove all moisture. After hold back the edges of the wound with drapings and powders, and put in wine and oil, and let it be so until the fifth day; then dislodge, and treat the wound by tending and by ointments, and let the head settle gently, and give to the patient dry food in moderation, as long as the limb is comforted and healthy.
And another way of incision is that you examine where the greatness of the abscess opens, and assemble the water; for it is never before; never behind; never on the right; and never on the left.
Cut then where the abscess opens, and fill with water, and let it flow according to what you can do; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and avoid flowing blood, so that the patient does not die from the corruption of blood and evacuation of moisture.
of humor
When there is a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or at the foot, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with fire, which one coppes with the arteries.
Then it is necessary, when you cauterize the eyes, that the patient makes his head bend back; after scrubbing the skin of a rough cloth so much that the arteries appear, then stretching the patient's neck to the entire cloth; then look where the veins are beating, and the eyes on one side and the other are behind the ears, and are slightly bent back; then sign the eyes with an inch, then cauterize one and the other with a pointed instrument so much that the vein reaches just to the bone, and it is done by the width of the head.
And if you see, insert the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cauterize above, cutting just as much as two fingers at the traverse.
And when the vein is cauterized, then the blood flows back up continuously afterwards.
And if the artery does not open to sensation, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the width of two fingers, then sign from the notch and stop just at the bone; and this requires putting fire beneath if it is six degrees Celsius, and by chance a little more or less according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains on the bone point of a syphac, if the treatment of apostemes does not come, then hold the wound and bind it, and the cure of ointment until it is healthy.
of migration
When an old migration comes, and catarrh agitates, because of the moisture of the tears and the colds in the temples and the old forsakenness and similar things, and it is medicated by ways of cures of medicine and all this does not profit him, if we extract the arteries from the temples and the cauteries, as we have related.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs of their temples grow back, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is little restored unless in some homes which are too cold; and if it is restored, then extract the neck of the patient from some drapels, then rub the skin with some rough cloth, and raise the skin with warm water as much as the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of this form:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Because fire cautery is helpful for ending moisture: therefore it is of great help against moisture. Where it is necessary to extract the arteries, one fills the hole with much cotton and puts on well-made tents; and when they are removed, be cured by dry medicines that make flesh grow, and by tents, until it is healthy; and if you do not have a remedy for the artery as I will show you, if you hasten to cauterize, either use vitriol and hold it in your hand so the wound does not get infected; and if you don't have that present, put your finger on the hole until the wound is congealed, and raise the cold water until the wound ceases, and hold steady as it is necessary; and what is more gentle and easier in extracting the artery is to cauterize the vein of this trenchant cautery .ij. parts, but the trenchant should be well spaced to avoid further inflammation. For when the instruments are too hot, they hold less their warmth. And you should have between the .ij. knives .i. a space of a thumb, and then when you have signed in the .ij. joints, and you put the hot iron on them until it reaches just to the bone, and cauterize the vein in .ij. parts; and they should be separated between the .ij. fingers because it is not suitable for this cautery to be done all at once; and that is the form of cautery:
of the tears
When the tears of the eyes are descending from veins that are on the top of the head, and it does not benefit from a medical cure that one makes, and you see the face of the patient become inflamed, and feel at the front as if walking on fiery coals; and thus they are tender and moist so that the hairs of the papers are fallen, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the ardor of the tears, so it is necessary to use this cure.
And they called it the "confused cure", and it is that you make a row of hairs on the forehead of the patient who has this disease, then you make three cuts or incisions on the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be as deep as two fingers into the forehead descending downwards until reaching the nose, and the others are like two fingers along the edges above the papers, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are along the edges above the papers; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the jawbones, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers in traversing joints.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: And put the cautery fire against the side of the chest towards the clear skin at the heart, and soften the side towards the bone, and soften it until it reaches the middle incision. And cut away the veins that descend from the head as far as the eyes so the incision is continuous up to what opens at the heart, and then make another cut in the middle incision up to the other side; and then extract the blood equally, and press on the skin for the blood taken; then put in each incision a tent of old cotton, and put on molten wax in wine and oil and vinegar, and guard that abscesses do not grow; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and apply great quantities of hot water, then anoint with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments to cure wounds, until it is healthy.
you remove the eyelids
When no vein is accustomed to the flow of catarrh, and you see the eyelids swollen and small, and the vision is obscured, and the papers are burned; and the hair falls out, and where the head is in the front it has a painful ache, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these accidents that those matters and this catharr come from many veins, and the treatment is more difficult than it is, if it is this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to shave his forehead, then make a large incision in the forehead, and another just as wide. And start from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and be careful with your hand at the temples that move to the bone; and when the bone is uncovered, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then remove it between the lips of the incision and put in much cotton, and apply tourniquets of linen; then wrap above with warm oil-soaked cloths, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is open, you must rub the bone so that it begins to heal, then cure with exciting things that make the flesh grow.
In this manner: take three parts of flour of wheat, and three parts of colocynth, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to promote healing throughout.
of the inflammation of the ears
Here is the translation:
When the blood flows into the ear, or another manner of thing that does not adjust to the ear, nor grows in the ear, then one puts the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, if it distills any drop of violet oil or oil of sisament, then it facilitates extraction; and when one makes a conduit, and stops up the nostrils when the conduits come, and places pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and holds the ear above. Many times it comes out by this cure; and if it does not come out, one facilitates extraction with subtle pincers, from which it is in the form:
If it comes out with the pincers, that is good; if not, one facilitates extraction with the subtle onion-shaped double hook; and if it does not come out by this, one makes a cane of iron and puts the head of the cane or perforation into the ear strongly, and stops up what is around the cane of wax so that the veins cannot enter with the cane; then one draws it out in the proper form, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, one takes glue from taking the wings, and puts some instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and puts a bit of cotton around; then presses the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and draws it out. And if it does not come out from all these things that we have said, then you hasten to open the ear thus that an abscess chalzes in the vein, and spasms; and the manner of the opening is that you first make a healthy wound on the cephalic part, and extract blood according to its virtue, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear above, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends; and let the incision be thus like a moon, until you reach the stone, then draw it out according to your power, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and cure it until it is healthy. And if it's a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer a spatula with subtle touches according to this form:
and administer an incision of that grain. But do not do it when you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, so much that you have made many pieces; then extract with subtle pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction may be alleviated.
In the aqueous humor that flows into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use the first remedy of condisi, and fill the ear with much cotton. And let it rest on that same ear where the aqueous humor is; if it does not come out, then take many small pieces according to the length of your thumb, and heat them a little over the fire; and place the patient's finger in one hole of their ear, and touch another part with the foot of the other ear; and make an opening from one stone to another on the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease making openings from stone to stone until the aqueous humor has completely come out; and if you see it, then take a juncture, and put one of the heads in the ear, and the other head takes fire so that the most painful juncture is burned; then remake another part with other junctures until the aqueous humor has completely come out, as we have said about the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is small in body, like a puncture and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large in body so that one can feel it, then administer an extraction with pincers; and it is the lightest thing to remove what is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where you treat distillations, and the cure does not profit, then it is necessary that you examine the ear in the sunlight: if no worms appear, if they are treated with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, take the vein of what is its form.
And be narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle instrument in the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then suck forth into the vein; do this as often as all the worms come out. And if they do not obey in coming out, stop up the vein with cotton as I have said before; and if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have experienced in the extraction of worms, and you will find them or treat the distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear into this instrument, from what is its form as you see:
And be of silver or copper narrow below at a small hole, and above overturned to distill; and to press within the distillation with an instrument of well-made copper for this, and if you see take the scum and wrap it around the point with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you have of your medicines in the vein, and the vein is in the ear; then put within the scum all the cotton, and press your hand temporarily until the oil is distilled or extracted from the ear; and the patient feels it within, and be the distillations not too heated by fire lest they are not well distilled in the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
of the swelling of the ears
No child is born with holes in their ears; and the same thing happens to men through swelling of a wound, or a flesh born inside the ear, and this swelling comes sometimes from deep within the ear, if one cannot see it well; and sometimes it happens that the hole becomes small, and one sees it well.
That which comes from deep within, if one cannot see it well, is of grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in this one sees that you should put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see apparent opacity, then it works with all this spatula-like instrument, according to its form.
And be careful and gentle in front and behind the entire plain, so that it does not block the ear; if the opacity is from flesh born or growth of the ear, then take it as subtle pincers, and hold it lightly, until this flesh is entirely removed.
And if the opilation is deeply rooted in the ear, take a subtle and light razor and carefully shave a little around the fire, then place it at the root of the ear. If you feel the opilation where the patient feels great pain in the ear, perceive lightly, and be careful not to touch the nerves of the ear; then put a tent in the ear according to the width of the perforation, and apply the Egyptian ointment in the ointment.
Here is the translation:
And if the flow of blood comes, then plunge an esponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood which are treating the distillations.
from the ulcers of the papers
It is the ulcer that comes from papers of the eyes when they are moist and dry, if it is necessary that you extend them with tongs and pincers, and cut with a spatula of its roots; then put on the clear glassy surface.
And if they are not torn out, then the cautery of the subtle lenticular fire is applied, and the cauteryizer afterwards incises and makes wounds; and many times they repair, for nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of the scab
Many times things that seem like scabs in their shape and hardness come from papers of the eyes, and because of this, this disease is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of coarse moisture above and below; the works are such: take warning if the grandine moves from one part to another, and it's a light thing to know; make the hole large, then scrape each lighter part, then take it with pincers, and cover. If you cannot cover without piercing a little the paper, do not harm the patient; and if the crack is great, assemble it into a bandage, and cure until it is healthy; and if it is small, do not make force, for the ointments will restore soon and enchant.
And if the grandine descends from the depths of the ear towards the upper part, turn over the paper, and grasp the grandine with pincers, and cover and press from one part to another; and if the paper is separated by incision, it does not harm; and when the grandine is covered, leave the salty water of the oil, and cure the place of that which enchants, as long as the patient is healthy.
of the fatness of the eyes
Here is the translation:
And the manner of the operation is that the patient places his head in a healthy position; and then takes a strip of linen, and arranges it in a circle according to the quantity that contains the extremity of each part, then puts it on him; and presses with both hands from one side and the other, so that the extremity is assembled within the circle; then makes a moderate incision at the spatula-like trenchant, making a cut no larger than the wound made in a vein opening; and makes the skin deep enough to reach the extremity; and in many dispositions the extremity comes out of the incision, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Extract then a whole piece of charpit cloth between your two fingers at the defuer, and turn your hand to the right and to the left so that it is spread out; and be careful not to touch the incision, that you do not reach the entire spatula-like trenchant up to the eye, lest you bruise it.
And if the extremity does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then slightly enlarge the incision so that it appears; then extract as we have said, then wrap in cloths and in water, and put on the limb, and bandage with binders.
And if there are such men who break and put on to corrupt the moisture that is retained. Then heal as long as it is healthy. And if a hot abscess comes, then heal by soothing applications as long as it is healthy.
the hairs of the papers
When papers grow hairs joined to another than the natural ones, and are enveloped, if they harm the eyes, and bring about kinds of diseases such as customary tears and softening of the papers and albumin, so that it is cause of destruction of the eyes; and there is a cure in .iii. ways: either by fire cautery, or by medicine according to what it is before or chapter of cautery, and it is done or by incision and stitching or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your healthy one, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, then you pierce with a needle at all .i. threads above; and let it be beneath the margin of the paper where the hairs grow beneath these hairs, and draw .i. thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make on the part beneath the paper, beneath the joined hairs, all the spatula coping, from the great tearer just up to the small one; then extract .i. thread, and put beneath the paper a small tent of cotton and of drapery, then sign on the paper a figure of an inch, as the leaf of myrtle, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevated the paper which is divided into two.
And if you have a mastery of the craft, take great care to prepare a large quantity of paper according to the softness of the paper; then make all the spatumile lines that you have signed, and begin with the large larmier just a little; and let one of the natural fissures near the hairs grow in the thickness of a root, then put the onion in one of the angles of the circle, then scrape everything; then assemble the several layers at the costure of a needle with all the subtle threads of wool, and suck out the blood, and make the superfluity of the threads on the several eyebrows to all sticky things, if you want to do this; and if not, if you do not have a cure, then leave the costure and the threads until three days or two; then treat the wound without the costure of dry and constricting things, for the paper relives at the suddenness of the wound and its assembly, but the costure is muedre (as the ancients said), and it is a work without fear.
and if there is another manner: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is as much like the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, in three ounces of powdered substance according to the form that is here.
then take what surpasses the small equal forces according to the form that is here.
And if you cannot hold the tourniquet, and the thing is not even, take a needle or a thread .i. filament, and insert it into the figure; and insert .i. another thread from the large artery, and the second thread from the small one, and assemble the threads evenly between your two hands; then leave your hand evenly, and leave all the skin on which you have signed, as we have related, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar ointments soothing.
and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the papyrus are converted: if it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the suture on one side and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the papyrus and make it thin according to what I have said, and then make .ij. stitches by art, and .ij. subtle threads as long as the papyrus and the width of the spatula is; and take .ij. heads of .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above the papyrus of the eye, and hold the .ij. stitches of the .ij. parties firmly; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin which was stretched will die and become black, and will fall off, until it heals by itself.
If it delays, if the scalp has one force, then cure until it is healthy; and when the wound is sewn, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer prick the hair; and this is the form of the .ij. canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The operations are such that you take a subtle needle, and thread .i. fine silk thread subtly; then assemble the heads and tie one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then order another subtle silk thread briefly in the hunt, and tie the two ends of the thread; then put the patient's head in your healthy hand; and let it be exposed to the sun so that the operations are clear, for this is a subtle and minor operation, then insert the needle at the root of the hair, and make it pierce through the paper hastily until you draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the hunt, and put in the hunt that hair, if there is one or two or three or more; then extract your hand as much as the hairs come forth throughout the paper with the natural hair.
And if the hunt is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then draw the hunt to the bottom of all the thread that you had ordered, so that the hunt comes forth through the hole above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then draw the hunt and the thread, and close the eye and let it stay closed .ij. hours or .iij., until the hair is rooted in its place and grows out of the flesh; and if the hairs are small, then accompany one long hair from the natural locks, and elevate it with that which you left, so that it is elongated and then release it.
of the corruption of the eye
When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the corruption comes into the eye, if there is in it two manners: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from a cut, or from a cautery, and from similar things.
And the manner of working on it is that you split open the suture, and separate the lids from it, and put inside threads of linen, and bind them so they are healthy; and it is not suitable to use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease returns worse than before; but it works with mollifying things, such as fenugreic; and the rose-water or attar and linseed oil being cooled, and ointments of dyapulon founded on none of the eyes, and enveloping a thread, and the treatment of this.
And the treasure of this treatment is that you take heed so it does not become worse according to the form it was before; and these workings that we have said are only remedies for this disease, so it does not return according to the form it was before.
of the flesh that comes to the eye
This disease that is beneath which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wound and fracture and cautery and similar things; and the method of work in this case is that you take a needle, on which there are two threads, and prick the flesh, and make it pierce through the left eyelid as far as the right, so that the thread goes into the head of the flesh; then place the flesh above all the needle, and cover with a large spatula.
And if the figure on the parchment returns according to what is desired, it's good; if not, take a razor and put it in the wound, and turn the parchment, and make two cuts or seams within the parchment; and be the head of the two cuts at the two angles of the incision that you have covered, and be made one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is as if it were the figure of a letter that has no "j" stroke; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity whose edges are affected beneath, from what follows on the parchment, then reassemble the two separated parts, and sew with a thread of linen; then apply the cure of what we have said about mollifying medicines, and tents, until it is healthy.
And if the disease comes from wound or fracture or cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain cut beneath the hairs of the parchments, and according to what is written before; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to know how to make the figure return to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what they need from work and from instruments in many dispositions.
because of the swelling of the paper
When this swelling occurs in many ways that the paper above is swollen with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to put the point of a razor beneath the paper, and lift it high; and hold as pincers, until you collect what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient may not suffer from the spatula being too sharp or bleeding the oil; and make your incision, where you carefully remove the assembled thing, lightly, so that the paper regains its natural form; and it is all healthy, and never again becomes salty in the bitter oil, and raises with gentle warmth, and of collared things; then put between the paper and the oil a linen thread, and put on the oil a moistened cloth in abundance of egg white; and after three days use gentle collared things and similar soothing things until it is healthy.
of the corner of the oil
You know that the corner is according to two ways: it is nervous and similar to a hard, rough surface, and another which is not nervous, but is similar to a whitish, congealed moisture, that when you touch it with iron and cut it with pincers, it cannot be; and one and the other appearance encounters towards the great artery, and gradually increases until it covers all vision and all light and movement of the oil.
Here is the translation:
And beware that the spatula does not touch the tender skin and break it, and that the pruning is not perceived; and after the incision, pour a little oil into the eye, and make a poultice of litargyrum, and leave it until the next day; then cure what needs to be cured so that it may be healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the nails cannot enter, many times this type of nail is cured by medicines; and grows as I have related in the division, and if you see it covered, if you open the eye of the patient, and take the spatula lightly a little agitated according to this form:
And lift the nail subtly, and if you see that it is diminishing point by point and the reason appears, then distill from your mouth into the eye a poultice made of litargyrum and red clay and oil, and stop up the eye until the next day; then recommence the other work according to this same method of opening, so that it may be entirely restored.
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, then as an abscess bursts, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess so that it may be healthy, then recommence the work as before, so that it may be healthy.
And if the appearance of the skin is hurt by the armorer's night in the eye through great annoyance, if it suspends from the onion, and cuts into a part but not entirely, that course of tears does not come; then distills in the eye a red collar made from litargy.
of the flesh that grows on the nail
His eyes of some men grow a red flesh, and cover the nail and restrain against the papillae and turn to the defect, and seem like a rose of baluster; and the work is that the patient puts his head in a healthy position, then he opens his eyes, and coils all that flesh as convenient uncines to that, and holds it with force; then cuts the first flesh, and goes cutting to the rasp jusc'a la fin, and beware that you do not blister the eye at the work; and so is the incision of the spatula which we have said in the incision of the finger and small forces of what one uses to remove the sepulcher, as we form after this chapter which demonstrates.
And when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then fill the eye with a broth of sage or where you distill a red collar and seem like corrosive medicines, and put on the eye a cotton pad with egg white, so that it be assured against hot abscess; and if there remains nothing, and the wound is swollen above, and you doubt hot abscess, then leave the eye and cure the abscess with soothing things for hot abscess; then return to your work until it be sane, and thus make all characters adjusted in the eye by this semblance.
But always it is necessary that you lift the treatment of each oil fragile by nature's way; and by accident, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
of the veins of the eyes
There are red veins that are covered on the eye, and they tolerate in their view their work and weaken the eye for many years. Therefore it is necessary at first that you examine the eye, in which way this is, is strong, and there is no other illness further than the vein; then take the coil in such a manner: instruct the patient to put his head in a healthy position, then suspend those veins all around according to their wisdom, and let the subtle double onions be according to this form.
And let the onion be divided by degrees in the course according to this form:
Then when you collect the subtle forces of those veins skillfully, and extract the blood at a good hour after another, until you see the veins removed from the eye; and beware that you do not block the eye with the points of the scalpel, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not take more than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what is dormant beneath the eyelid.
And if you cannot collect all of it at that hour, then make a plaster on the eye with soothing things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and leave some days until the pain is alleviated and assured of hot abscess, then restart according to this method which is before until he is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
of the fistula of the eye
The mirror is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and by burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healthy, if it is engendered in the eye that you make an incision on the abscess, there where it must be drained, and remove all the moisture that is there, so that the bone may be uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the decay and blackness, if it reaches all the instrument of which it is the form; and it is called "asperate head", and it was made from iron indeed a chief counter, and it should be pointed like a file as it is in the present form.
And put on the bone of the corrupted place, then turn it between your two, and press your hand a little so that you feel that this corruption is reached; and do this several times, then restore the bone with medicines excitative.
If the bones are swollen, and there is no growth, and the body of the arm is swollen, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not get better and is not apostemized, and bad accidents come, know that it is healthy; if not, if there is another engine than to return the fistula to the pertus of the nostril according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with watery medicines, and when it is uncovered thus take .i. forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and let the fistula be attenuated just up to the chief as you see here:
Then put on the bone of the forearm, and slide your hand from the eye a little, then turn all the forest so that it pierces the bone and feels the patient through this because the veins are there if he holds his hand near his nostril; and then restore the bone with dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and endurates the bones, it will be easier to treat the matter in the nostril; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the exit of the eye
When the eyes are open everywhere, and there is no disturbance in the nose, nor diminishment, it means that you should bind the patient; then put a poultice, then apply cupping glasses or heated irons to suck out, then place on the eye .i. make a paste of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then hold the eye steady, and wrap with bandages and drapery; and the way of draping is that you take drapes quite soft, and double each one in .iiij., and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes need most; then hold it steady with a firm bandage above, and reapply the cupping glasses to suck out without piercing; then remove the cupping glasses and let the eye stay steady day and night, and if they become weak, it means you should strain them more; then remove the binding after day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, that is good; if not, then reapply the poultice and drapery and the binding and cupping glasses until it is healthy.
because of the tearing of the veiled membrane
When disruptions come to the veiled membrane, then open, and come forth with papers as if .i. grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see; then if you have seen the veil covered, the operations are such that you put a needle in the root of the part beneath, just below the pupil; then put another needle where there is .i. double thread of the part of the eyelid; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cover the eye with double thread and tie one part of the veil around, and hold it well, then remove the needle and place on the eye a clean moist cloth in abundance of egg whites; and let it be until the threads stick with the veil, then cure the eye with comforting things as long as the wound is healthy; and never restrain the wound by the veil any part of a circle of drapery, as long as it is healthy.
And if the eyes take on a great appearance, if they pierce through the subtle spatula which comes from the front of the eye, and corrects the moist albumentous and descends to the eyes, and goes in between at once; then it is extracted until it is healthy.
of the cavity of the eye
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is only a cavity in the eye, appearing as if it were an aqueous humor, but it is not; and the manner of appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on a seat prepared and upright, then take the head between your hands from two sides, and move it so that you see the cavity come to the surface at your eyes; then be careful, and do not descend or be disordered by the light, and see the patient's things as they usually are; and if it does not descend below, know that it is an aqueous humor, and if the descent of the cavity is not apparent as we have said. Make the patient sit between your hands, then take a subtle spatula and touch the cornified tunic .i. little by the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornified tunic and the cornea, until the cavity is open; and when it is opened, distill in the eye a warm honey-like mixture, or an aqueous humor boiled with honey, then be cured by another cure until it is healthy.
of the humors of the eye
We have here the similarities of humors in division, and what is necessary to perceive; if one operates according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the light by the sun, and hold the healthy eye strongly; then put the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if the eyes are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right; then put the point of the instrument beneath the cornea by the thickness of a thread in that whitish part of the eye at the lesser angle of the eyelid, then insert the instrument called "almagda" gently, and twist your hand so that it perceives in the whitish part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty space; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the depth of the measure of the spaces which are from the prune tree up to the end of the blackness; and this is the cornea of the eye; if you will see the opening in that paper by the clarity of the cornified tunic, and then put the instrument just where the humor is, then press it downwards one way after another. If the humor descends now, you will see the patient before him and the instrument in his eye.
After rest .I. a little, and if the patient's water rises again the second way, put the fire with the instrument, and when it is thus fixed and does not rise, then extract a little almond oil in turning your hand gently; and then put back into the water a little of that gemstone, and lift out of this eye inward. Then put through the fire a stopper or woolen thread soaked in rose oil and abundance of egg white, and tie with the healthy eye. We, and those who are of our time, put on common broiet with an abundance of egg white.
And if the almond oil cannot enter the eye because of its thickness, for there are some men who have very hard eyelashes, so it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", whose form is this:
And pierce the conjunctiva gently, and do not go too deep in front, but make .I. a subtle layer, then put in almond oil, as we have said; and at the completion of the operation, apply it to the patient who is about to sleep, in which he sleeps on his back in .j. a dark place; and be aware of all movements, and take light food, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day; then dislodge him from that same dark house, and test his vision, and make him see some things, and then put back in place until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this at the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate it, because the water rises hastily.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And these are the similarities of the forms of algmada, because those who do not know them go astray; and thus they are properly aligned:
And thus the head of the bone is in this subtle complexity, and the last one at four angles aqueous.
of the flesh above the nose
Never born or nose flesh attached to diverse things, because there are some that seem like scorpions on the feet; and if it has flesh of fixed color, and if it has soft bone-colored flesh. In those cases of these fleshes which are soft and not attached, you must make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open their nostrils, and throw the onion at those fleshes, and burn them with fire; then take what you have put to sustain on the subtle spatula from one part, so that you know that this flesh is entirely removed.
And if there remains anything that cannot be coped with, if you open everything .i. of the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without surgical intervention, or an abscess bursts, if you sew it up as it should be; and if they are malignant abscesses, if you hurry and cauterize until the blood is stanched and all the wounds are closed, then pour in water or vinegar and sharp wine.
If the nose is stopped up and moisture comes up to the palate, it means that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pass as it should, it means that there is a new wound in the bone above, which the instruments cannot reach: then it is necessary that you insert .i. a thread of linen, somewhat thick, and be careful with your hands, and take up each notch of space .i. as much or as little; and put the patient's head on the thread in his nose, so that he can breathe through it, and draw out the odorant substance until it comes out through the nose; and many times children are treated thus, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it; then take the thread that comes out of the nose with one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and pull them out one after the other while we are at the thread. Do this as long as you see that the notch has corrupted that wound, then draw out the thread, suck out the blood, and wrap the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of the wound; and then put a tube of lead in the nose for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need of medicines subsequently, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, from which they distill oils and medicines into the nose.
And let it be of silver or copper, resembling a lamp cover, like a tube, and the conduits are thus; and if you see, make a closed tube, and let the instruments be plain for purging the head; and have .i. a handle on the head to hold it when one heats up the oil or some liquor.
of the flesh over the nails
Many times a disease occurs on the nails of the hand called "telul", and grows and becomes large, so it is visible to behold; and for this reason you must take care at the beginning, and remove all further, then put on it the cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay taking care until it becomes large, if it is hard, of fixed color, of poor sensation: if you do not touch with iron for it is an encrusted abscess, for when you take care many times, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of fixed color, and you see that you can remove all, if you cure the patient and take away their fear, and heal the dry and restraining things.
when the nails are cut and burned
Know that when continuous solutions come into one of these cartilaginous joints, it profits little, for in some homes. Then it is necessary to cant this from happening to none, if you see the wound is fresh and full of its blood; and then you join the .ij. leaves to a dressing, and cure until it is healthy; and if the leaves are somewhat disjoined from one part to another, it is necessary that you scrape all the parts of their root until they heal, then assemble the .ij. leaves into a dressing, and restrain, and sprinkle with powder of dragon's blood, and incense broiled; and put on the powders a piece of strong or other plaster, and let it stick by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healthy.
The method of the suturing is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or by thread, as I have made you know.
of the abscesses of the lips
At the hands of men who have dens abscesses on their lips, hard, like grains of wheat, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut into each nut, and take them as pincers, and cover in each part; then apply the lard after the incision of vitriol bruise, so that the blood may be staunched; and then leave it to heal, and cure the lip of dry things until it is healthy.
of the flesh of the gums
Many times the gums are bruised by a blow, which the old men call "albulus"; if it is necessary that you hold them in place with bandages, and apply a dressing to their root, and let the blood or wound flow; then put on top a vitriol broth or other powders that constrict and dry; and if that wound returns after the incision, and many times happens, if you cover it a second time, and cauterize: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of treatments to heal wounds.
of abscesses
Sometimes they are gathered at the top of the teeth, deep in the mouth between the gums, scabs which are black and bitter; and sometimes the teeth turn black and yellow and green, until the corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become putrid; if it is necessary that you examine the patient between your hands, and their jaws are in your saint, and take out the teeth or scabs appearing, until nothing remains; and thus make an end to the blackness and the verdor, and the jaundice and other taints, until they are cleared; and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good; if not, then recommence to re-treat on the second day and the third, until you have removed everything; and know that teeth have need of various forms of treatments to remove, according to what the work demonstrates, because the roots which are removed from the teeth have other forms than those which are between the teeth; and these forms and others should be well-equipped with you.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay to treat as long as you can, because it should not be done hastily; for it is a very high substance just up to then so one has no excuse to rush. Here is the translation:
After extracting the right tooth properly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and gently pull from each part lightly, and remove it as you had done previously. And if the teeth are perceived and eaten away, it is necessary that you fill them with cloths, where the perforations are; and if you hold steady subtly as in the retainers, so it does not break while retaining; and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And take care not to break it, and leave a part behind, and return to the patient with greater pain than at first due to the evil of the root. And beware that you do not act like ignorant surgeons who, in their haste and hardness, often break the instrument, and do not remember what we have related; but rather they come frequently by questioning about this great illness through the roots that remain, or through the instrument that breaks, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is extracted, rinse the place with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood flows out, which often happens, apply the solution of vitriol broth; and if it does not work, cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, which one must adapt to the teeth first, should be long and pointed and have large handles, so they do not slip when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
And let them be thick limbs so they do not bend during treatment, and let them be well-made of iron, and let them be held in place by steady muscles.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains in the treatment, it is necessary that you put on the cotton cloth moistened with burre. One day or two, until the limbs are softened, then you apply the tenacillas called "algefri", of which the head seems to be a beak of a sign; and let them be made thus like a lime and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to issue into all these tenacillas, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh totally around the root, and you put the instrument called "althali", that is to say scalpel, of which this is the form:
And let it be strong and large so that it does not break easily, and if the root jumps through that, it is good; if not, then help with all the instruments, from which the forms come afterwards.
And if one helps with this instrument that has twelve rungs, from which it is the form:
and other iron instruments that are in front of the teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large pincers, from which it is the form:
And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break, and know that many of the teeth's instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtly find their own instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, because there are certain diseases where the ancient ones did not teach at all about the instrument for the diversity of wounds; and it does not break in the cartilage or other bones, or it decays, if one searches for the instruments that are needed, which I have told you, and helps with the gestures, from which it is the form: And let it be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, so it does not slip away, but it can hold and remove; and then restore the limb with convenient medicines, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, if you take out all this instrument.
When the tooth appears not according to the natural body, and its shape is ugly, especially in small women, if it is necessary that you know if the teeth are not after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot smooth or file: then take the radius; and if it is joined with the tooth, take this instrument which has a similar shape, and is like a small beak, and let it be of iron sharpened to a point.
And the small skull and small hands hold it firmly for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file it with a part of the file as it is in shape.
and it is also like the file of which one makes the needles; and file the small tooth firmly but gently with small hands, so that it does not move until it is steady; then smooth it out at the end without any roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, then file the asperity until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech.
when they prick
when they prick in front, or by percussion or fall, and the patient cannot press on it because they are worried that it will hurt, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, but it does not help; if you need to restrain it with a golden thread, for the silver thread becomes green and rotten, but gold never moves; and let the fine thread be neither too large nor too small, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you want to straighten the teeth, take the thread and double knot between the sound teeth, then put the head between the bad teeth, if there are one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then start covering up to the part where you began, and hold your hand subtly and steadily, so it does not move at all; and let your treatment be at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape. Then take the head of the thread in a pair of forceps, and assemble them, and replace them between the healthy teeth, and put it so that it does not block the tongue; and then leave it thus tightly as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone, or the golden thread breaks, hold it with another thread; if it stays and serves thus all its life, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the straightening of the sound teeth, and the bad ones, as you see.
And when the tooth falls out, put it back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and do not meddle with it who is not skilled and suffers, and never make the shape of a tooth of ivory from a cow, and put it in the place where the defect is, and hold it thus as we have said, and it will stay and serve thus long time.
from the copper of the tongue
from the copper of the tongue
and if you see the color of the fuse is black or dark, if the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it declines to a blister, and there is moisture, if you pour in an ointment, and you make a subtle spatula, and you deliver from one part and another; and if the blood does not come to your work, if you put on a vitriol broiet as long as it is stained, then return to your work as much as you treat everything fully; then lift up the limb of the axis and of the seat, and cure other cures until it is healthy.
of the abscesses of the throat
Sometimes abscesses come in the throat, which are called "godath", and they are properly called .ij. amandres, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healthy, be careful: it is a hard abscess with little sense and dark color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood; but let it ripen until it is mature, and then you will divide it, or it would break apart by itself; and if it is of pale color and the root is subtle, have the instrument ready to cover, but first check if the abscess has calmed down and is quiet. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and their head be healthy, and open their mouth and hold the scissors between their hands, and press the tongue underneath all the instruments, from which it is formed; and let it be of silver or subtle copper, just as one shapes a vessel:
Here is the translation:
And if you do not have this instrument present, then take a candle, because it is its form:
And be cutting from one part, and naming from the other part; and when you have cut into one of the veins, then cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot and cold water, and if there is a flow of blood, then gargle the patient with hot water, or scorching pommes grenades that are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is stained; then cure it until it is healthy; and no other time do abscesses grow in the throat besides these two veins, if you cut them thus as the two veins agree.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was next to her throat, it is to say .i. a small abscess of little sense; and she had almost entirely closed off the whole throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the conduit that was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus for one or two days. And the abscess was so swollen that it had almost killed .ij. rains through the .ij. holes of the nose. I hastened then to act, and made an incision in one of the .i. tonsils, then cut into the false flesh, and a large amount of pus flowed out; then I made another incision in the other hole of the nose, and opened her mouth and pressed on her tongue; afterwards I made an incision in these abscesses, and cut away part of it, and only a little blood came out; and thus the conduit of the woman's throat was cleared, and she began to drink warm wine, and did not cease to cut away from that abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew back again, and refilled the void I had made, so much that it became very large; then I cauterized it deep in her throat: thus it remained without growing worse; and I departed from those parts, and knew not what God would do with her afterwards.
of the grape
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
This cure is safer than incision, not like cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put them to boil, and make the pot well glued with strong earth, and let it have an instrument that cuts according to this manner: And let it be of silver or copper, and let one of the heads be inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, until the eye is mortified; afterwards, it recommences often, until the eye dries, and beware that you do not do this at the beginning of the arrival of a hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not do this unless at the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put a crumb of egg in the head, so that the patient's mouth does not have too much heat; for the crumb of egg does not let the vapor pass through the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether healthy.
Many times it happens at the throat or spine of a fish, or some other thing; so therefore you should try what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing; and what does not appear and is rejected in the throat, therefore you should make the patient vomit thus that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by chance the thing will be cleared by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and tie it to the sponge thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will be rejected, and then you will extract it again; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take this instrument of a plectron in this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so they can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high elevated; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all does not go well, nor does it bulge inward; and it is of great value that the patient holds the instrument, because it is held or the thing is at ease; if it holds below, where it draws everything equally throughout the entire instrument, so it is drawn.
from the sensibility of the throat
No medicine is suitable for the sensation, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when it does not profit at all, then look into the throat of the patient towards the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the sensation, draw it all out with a small hook, or subtle pincers that are worth it. And if it is not suitable, take a hairy caterpillar, and put it in the throat of the patient, then put or fix the caterpillar with an iron instrument, and make it warm; and if you hold the patient's water all day, then take full sight of the cold water, and open the mouth, and swallow without gluttony, and move it with their hand often; and if you feel like the sensation feels the water, then vomit.
And if it does not vomit as we have said, then suffumigate the patient with absinthe, with the instrument that I have described in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, for it will soon expel. And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are visible coals, and let it be covered with a pierced perforated cloth in the middle, and in that hole is the head of the instrument; then you pour out the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane into their mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not issue out, but reaches just to the sensation; and the sensation will expel now, and if it does not vomit, start the fumigation again many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink any water; and then it is necessary that they expel by this government.
And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the wound is such that when one can see it, it resembles curved tongs entering into the throat; and it has a resemblance to a beak of a sign, and it has roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot release; and see here the shape:
the cauterizing irons for abscesses
Many similarities of abscesses are, according to what the remembrance comes here after one and another in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and in size; and it is in three ways that one is in its own resemblance, and because of the moisture it holds. And the second way is through the joints where they are in the body. For abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and abscesses of the flesh are different from those which come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if abscesses are not to be pierced, as long as the swelling is moderate according to its accomplishment; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their accomplishment, like abscesses which are in the joints. For when abscesses come from the joints, and one leaves them until they are fully ripe, by chance so are corrupted the ligament and nerve of the joint, because it is cause of contraction in that member. Or the abscess is in the principal member, and if you delay the perforation until it is moderate, it will harm the principal member; or it is from the foundation, if one pierces it thus so it is moderate; and it does not seem that you should pierce a ripe abscess without complete digestion, except for the one which is from the foundation, so it does not rot within, and becomes fistulous; and it cannot heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the signs of the perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to completion, and it's when the pain is alleviated, and the departure from fever, and the lessening of the pain and of the redness, and the debating and settling of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation sit or more depending on the abscess, and where it appears most; and let the perforation be from the length of the body, and if the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all their equalities where there is no polypus.
In these cases, according to the member. And when an abscess is in the flesh, it is worth more that you let the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce before this, then the body will be filled with much disorder; and by chance they will harden the lips and the deep parts of it. And if there are any abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to how much the members need it.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And it is necessary to understand universally in the treatment of abscesses: for you have said how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
of ulcers
Where the wound of the chief vein comes from small abscesses, and there are ways in which we are deceived, just like a gouty swelling, and many similarities. There are fatty and slippery ones where there is moisture, as with ulcers; and if there are hard and piercing ones to be cut, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act against it. And the work of the cutting is that you test all instruments called "entromissoire", from which the shape comes afterwards, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, then clean above the length. And when the moisture is evacuated, then scratch without leaving any skin that contains that moisture, for it returns immediately when you leave nothing; then apply cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; otherwise, with water and soap, and apply to the wound, and let it be until the next day; and this cures what has remained from the night. And then reapply the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain from the night; then cure the wound with ointment in a suitable way, so that it is healthy. And if the abscess holds .i. fatty matter, then cut according to this shape, above the length; and throw away the excess, and scratch all around, and put all your care into treating the wound where it lies; and if the artery acts against you, do what I have told you afterwards. And likewise do with the abscess if it is piercing, and from the cutting and from the curing as I have told you.
And the cutting above the piercing abscess and the moisture is lighter, for they are of little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or chief wounds where there is no moisture, and of these I have treated as a chief wound of an old woman; and found the abscess just like a stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and if one had made a hole in it, one would have made a wound just like a stone. In other abscesses coming from the chief, because these that come as chief wounds of children and roots of ears, the treatment should be done for at least three days, depending on how much one needs to open the bowels; and the cure is done as it is necessary.
of the scalp ulcers
Many times an abscess forms on the neck, and below the shoulders, and in the groin area, and sometimes it appears in other parts of the body, and they are numerous, and they are interconnected with each other. And each ulcer is properly located on its side, just like the knot and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these ulcers are many. There are those that contain moisture, and if there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health. In this case, when you see a good disposition on the skin, and it appears similar in color to the body, and moves from each part and is not very hard as the veins under the skin neither in the artery nor in the conduit, and it is not very deep; then it is necessary that you cut into it from above, and scrape off each part, and stretch out the two lips of the wound as wide as possible, if you are skilled, as we have said in abscesses on the head; and you treat it little by little, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve or the vein, and do not cut too deeply, lest you injure the veins, and do not proceed too far, lest you touch what you should not.
And if you cut into the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to operate, then put a vitriole balm on the wound, or some powders that stop the bleeding, and hold the wound together; and let it be until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to heal. And when the blood is stanched, return to your work, as long as you complete it; then inquire about your duty if there remain some small ulcers, treat them and dress them. And if there is a large vein at the root of the ulcer, it is not necessary that you cut into that ulcer at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself, without harm; then fill the wound with much cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
And if you cut out the whole scrophula, it is necessary that you reassemble the .ij. lips of the wound, and sew them now, then there will be no more superfluity because of the greatness of the scrophula. It is necessary that you understand how to cut at the root of it, and treat fiercely, and sew as we have said. Those scrophulas that hold superfluity, pierce where it appears dead; and pierce thus as before mentioned, depending on it, then it mixes with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well healed, if the treatment with ointment produces a scar, until it is healthy.
of squinting
The old ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and that is the scripture of their words.
For those who have squinting, it is necessary that the cutting of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be avoided; and one should not help by that, because all the veins and the pormon of the patient are at risk of having an abscess burst in the mouth, or in the throat or in .ij. mandrels. When the disease is in the channel of the arm, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary, therefore, when we want to open the epiglottis, that we open it below in three or four circles, or a small opening through the traverse, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the opening of the syphac, not in the cartilage.
and if it is conveniently located at the section of the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, and the vessels are far from inquiry.
And if the masters are fearful, it is necessary that they extend the skin of the throat to the entire tonsil, then open the kernel as much as it comes to the channel; and remove the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cover the syphac, as we have said.
and it is shown by the cutting of the flesh of the shoulder blade that jumps forth through the broken place, and by the defect of the voice;
and let the wound open a little piece.
And when the hour has passed during which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew entirely without sense of cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, so it may be healthy.
It is necessary to do this just as much as the throat is entirely stuffed, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, and the defect lacks the wing. Then one should treat the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death.
and for this reason the surgeon commands to leave the wound open as long as the evil of the disease has passed, and it will have passed in three days or four. And then he commands to sew up the wound and treat, until it is cured.
and I will tell you what I saw. I see that a young woman took a candle, and thrust it into her throat, and burned part of the sinew of her arm;
and I was called by the curator, and found her almost dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and knew well that she had not been treated properly, nor had a vein been conducted further than the throat, and the veins were issuing forth through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and cured it until she was healthy;
and she did not have at the lady's fever when it was rough with voice, and returned afterwards to her disposition;
because I know that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the color of a jaundiced person, and it is very common in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural and accidental; or naturally there is no obstacle.
And the accident is according to two manners, one of which is similar to a fatty tumor that comes from our flesh, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery. and there is fear, and it does not seem to work with fire cauterization except in the case that is small, and test and search thoroughly throughout the entire affected area. if you find it thus as I have said, like a fatty tumor, and it does not adhere to any vein, if it is cut, if we cut them as we cut our own, and remove all its filth, if there is any. and search well everywhere, and the doctor so as it is fitting, until he is perfectly healthy.
of us
Many ways are ours, which I will describe all the similarities;
and it is fitting that I should say all the differences that are between us and them.
I say that the fever and heat are maintained, as long as the inflammation has passed, and the putrefaction is accomplished; then replace the fever and heat.
With the ninth node there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains syrup, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins thus like a jaundice, and becomes large.
and they are according to their resemblance, whether grey, or moist, and many colors are so as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the ninth node, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to what its form will be or the chapter which follows.
And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of the nodes is that you take or touch the most moist place where you find it in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, so that you know that the instruments have perceived the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then remove the entromissoire, and take care to guard against what it may expel forth.
If the moist humor flows freely, whatever its color may be, thus they make them as I have said about other abscesses.
and after the entromissoire no moist humor comes, they know it is fat, thus they make it in a cross, and take it with pincers, and lightly scrape each part and ward off the crust where it lies that you may draw it out whole with the nail.
and if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if he remains nothing, he returns to us many times;
and if he remains a little, and the wound does not grieve him, then apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and hold the wound steady, and put on soothing things for hot abscesses, and treat other treatments until he is healthy;
and if it is great to us, then cut the lips of the wound, and treat what injures flesh.
and if the veins are swollen, it is contrary or otherwise, if you hasten and apply the liquid of vitriol broken, and let the lips be still for two or three days, until the wound putrefies, and restore the ebullition of blood; then return to the copper that which was delayed from the night.
Here is the translation:
and they are also like the needles whose points are burned, and they are of citrus iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are worth more, being more experienced in piercing the fistulas with black horn;
and they are of three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
The forms of the lancets are very similar, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are lancets that have three fistulas of three manners also;
and if there are lancets that have three fistulas, and they are also of three manners; and if there are lancets that have two fistulas, and lancets with a single fistula only, and they are of three manners; and all these things are necessary in their place.
The head of these is so cutting, and there are those who do not cut more than one part, from which they scrape the nails, because they cannot touch the vein or nerve;
and of these internal suppressions are the remedies applied to the limbs, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of the abscesses;
and they are of three kinds: large, small, and moderate, as you see;
and one does not use more than the natural heat of the body, such as in the legs, and arms, and limbs, and in similar places;
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, similar to a fisting scorching tool, in this form, for which they staunch blood:
and put it in a place that heals with the conjunction of veins, and arteries, and put it back together according to this great form.
Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen when they start to be corrupted, so that they seem like female breasts.
and they become weary and swollen, and those who want to cure them, if it is necessary to operate according to this form of this line, just up to .g. then scrape off the fat, and apply the plaster of medicine in the wound, then assemble the .ij. leaves of the wound to the suture, and cure it until it is healthy.
and he massages the collarbone down, and it is swollen due to its greatness just like it happens with women, if they make a .ij. gathering above, by .ij. similar fractures; because one is holding onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.; then scrape off the skin that is between the .ij. lips, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about poultices and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, so that it be healthy;
and if it is not healthy, or the incision has not been fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the decay of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil; and let it grow as long as it reaches the remainder and the fat, then cure it so that it becomes healthy.
of abscesses of the seats
These abscesses that come from under the seats are a type of hard scrofulas where there are ribs, and it is only moisture that they contain.
Those therefore that contain moisture should be cupped according to this form, from line b to line g: And when all the pus in the abscess is evacuated, fill the wound with much cotton, and let it be until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply an ointment coming to that extent so it becomes healthy.
And if the abscesses are similar to scrophulas, then they do as we have said in making incisions for scrophulas, and if the wound is gaping, then apply fire cautery as we have said before.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is swollen which is above, then many abscesses often come, and also it happens to the inflamed and abscessed vein.
and if one recognizes it thus because it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and profound. and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel the constraint; and when it is through the vein, it is soon relieved by appearing externally;
and it's foolish to cover this abscess, and similarly when it is under the arms and the loins and in the neck and in many other places, and it's very large. It is necessary to choose the iron treatment, and the one who is at the head of the case must also choose, and in the one who is inflamed with arterial fever it makes a dent above the skin of the loin.
It is necessary to choose the iron treatment, and the one who is at the head of the case must also choose, and in the one who is inflamed with arterial fever it makes a dent above the skin of the loin. then open the wound at the ankles, and beautifully separate the artery from the tiles, until it is discovered.
then put a needle underneath it, and make it pierce just to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
then stop the hand that is between the two ligaments of an intestine as long as the blood flows from it, and be careful not to touch the abscess.
then administer the treatment that induces a bowel movement, until the ligament relaxes. then treat this joint which is inflamed, until it is healthy.
and if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, then it is necessary that you hold with your hand what you can of the abscess throughout all the skin. then put the needle beneath the skin that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and have two threads, so that you draw it from the other side; then lay on the abscess, as I told you, or thread of one of these parts as one head of the double thread;
and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, then I rebore another needle through all the threads beneath the entire abscess to the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four layers;
then cut into the abscess as much as the superficial layers come out, then cut into the superficiality of the heart and let go what is tied;
Then place a warm compress on it, with wine and oil, then apply gentle treatments of bandages and ointments until it is healthy.
of abscesses of the nerves
Thus, abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses come to the nerves when they are irritated, or from too great labor, and similar things.
And these often affect the joints and the two bones where they have joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of dead flesh, and it is in many dispositions without pain;
and when one is tightly restrained, the patient feels pain, and it is not in the deep font of the body, but beneath the heart;
and it must be well bound on all parts, and does not go either forward or backward, neither beneath nor above, and he who is in joints cannot be held together by iron: perhaps it will contract by chance;
and he who is at the head or forehead, makes the skin into a scab. If the abscesses are small, then hold them with a bandage, and cut at their root;
and if it is large, then suspend it from the anvil, and scrape, then oste and assemble the wound to the ribcage, and cure until it is healthy.
the large hanging lumps It never happens in the stomach and not in another part of the body, and it is an illness called "fungus" due to its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots, and large lumps; and there are small and very large ones.
and I saw some who had them in their stomach which were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and were split apart, and it corrupted with moisture.
I coped them and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6 ounces, and the work of incision is that you examine if the patient's humors are moist, and the color of the arterial root is pale and moist with subtle roots;
if you touch the spatula largely, and thus are in your presence the fire cautery. For when cutting often comes too great a flow of blood, and if the blood does not cease, then hasten to give a burning cautery;
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision with the iron, then take a well-made thread of steel, and tie the arterial root as we have said, and leave it 10 days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease from straining the thread of steel until it touches the arterial root, and tighten by means of it without trouble; and if the roots are large, then you should be afraid to copulate in the meantime for fear of the belly, but you can well copulate moderately;
Then cauterize so it does not relapse; then heal the wound, and be careful not to touch the flesh that is of a faulty color and poor sensation and lazy gaze.
For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted abscesses afterwards.
when the swelling is hot
The appearance of the swelling comes from cautery of wounds or fissures of syphac, and it is on the belly and in some of the swellings, just as it has in other ruptures, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windiness.
and it is through the rupture of the skin and by the issuing of the bowel, if it is the color of the abscess similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to diverse issues. And if it is through the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press on it with your fingers if it resonates, and then returns, and by chance if it is serrated, and greatly increases at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
And if it is through moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press on it with your hand, it does not constrain at all; and if it is through blood, it opens through these signs the large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity.
and if it is through windiness, it is soft to the toucher, and the works are that you consider whether the appearance is through the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. Here is the translation:
And if the appearance is through the intestine or the bowel, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his belly, and let it be stretched out straight, then mark out a circle all around the navel. then command him to sit between your hands, then go around the place that you have marked at the entire spot, then stretch out half of the abscess downwards to the entire great groin;
then open most of the abscess extended on the binding, and you press with your index finger, and examine the intestine; if you find it bound to the binding, so dislodge it, and insert the intestine into the depth of the belly;
and if you find the bowel, take it in your hand, and cut off the excess;
and if you make the artery oppose, or the vein, if it goes badly inward, then return to your work and take nine needles, and throw out nine forces of thread, and throw the nine needles inward because you have done in a cross that you made to pierce;
then extract the abscess in three liters above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the limb putrefy as long as it can, and choose the dead flesh by itself; where you touch when it is subtle and rotten, then treat what is necessary, and shave the abscess as we have said;
where you touch when it is subtle and rotten, then treat what is necessary, and shave the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the limb with what is necessary, and sew up the limb.
Do you mean "Where cautery"?
We have said in the division the appearances of ulcer, and how one must work with medicines, and how one must remove the treatment with iron; and we say that ulcer is generated in the marrow, and great caution is necessary in its treatment, and the ancients say that when ulcers are on the skin or where one can reach them if they are like ulcers which are in the limbs, and in similar places, and it must be completely removed when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it does not matter that you approach it, for I know no way to heal it; nor have I ever healed any before me.
And the operations, when it is on the skin or where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile several times; then make him healthier if he has shown signs of repletion, then perform the operation .i. cut into the limb to do the operation; then pour out all your incisions or ulcers, and shave all parts, and scrape all parts without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, and hold the skin well with your hand or with something, and if the remnants of blood make you hesitate about the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize so that the blood is stanched; then treat with another treatment until he is healthy.
of hydropsy Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
Then observe if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you make an incision below the navel. You should make two right lines above the pubic area; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then make the incision on the left side of the navel. You should make two lines; and if it is due to bile, then make it on the right, and it does not matter that the patient guides themselves according to the incision, as long as the superfluous liquids do not flow towards the weakened area.
Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and the bud, and lift your hand to all the spatium between the skin and the syfac as if cutting into the quantity of a single fingernail or an inch within; then pierce the syfac until the spatium comes to the voided area, and that is the level of the water, then draw it back, and it is this instrument which has this form: And it is similar to a subtle silver cane, and is made of refined copper or light iron, and has small holes on the underside; and where one side has three holes; and two on the other side, and one more; and the head is shaped like a pen, and that is the form of the incision which writers shape with their pen.
At the top is the alembic, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it descends now onto the instrument; empty then the half or third part, for if you empty more than it should at that hour, perhaps the patient might die from the resolution of their spirit to arm themselves, or they become pale, or they approach death.
but according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and their pulses; then draw the instrument and hold the water, and it is held back now by the cord which closes the orifice that is on the syphac, as I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then reinsert the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw from the water a small quantity;
do it on no day, and guard yourself from pouring too much water, but only a little. And if you doubt the patient, and you leave much water, if the treatment of the grave or dry heat increases, and by very sweet or bath and in the sun, and you are thirsty to drink; and the treatment of desiccative medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
from the stopping of the rod No child is born who does not have holes in the rod, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place. If it suits you thus that it has not perceived at all .i. a very subtle spatium according to this form: then put or hole .i. a subtle plug of lead, and bind it thus .iij. three or four days, and when he wants to make urine, if the plug is opened, and makes urine, and then puts it back; and by chance you do not perceive it, for the urine that comes out does not leave it closed. Here is the translation:
And the manner of treatment is that the patient lies on his back, then the head of the rod and the handle are like the width of a pen, so the pierced area is in the middle, as it should be; and beware of the flow of blood which often comes, and if it happens, then stop the bleeding with what stops bleeding, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
the blisters on the rod Often times cysts come on the rod, and it is a sign of bad flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you must take them with a very subtle onion, and cut and clean all, then put on a soft cotton in an Egyptian ointment; then heal the ointment diafinicon until it is healthy. And if the cyst is malignant, of bad color and putrid, then you must apply caution. When you have cut it, and the cyst is in the rod, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the cyst that is inside first; and when it is cleansed, then heal the outside. For when you heal simultaneously, it is not assuredly the head of the rod that it will not be perceived, and comes blackness and corruption in the rod and in the joint; then you must excavate all that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice made of honey and flour which is made from crushed pomgranates and veal, then heal with other cures until it is healthy.
And if the flow of blood comes, then administer the lunar cautery in this form: The cauteries aid in nine dispositions together: it is to know, at the flow of blood, and at corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must boil or conduct a pipe of lead, and pour the patient through; and when the skin is rough at the head of the penis which has been circumcised, either from wound or from abscess, then you must scrape with an instrument, so that the threads are untangled, and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
And if it is a grievous thing to devise this, then you must scrape with a spatula at the head of the penis and testicle; then separate boldly between nine, and I put nine subtle threads of the milliet in cold water, so that it does not become hard again.
of circumcision
Here is the translation:
I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the greater part of my masters and wise men who performed circumcision in this way, and with great force, and all in a new manner; if the courses were changed because there are two modes, and by chance one copes on that which is above and delays that which is below.
Now the wound closes over, and the pain is double, and in the mending which is two fingers from the member it is not assured of the point of the limb; and in the mending of the ankle by chance the iron escapes, and corrodes the vein, and many times thus they have no need of mending and I have seen it.
From the mending which is done with great force, I have found the benefit of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, if you cut evenly in .i. the whole soul tenses; but the thread should be well stretched around the skin; and be the manner of the first treatment so that you make the infant think, if it understands, that you do not make him suffer by tying the thread around the rod too tightly, and then you make him move in all the ways that you can. Then you make it stand upright between your hands, and hold the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the infants do not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or uncover, and pull it up as high as the head of the rod is in place; then cleanse well the area where it is assembled, then tie it with a double thread, then tie it below .i. another ligature; and hold it as .ij. two ligatures by the second binding at the pouchet and at the index finger, and gather between the .ij. ligatures, then lift the uncovering hastily and pull the head of the rod.
Then you make it stand upright between your hands, and hold the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the infants do not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or uncover, and pull it up as high as the head of the rod is in place; then cleanse well the area where it is assembled, then tie it with a double thread, then tie it below .i. another ligature; and hold it as .ij. two ligatures by the second binding at the pouchet and at the index finger, and gather between the .ij. ligatures, then lift the uncovering hastily and pull the head of the rod. Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the mothers; and put powder on top and on the powder .i. a wrapping cloth glued with a piece of cooked egg white tempered with rose water, confited with oil of rose and fresh, and leave it on until the next day, and heal another wound as long as it is healthy.
The form of the forces in the mundification is this: the two heads should be turned and should be cutting, and should be the heads as large as the evenly cut mains.
The error of mundification is when the dense heart goes to incision; then it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, so that the abscess forms equally, and you hold it in place, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then you tie it up.
And if they surpass three days, and that which is beneath the rod is inflamed, let it be until the aposteme wounds are appeased, and scrape the crust lightly; if you cover it as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, it will not harm him.
Heal then the wound of sudden powder, which we have said or treatise of powders, and if you cover beyond measure, it will go to the surface, it will not harm at all; heal then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
because of the retention of urine
The retention of urine is from obstruction of stone, or of congealed blood, or of bowel, or of new flesh, or of similar things, which we have said in the division.
and if the urine does not flow, and you see it being retained by the stone that is in the bladder or neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees; and let them put their feet on their back, and extend their belly above their back, and strain the patient's stream as much as they can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted by the expression of the stone above, because the urine does not flow;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary for you to administer extraction with all the instruments that are called "syringe", of which this is the form: and let it be a subtle silver tube, curved like the claw of a bird; and let its cane be a palm's length and a half, and let it be subtle at the top.
And the manner of issuing urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the top of a piece of flax or cotton, and insert the top of the thread into the syringe; and stop up the superfluity of the flax and tie it just at the top of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and honey and egg whites, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the verge with moist oil of olives and oil of olives and water tede;
then put the syringe lightly into the verge, until it reaches the root of the verge, then double back the verge above towards the bud; then insert the syringe before just reaching the bladder, and let the patient feel it coming to the empty space, and this is not done according to this order for fear that the conduits or it will be twisted; then stretch the thread little by little along the flax, and the urine follows the flax, then it flows freely, and make the urine flow.
and recommend the syringe as long as the bladder is empty, and alleviate the patient.
of the diseases of the bladder
When scorched or blood comes into the bladder, or when putrefaction is assembled, and you have seen distillations of waters and medicines, if you do all the instrument called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
It is closed, and if it has .iiij. perforations: .ij. on one side, and .i. on the other, as you see; and the veins are arranged so that the medicine flows well through the rod without addition, so that one can then treat the moisture, and cut out when necessary.
and when you apply your medicines to the bladder, place the head of the cauterizing instrument in the moisture, and pull out the drawing instrument that is inside; if you draw the moisture to the cauterizing instrument, and then strongly draw back the drawing instrument inside; if the moistures enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and it is the subtle form of the instrument for syringing, which one uses to syringe the bladder: this is it:
And it is made of silver or copper, and the head is higher; and below is the vein or the ligaments that cut; then take a bladder of a sheep and put the moisture in it that you want to syringe into the bladder, then tie it between two double fillet bovine fibers, and heat that moisture over the fire; then insert the head of the instrument for syringing into the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder until all the moisture is evacuated, so that the patient feels that the moisture has arrived at the bladder;
and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle from it, and pierce it roundly throughout; then insert a strong thread into these holes, and assemble the circle as one assembles a wheel, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture arrives at the bladder.
of the stone
We have already said in the division the ways of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone in the kidney as it rains, and all the signs, and in which stone one must operate by cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is in the bladder often affects children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder with subtle clarity; and it openly hurts, and greatly troubles the penis, and they often fall ill, and then become swollen; and many of these symptoms are foundational; and it's easy to cure children until they are three years old, and it's very grievous in old people, and it's as if midway, for those who are between youth and old age; and it's easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it's necessary first to clean the patient with aclyster, in order to remove all the filth that is in the intestines. For it often hinders the quest for the stone.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch out his right hand above the loins, and with his left hand touch the skin that is beneath the loins in the area where one makes the incision; then he should apply the spatula-like instrument, because this is its form.
And make an incision between what is between the loins and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left thigh; and let it be straight on the stone, and both sides should be equal or at the fundament, and let the cut be so that it is wide enough to pass through, and within it is narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
perhaps the pressure if both sides which are at the fundament, so that it feels no sensation of labor; and know that there is a stone where it has angles, and margins: if it is gripped to come out; and if there is a part which is underneath, resembling a glance, and rounded, whose issue is light.
At that point where it has angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, then you must extract with the tenaculum which are like a file at the head, to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you apply underneath the subtle curved instrument at the head; and if you cannot engineer it thus, then enlarge the small perforation, and if the stone is not decorticated, then extract with vitriol.
and if there are more than one stone, first remove the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull out the thread, and the small ones afterwards if there are many. And if it is very large, you must cauterize it, and make a bigger wound. For these things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes back through the tube that cannot be stopped; but in any case, strive to remove it, or break up the tendons, as much as you can remove it piece by piece.
and when you have completed your work, apply the plaster of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put on top a dressing coated with oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then resolve to keep the patient steady on their bed, and do not dislodge the bandage until the third day.
And when you remove it, rub in very well the oil and water, then apply the ointment of Dyafinicon and Basilicon ointment, until he is healthy.
And if the hot abscesses come into the wound and corrode, and congeal the blood in the bladder, and it is retained by that which holds back the urine, which is known in such a way that without a sound with the urine: then put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and make it putrid.
Then lift the wound of water and of oil and of serum, and aid it in all ways that you know, so long as it is healthy; and it is necessary that all the wounds that you cure, that you bind the hips, and assemble the medicines on the place.
And if the stone is small, and it is conducted by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot issue; if you cure of what I say thus, that you cut many times, it is excused from the cutting per this cure. I have already proven it thus.
Take a forest of iron in this form and let it be at two angled points fixed in the thigh:
Then take the thread and bind it around the rod beneath the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the rod into the rod lightly, until it reaches the stone; and turn the rod with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can feel the stone from another part; if it comes out soon, the urine will flow, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the rod. It is soon broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
and if you cannot do this because of something that bothers him, then he puts the fil under the stone and another above, then make a rod in place of the stone between the two ligaments, then extract the blood, and dissolve the congealed blood which is in the wound; and heal until it is healthy.
of the stone in women
Sometimes it happens that the stone is in the womb of women, and if it happens often, then the treatment is difficult, and is prevented by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows herself well, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who knows herself well in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more deeply embedded than the stone of the man, because it requires making a deeper incision, and there is great fear about it.
And if it is necessary to ascend to this, it is fitting that you take a wise woman knowing well, and grasp the true vein on, and if you do not find it, then ask for a subtle cast of the mirror; and it presents a good and healthy life for women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and she commands that she does what you command her to do from the inquiry into the stone.
and look very well if the woman is a virgin: then it is fitting to let her put her finger or foundation and search for the stone; and if she finds it, then constrain beneath her finger, and recommend that she puts her finger or with the patient, and searches and presses her left hand firmly on the bladder in the form.
If she finds it, then it is fitting that she moves it little by little from the entrance of the bladder down to beneath, until she reaches the root of the thigh; then feel on the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft spot, there where it is most apparent, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above the stone or beneath, and let it be cut off at the first small sign.
then put the rule in the cutting, if you feel the stone if it increases the wound so that the stone can come out further, and know that there are many kinds of stones: it is to know, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have ridges. if you know the similarities to know the outcome.
And if the wound is faint, set on the vitriol ointment, and hold it for an hour until the wound is staunched; then return to your work, so that the stone may be broken, and have the instruments I told you about in extracting stones as men do to aid you in your operation.
And if the wound is faint, and it's an artery that's been cut, set powder on the wound and hold tight with tourniquets and bandages, and don't start again, and leave the stone alone and don't touch it anymore, lest the patient might die; then heal the wound.
And when the flow of blood is calmed, and the veins are purified, then return to your work, so that the stone may be broken.
of a fleshy hernia
Here is the translation:
And the generation of this arm is from weakness that comes to the joints, and it is spread throughout that matter.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: either it's a declining yellowish color, or it's without red, or black, or watery pale, and that happens more.
and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is white or yellowish as we have said, then the abscesses are ripe, i.e. shortly long like the figure of an egg, and do not open the joints, because it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in its own fabric, then the abscesses are ripe with a part of the egg, and therefore one thinks that it's another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the belly and the white sifac, then he feels very well; then when you want to know the color of the moisture, then examine all the interior quarters, because the form is thus before. According to what comes after the interior quarters, judge of that which is within.
According to what comes after the interior quarters, judge of that which is within. And when we cure by iron, it is necessary that the patient be strengthened according to his power and the replenishment of his body; then he should sit on a high thing, a little elevated, and much drapery should be placed under him.
then he sits on his left, and commands the minister to sit on his right, and stretches out the rod to one of the ribs near the heart of the belly.
Here is the translation:
Then the surgeon plain of water at .i. large perforations, and extracts all the water, and then puts his fingers, and it is the surgeon above; and does not touch the heart of the wounds, but the surgeon soothes only; take out everything or in pieces, measuring the subtle cost of him, so that if you do not take it out wisely, the water will return;
and if the vein is swollen from a fall, reset it in its place when you have completed the surgery of the blood; then assemble the .ij. veins of the heart at one costure, then treat it as other wounds, until it is healthy.
And if you find the corrupted vein of another disease, it is necessary that you lift the vessels that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood; then touch the joint to all the suspended, and extract the vein, and cure it as we have said.
And if the wound is assembled in two parties together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part as you did the first alignment, then suck out the blood, and put into the wounded place a mild oil rosat.
and put another mild oil of wine and oil, and put on the two compresses, and put double tarps, and bind it all together with the lien that is according to this form.
Then take two tarps, and fill them with lint according to this likeness and sew them together at the neck of the arms, and one of the extremities takes hold at the base just up to the back, and another at the part of the finger; and the other two extremities on the two angles, and so is all assembled the restraint in the loop of the arm.
and no medicine is made from this branch of cautery in the length of iron, and it is that you take a subtle cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the compresses, and be heated as we have said, so that the white sap that contains the wound is uncovered.
If you take fire cautery according to this form, and prick with an onion-like point, and scrape with this subtle fire cautery burn:
And take the cup in all the ways that you can, so that you clear everything; and beware that the fires do not touch the egg; and know that this work is more healthy; and beware of blood decormentation, and remember that the operations of size.
and if nothing makes you counter, or abscesses burst or blood decorations or something else, so heal what makes you counter, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this operation due to its horror, so perform perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain through the signs that we have said that the watery liquid is there.
Here is the translation:
Then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let it congeal for a while to correct the remainder of the water, then treat until the wound is healthy.
and if you see that the watery discharge does not come out of the mouth of the wound, it is necessary that you insert a tube or instrument through which one treats the watery discharge of hydrops, because its form is thus before; and enlarge a little the wound, and know that the watery discharge returns, and it is assembled after twenty days or thereabouts, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will pass their days.
of the abscess of the groin
Know that in the treatment of this disease, there is fear in many dispositions, because it seems to me that it is worth more to leave it.
and I will tell you about the work and the similarities of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come to a head, and likewise as wounds; and it is in most cases.
It is to be known by excessive heat and fever, which is spread through the wounds, or from percussion;
and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no true pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
and by chance there are painful abscesses green and pierced, and of a flux color, and sometimes they come from the artery, or from an inflammation of a vein.
When it is from the artery, it is known by the arrangement of a hot abscess, when you press on it with your fingers. and it does not seem to you that you touched it.
That which is made from an inflammation of a vein is known by its arrangement at the expression of the tender touch of the fingers.
and one can well make the cut according to this resemblance, and on the other parts; and it is that you cut out the heart of the veins, then extract the egg white from above, and remove the suspensor from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already surrounded by these new flesh, then it is necessary that you extract the egg, and cut out.
and if it is attached to the fascia, or in that which is within the vessels, then it is necessary that you remove all of that tenderness, and cut around it again.
And if the birth of the flesh is where the back skin is, it is necessary that you cut all of it, and withdraw the vein, as we have said.
And when the operations are completed, apply the plaster of moist linen oil and rose water, then treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
of the abscess of the groin
These are abscesses enveloped by an envelope resembling a .i. boil, with softening of the groin, and the patient's groin hurts greatly when he walks;
and the treatment of this disease is very similar to that one before,
and in every way we will direct their work according to what the ancient ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a high seat, then bind the suspender of the loins under your two fingers, to all the vessels that are near the edge, and touch the masters, and extend them forcefully;
then cut with a sharp spatula deeply through to the place of the vessels, until they are discovered,
and then scrape off from each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
then he attaches a needle or it has a double thread, and ties it to the first vein where the vitellus was located, and then ties it again to another vein; Then remove the hairs in a straight direction, according to the length of the body, and by pulling out the corrupted moisture.
Then heal the wound as with others or by inserting a bow, so that no vessel bursts and nourishes one of the sides.
For by this, there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come together, it is necessary to treat the sides of all the vessels. So that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
of the treatment of the face The accidents of this arm happen through the section that comes to the face, or the extension on the belly in the part of the loins, because the intestines descend from that treatment to one of the flanks;
and this treatment is from the face, or from the extension of it, and these two manners of many causes come: either from percussion, or from a fall, or from a blow, or from the lifting of a fixed grief, and from similar things;
and the signs when it is from the extension of the face, are that it happens little by little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly; and it is the abscesses even as far as the peritoneum, because the swollen tissue presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is from the swelling of the section that makes sudden painful beginnings come, and there are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin, close by, and it is because of the issue of the intestine and the body's failure due to the swelling.
And sometimes it descends with the intestines, and is retained inside, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments with fear, because it is necessary to beware of its effects.
And the manner of the operation is that you instruct the patient to insert their finger inside the wound to feel with their hand if they can reintegrate. then be supported on his neck between your hands, and lift the hips;
then stretch out the cord above, and cover all the skin of the joints from the length; then thrust inside the ribs of the waist girdle according to what you have mastered in order to open the wound, and be such that your eyes may issue forth;
then strip the patient of their syphac which is beneath the skin of the joints, so that the white syphac becomes uncovered on all sides;
then put your finger index in the one that guides the joint, in the one that is between the white syphac which is beneath the skin of the vein, and between the second syphac,
and separate the one that is behind the vein, and between the second syphac; and then move the vein to the right hand within the curve of the joints, and hold the white syphac above with your left hand, and lift the vein to all the syphac towards the waist; and instruct the minister to stretch the vein upwards, and dislodge the one that is behind the ligament;
and if you find in your fingers that the intestine is wrapped or white and hard, and if you do not find anything, then it bursts in the belly below;
then take a needle or one with a large thread made of six threads, and insert it in the rear part of the hard skin, which is after the skin of the loins; after the waist, then cut the heads that appear as threads, until there are three threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the hard skin, which we have said is below the skin of the loins, with a strong thread of two parts; then wrap the heads of the threads, and tie them firmly with two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them may enter into them, lest an abscess forms there; and place the thread according to the first thread long and even .ij. fingers of that, and after these .ij. threads leave enough space which is beneath the curve of the joints the size of a finger;
and afterwards all the other according to the roundness that the egg brings; then cut in the part which is beneath the skin of the thighs, as long as the vein runs, and the bowel, as we have said before;
then anoint the bruised area with oil, and put in place, and anoint the vein as we have said. And at no time is it cauterized, the white thus that we have said, after the incision, due to fear of deterioration of blood.
For it happens often, and let the vein be until it chooses for itself; and if it tarries in the delay, so be aroused by warm water, and put on what we have said, until it chooses.
then heal the wound with another treatment, so it is perfectly healthy.
from a fleshy hernia
In this wound I never saw anyone who dared to make the treatment with iron.
And the old ones said that it is done thus, as with the wound which is assembled in a similar manner that you bind the vessels, after cutting lightly beneath the skin.
then take a look inside me, and treat the abscess of those who have swollen so much that the veins burst; and treat it as we have said, until they are healthy.
Sometimes a rupture occurs in the entrails, as we have said, and opens the loins; and do not descend to any of the intestines as to the bowels, and if you do descend, it is little, and repair all hours;
and always, if it stays too long at this point, the wound or syphilis grows, so much that the intestines descend;
and this happens through the extension of the syphilis which is in the entrails, as we have said, because it is extended, then becomes softened and inflames the loins and opens;
and the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before; and no treatment is done with iron in this way:
and it is that the patient places himself on his back between your hands, then bend the limb of the affected part outward according to the quantity of two fingers;
and then extract the skin which is beneath the skin that is swollen, then take the vein and place it on the apparent limb beneath the skin;
and press at the front of the belly, then cut the two apparent veins beneath the skin on the head of the vein, and cut one and the other;
Then extract the head of the vein, and do not cover the point where it meets so that it does not extend to another thing, just as I have made you aware in the treatment of the ramice of the intestines.
Then heal by treating the wounds. And when you cover the filaments, if it is undone and heals the wound, so that it may be healthy.
The veins are constricted, and have no appearance in the wound, and the cauterers are moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the intestines
Many times the skin of the joints is softened in some homes, because the flesh that is within is softened, and it is pleasant to see; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure, to make the patient sit on their back, and cover the softened skin with natural skin; then assemble the .ij. lips to a suture, and if you see, first remove the excess of the softened skin from .iij. sutures or .iiij. firmly; then cover between the sutures, and cure it as with other wounds, until it is healthy, and feels the thread.
with strengthening
I know that strengthenings are customary in our law, and therefore I prefer not to speak of them in this book; and it is not necessary to do so for .ij. reasons: one is that the mirrors respond when asked, and in strengthening the cure; and another, because we often need strengthening from certain beasts to aid us, such as goat and sheep and deer and other beasts. I say therefore that strengthenings are made according to .ij. methods: either by attraction or by fendingure. In that which we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in warm water, so that the joint becomes softened and flexible; then take it with your hand, so that it is reset and you no longer feel it. For strengthening of a cut: it is necessary to hold the beast, and press the skin of the joints with your left hand, then suspend it, and cover each opening with a .i. cap, when you have well cleansed them; and leave no small part of the subtle fascia that is beneath the veins; and this method of strengthening is more effective than that done by attraction, because in attraction something often remains by chance among the joints, whereby the beast desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healthy.
of the hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds in men: one is when they occur between the thighs as if figured by nature in a woman's shape, where there are hairs, and sometimes it affects urination.  And the other way is in women, and they appear on the buttock like a rod with two thighs.  And the cure for men and women is to cauterize all the affected flesh, and to treat them as other wounds; in the second case, of those whose urine passes through the skin of the thighs, there is no cure.
of the tenderness
Tenderness is an affected flesh on the natural part, so much that it is too ugly to look at; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the cure. It is necessary that you remove the superfluousness of the tenderness with your hand or with onions, and lightly touch; and do not push too hard in front, lest the blood come forth, then the cure of another wound as long as it is healthy; and there is another wound that grows at the mouth of the anus, and the embossing, and by chance it breaks out, and it has the appearance of a cow, and for this reason the ancient ones called it "cow disease". If you touch it, if we have said about the tenderness, and the cure as long as it is healthy.
of erratic
Erratic is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the pertus is small; and it is born naturally, or occurs by accident through disease that comes to be; or it is by chance adjustment, or subtle dou syfac, and is made in the marrow, or in the sides, or below, or wherever; and they hinder conception, and childbirth, and by chance the flowers have to be had; and the knowledge of this is by the gaze of the baile.
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are overgrowths of veins which without proper treatment become accustomed, and when hemorrhoids become old they become thelul; and we have already said in the division the similarities of these, and the signs, and I will tell you those that receive curation. I say that hemorrhoids and thelul, when they are deeply rooted in the marrow, and do not appear to the sense, it is not a cure by iron. Those that are at the mouth of the marrow, one can feel, are those that can be cured. It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, then apply the altaelul as poultices, and the cope with its roots, then powder on medicines restraining blood, such as dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then boil her feet for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if the blood flows out, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and galen, and similar things, and then take flour of barley, and confit with honey and oil, and make a plaster on her back. And if it is inflamed, that's good. If not, then apply ventouses to the back and massage with iron; then take wine, and mix it with plantain juice or aglentier juice with old wine, and apply to the affected area. And when the abscess ripens, then cure the affected area thoroughly until it is healthy; and the one that is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough chief, then it is necessary to cover as I said about thelul; and then cure until it is healthy.
of abscesses of the marrow
Here is the translation:
of the birth
The expert is first to recognize the figure of natural birth, and the signs are when you see the woman approach below, and desire to smell the air: then hasten the infants to come out quickly; then know that this birth is according to natural figure, and it issues from its chief, and the second with him; and when you see these signs, then you must press gently on her belly, so that the infant comes out quickly; for when it descends upon its chief, then is the second with him, and is removed the superfluous matter by good moderation; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For it comes sometimes upon its feet, and comes to the body or the head, and the hands, or it comes upon its belly, or above, and is converted by an adventure on its neck, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary for the expert to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must aid him.
If the infant comes out naturally upon its chief, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the virtues of it are weak, then make her sit on a chair, or the women hold her; and arise from the nature of oil or fenugreek being cooked, and then place the expert between her two small spatulas, which is the form: and find the second, and cut to its nail as much as the moisture which is in the cord was; and take hold of the woman's belly so that the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then you must clusterize the woman with musculating fenugreek oil; then make her take a drink and be consoled, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the infant is born. And if the hands issue forth, then you must gently press them back little by little; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a seat, and raise her feet high; then remove the seat from the ground, and hold onto the woman, so that she does not fall; and if the hands cannot enter, and the infant dies, then take hold of the hands at the counter which is placed before, and extract the infant, and gently press.
from the birth of the child on its feet When the infant comes onto its feet, if it needs to be held upright. and then turn it little by little, until it is even.
then take hold of the feet and stretch them out little by little.
When it jumps just as a knee, if you command to bend, and make it stretch with conditions; if it jumps fiercely, then God wants.
And if it does not jump fiercely as we have said, turn it little by little, until it is according to the natural shape. For then it is easier.
And if it does not come forth as we have said, take a poultice of hot water, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and crush everything in a mortar. and put it on the nature of the woman within and remove this ointment, then have her sit in a warm bath until beneath the ribs.
and when she is softened beneath, have her a girdle of myrrh, and put it beneath, and leave it for an hour; then make them sit on the seat, then make them lean back and hold their mouth and nose, and take hold of their belly lightly, because the infant jumps now. from the escape of the child upon his knees When the infant comes in this form, if I put the basin under his hands little by little;
from the issue of the child who comes with a large hand during One must know how to reset the hand: if one cannot reset it, then make the woman lift up and go;
if she cannot walk, then make her sit on a bed, and let her legs be straightened out;
then treat the muscle strain that I have described;
and it does not inflame, if it makes it sit on the seat, then studies to guide the hand back; and turn the child according to natural posture, and make it stretch, and command that it take hold as far as the veins issue forth.
from the birth of the child on its neck, and has spread out its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back I think that you should hold its hand, then turn it little by little, and rock it gently;
and when it is even, then place on the natural muscle tone of the thigh and oil, as we have said, then instruct him to move little by little;
and when you have done this, then make him sit on the seat, and instruct him to take hold; and make him steady. in the same manner for the entire second one
in the same manner for the entire second one When it comes to this manner for the entire second one, then cut the second one at your finger, so that the moisture is evacuated.
and he should place his face on it and on his neck, if the cup of the poultice, so that it is not retained, and kills the infants;
Then put the child inside, as long as you have placed it so that it fits, and instruct the woman to take care not to slip even once:
of the dislocation of the twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes not at all; it is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely. They are strange things, and do not live much, if they do not receive a name;
I know that, in order to be multiplied, and are divided by the syllable which is linked to the throat;
and no time do they issue naturally like all those below, as we have said.
And if they issue grievously, thus the treatment as we have said, and let the subtle vein be treated, and make it whole and light, whatever it does. and do thus as he values his health. of many children
of many children No times are formed in the marrow, i.e. one or two or three or four or five, or six, or seven, or up to fifteen, and all are fully formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage.
and it is believed that the wise one knows all this, for it seems that chance brings similar things to him. Do thus according to what is suitable.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman who has had a dead child or a miscarriage, as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained by hand work; it is suitable that you know if the woman is of healthy virtue, and has not had an accident or fear of death;
it is necessary that the woman be leaning on her back, and her knees bent downwards, and her legs raised;
and the midwife holds the sheet of birth, or she is tied to the bed so that she does not fall during the delivery of the child;
then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils of altaea and fenugreek, and sow flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and musk-like substances; then gently wash the mother's legs, then she wants her to bend or she washes the ankles that are suitable for this;
and take heed that the veins are apparent as they descend upon their head; if he feels the prickings in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the gullet or near the ribs,
and if the descensions are upon his feet, he feels it or pricks and has painful sides;
and it is necessary to hold the needle in his right hand, and place the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and he holds all his hand lightly, and feels the prick in none of these places that we have said, until he comes to the empty space;
then fix one against another ankle, or the third where you have mastery, so that the extractions are even;
and then hold them evenly in moving one way and the other, to make them issue, and let the ankles be held by them, as it is their form:
And if one part remains, then anoint the joint with some of its own oil, and bind it in that part, and treat the other part;
and if it remains a bit, set this anvil or higher up, and make it so that it all issues forth.
And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be brought back by straightening. so it is necessary that you envelop it with a bandage, so that it becomes whole.
then put the cup on the joint of the sole or at the heel, and thus it is necessary that you do the same with the other hand, and in this way.
And if the head of the child is large and it is twisted at birth, or it has an assembled crooked head, then it is necessary that you put the spinal instrument between your two, and make the head straight and extract the crookedness; where you round it with the instrument called "almidach", which is shaped to come with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and thus in this way, you make the children have a natural large head; and then treat the bones as fasteners,
and if the head jumps forward and it is held by the forceps, so it be bent, until the moisture that is or issues forth;
and if it cannot issue, then cut into pieces at the muscles where you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce as much as the moisture flows.
And if he stands on his feet, it is a light attraction, and the administration at the mouth of the marrow is lighter.
And if he is twisted in the belly or in the breast, it is necessary that you stretch him out with a wrapped cloth around the hand. and touch the belly or the breast, as much as the moisture that is there corrects.
and if the other limbs are stretched out, and the head remains. Here is the translation: Then he applies a poultice or an onion, and makes a dressing for the wound;
and if the mouth of the marrow is constricted by a hot abscess that has come there, then it does not need to be operated on; then one must administer moist and greasy things; and apply poultices, and use soft, mollifying, and moistening remedies.
And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, thus amending what we have said about the living infant;
and so that one cannot operate, if one draws out the fragments, and does not leave anything of the secondary wound.
And when you have done this, amend what we have said about abscesses that come in the marrow;
and if blood flows out, put it into a warm bath, and amend other treatments.
And I saw a woman whose belly had swallowed an infant that had been dead, then she conceived another on top of it, and the other was dead too. After a long time, he came to have abscesses in his belly, and it swelled so much that it opened, and began to greatly suppurate.
I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.
I put on a strong poultice, and there came out a bone, and after some days others. I marvel greatly, because for this reason the belly has no bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I touched the wound and extracted many bones, until the woman was in better condition; and the woman soon felt a little better, and then coughed up a piece of bone from her body;
and I have not recorded this chapter further because for that reason, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to set it right.
to bring the hip back to its place
Hereafter comes the form of the presser, where one examines the books; and at .ij. turnings as .ij. heads of the .ij. ligaments. However, the horns should be more subtle from the restrainer, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the box be a finger's width, and the margin of the trees should be, and from a palm and a half; and in the midst of the instruments should be two adjustments of this same box, which are fastened on one side and the other, half a palm's length or a little more;
and these two adjustments are placed in the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in its resemblance, should be made from ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of the tendons. and it has two heads, two joints, as you see, of a palm's length, and two fingers wide;
and when you see open the marrow to all the instrument, if it happens to sit the woman above, the feet pendant and the legs overturned, then place the two joints together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between her thighs; then open your hand to all the instrument, if you have done it equally, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the marrow, so that the vein makes what it wants.
Here is the translation:
Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for their necessities are not excusable.
When the secondine is retained in childhood, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his arm, and then make him stretch out his condition, and hold your hands at the mouth and nose; and let him breathe through that, it is good.
If that does not work, take the pot, and make a poultice or covering, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the stomach, such as calmant, rue, anise, chamomile, cassialigne, and centory;
all these herbs, or some of them, should be cut or put in water on the fire; then place a cane or tube under the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the patient,
and let the blistering occur as long as the vapors come from the marrow; then it will become sterile, as we have said. If the secondary inflammation happens quickly. And if it remains after this treatment, and does not become feverish, then instruct the patient to soak their left hand in oil of sesame or in a poultice of alta, and then apply the remedy naturally.
and seek the secondary inflammation; and when it has been found, take it and stretch it little by little, straightening it so that the marrow does not burst at the extraction. but it must move gently to the right and to the left, and then draw back; if it comes and dislocates again.
And if the mouth of the thigh is constricted, we have spoken of the treatment of stretching, and of fumigation with herbs.
and if it does not consist of all that we have said, beware that you do not fail in the treatment.
but it is fitting that what is at the mouth of the thigh, you bind to the hip of the woman, then anoint with ointment of four herbs.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the secondine is this.
And it is to be seen similarly to a cane, and one puts the subtle head in the nature, and the large heads above the fire.
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the tincture as long as it is bitter, and then begin another.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who do not have their foundation perceived, thus it has been subtly obscured. it is necessary then to apply the cupping glass so that it perceives the subtle character of its finger, and does not perceive it from the spatula's agitation, and adjusts the placement so it does not touch it.
then put on a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until it is healthy.
And if you doubt that it does not reset, then put or insert a cane of lead, and leave it there for a long time, and be careful when the infants want to go to their chambers.
And sometimes this sudden swelling of wound or abscess comes; it is necessary to cover that sudden thing: if it is treated, if we have spoken about the treatment of a pointed cane.
of the fistula from the bottom foundation Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are nodulation, and those that come from beneath the foundation of the furrow, or in the space of the two parties,
if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodulation is old, it works, and in the meantime moisture accumulates white or subtle swelling,
and often these are stubborn fistulas; and they are recognized by the fact that they burst out or evacuate or flatulence when the patient makes evacuation, and sometimes it happens suddenly.
And if there are fistulas that reach just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and they reach just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the knee.
And thus one recognizes the stubborn fistula at the foundation, and it does not diminish. and it is that you apply your index finger to the foundation, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has twistedness, if you apply a subtle probe of lead, or a horsehair, as long as you feel the probe or hair on your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come with a gentle pushing effort nor windiness nor truth, as we have said; know that it does not penetrate much; if you hasten to cure it.
And when the fistula is next to the bladder or next to the urinary tract, if it suppresses the urine, and cannot be helped by medications.
If it is pierced up to the joint of the thigh, then it is the tense vein coming up to the loins; if there is no twistedness and the discovery of pain within, then it is that it should be bowed inwards, and no medicine is suitable except by anointing;
and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure unless through work, and the foolish doctors who get involved with them.
In those that are not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced.
and it is that the patient places himself between your hands on his back; and he lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs bent towards his belly; then put a straightening device of iron, or of wood if it has twistedness, until you know where the device comes.
If the patient feels it in his foundation, then it is necessary that you put your right index finger,
if you then feel that the device has penetrated; and it is discovered where you feel between your finger and the skin or flesh, then you know that it is perforating. if one does not treat it, one cannot heal it.
One can almost always heal some, but this happens rarely.
and the help that one does, if it is that one has carefully applied the subtle fire according to the width of the fistula, as it was said before. and insert the hot iron into the fistula, until it reaches the bottom; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these cauterized scars are raised, which resemble a bird's feather.
and then the treatment of many wounds in a muddy place, so that those wounds are open, then the treatment of joints by anointing and congealing.
If it is thus healthy, it is good. If it is not, it cannot be otherwise healthy;
and hold it between, and do not pierce just to the finger which is at the bottom, and between your finger and the holding a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula at that which shows the covering of the finger; if you touch the beginning of the fistula, and cut just before the holding, and then apply the cautery, so that it reaches the head of the holding;
and it will be delivered the tent, and it will fall; then I will show you those withered fingers that seem a bird's claw, and none of them will remain.
And if the blood does not come to you, and it is short between you and the vein, then cauterize with fire or medicine water.
For the fire cauterizes gather many things: it is to know, the drying of those joined fingers, and the staunching of blood and the drying of moisture.
then the treatment of swollen tents in mud or in broken CHOZ ( unclear word), as long as the eyes pour forth, and it flows for the dried fingers in the mud.
then heal the wound of the fingers suddenly inflamed by a burning charcoal, and these are dry medications.
For when it is restored, it is healthy and does not relapse again.
And if a fistula comes near the fontanelle at the bottom of the foundation, and is separated from the body, then cut off your finger or foundation, and inquire about that.
If you feel the tension, and between them is the fabric or the sieve or flesh, or it is near to piercing, if there are no fewer ways than the path of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
where you apply the cautery as we have said, or you cut just to the bottom, or if you can set in place and treat as at first;
and do not go too deep in the fontanel, so that you do not cut the tendon that holds the foundation, and come to the evacuations by way of the voluntary sense; then treat, as we have said;
then treat, as we have said; perhaps it will be healthy, or you will remove that covering and the bandage then that it is cut from the foundation, or by tente or by another sharp instrument; then I will define the faulty vein which is in the wound, as much as you can;
then I will study how to restore the wound, and to hold back the fistula in the defective part underlying the foundation: if it is easier for the patient.
And often are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you apply the tents to the fistula, and it is where the thickness of the foundation beneath the skin above, if you take a perforated tent according to this form at the head: And thrust the thread into the fistula, setting it to the entire thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is pierced in the margin of the bottom fundament inside, then pull out the thread of that perforation, so that you thrust your finger or fundament;
and pull the head of the thread, and join the fistulae together, and hold one to the other, and let it be in the morning or fistula;
and restrain it no more than once, so that the threads grasp those flesh that are between two, and cicatrize.
Then heal the wound until it is sewn and healthy.
If the fistula does not penetrate, make it penetrate in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep inside.
For it does not suit to make a copper plate for the dressing if it is deep inside, and then heal it, as we have said, until it is healthy.
The shape of the spinal vertebrae from which one makes the fistula is very close to a part and separates. and on the other hand not, because one should not touch what one should not touch, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids are in two kinds of manners: either they are deep inside the fundament, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they suddenly burst forth with blood, and there is one or more, and they are located at the bottom of the fundament and at the head of the fundament; but those that are located below have little moisture,
and immediately afterwards apply a small amount of citrine water or a small amount of blood, and they have the color of the body's humor;
and the treatment of those who have them deeply in the foundation, if it is that you instruct the patient to stretch out on a bedchamber, until the foundations issue forth, and the threads appear; if you hurry, and you hold it as with pincers, or you hold it at your finger, then you cut into its roots;
and the uncleanness cannot hold them by their moisture, if they take them in a drapil, or a cushion, or a piece of camlet; and hold them at your fingers, then touch, and sprinkle above some warm powders that are in the fire of cautery; where you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then heal with other treatments until they are healthy;
and if the foundations cannot be opened, then cleanse the patient with a sharp and bitter clusters to wash what is in the foundation, so that it can open freely;
when the patients take hold, and their veins are outside the foundation, then it is a light treatment; and it is that you prick them with your finger or nails, and cut, then heal as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear not the incision by iron.
It is necessary that you make the suture in this manner: take a twisted thread, and put it on a needle, and then draw the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle. and if it is too large; and hold the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do thus for all the others, and leave one there to correct the excessive flow of blood;
then put on the foundation a dressing of milky oil or rose oil or cerate, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then let it rest until it heals, and when they are healed, if they receive treatment of ointment and other treatments, until they are healthy.
you should cleanse the wounds or basis Many times there is cleansing of wounds in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is of no value.
It is necessary that you raise to the point of a spatula or on one nail the scab which does not allow it to moisten. then the treatment as long as it is swollen thus as it is necessary;
and if it cannot be treated, then recommence the rubbing more strongly than before, as long as it hurts a lot, and becomes scarred; then the treatment as long as it is healthy.
because of trembling A blister is a small faulty appearance against the body, and goes very much deep inside;
and sometimes it finds the frost, and one feels it as if dead from cold, and it comes into all of the body, and more in the hands than other parts.
And the treatment is that you take a thread of a bird's feather, or a strong thread from a wild duck, and put that thread on the frost, so that the circles thoroughly encircle the frost all around. then turn your hand all along the thread so that you encircle all around the frost, and put it deep inside, and tear out the frost from its roots.
And if you see, make a cane of iron or copper in this form, and be subtle underneath and straight above.
do not pierce, for you must hold at the finger, and press; And if you see, cauterize the fremited place, as it is before or in front of the chapter of cautery.
of the form of the cluster Never make a cluster of silver or copper, or of molten iron or steel; and never make these small and large instruments, according to the ones that are prepared for them.
Here is the translation:
The shape of the small and large cluster is above width, where the belly is tied according to this manner:
and it has a separation where the belly is tied, as you see, and the chest is perceived from within; and it has a perforation on one of the sides, .ij., and on the other, .i.
and let the belly be where one puts the medicines of a beast's bladder or parchment, and let it be perceived all around with many small perforations,
and let there be between each perforation .i. a space of an inch, then put in these perforations .i. strong thread made from twisted thread, twisted in .x. or around, and assemble the belly as if it were a sack; and when the medicine is inside, if one takes the thread in front of a strong wire, then cauterize; and that's the form of a circle ring.
And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the cauterized area with oil or egg whites, or similar things, then apply it lightly.
then the minister presses with his two hands together, so that it be completely visible, then extract the cauterized area, and lift the patient's legs to the partition.
and if the medicine wants to issue forth, let it flow as much as it can; and if it sleeps one night completely, it is a greater aid.
And if you treat him for a disease of bowel decay, and the medicine hastens to issue, then recommend it as long as he is healthy.
And if the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or an abscess, then let the enema be as subtle as for a child.
and it is the form of the subtle enema on whom the skin is held back:
of wounds
We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you the treatments by hand and by medicine, according to accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they were made, and according to the locations or where the wounds were made, and of what they were made.
The things by which wounds were made are by thrust of stone, and cut of sword and of dagger, or of lance or of stick or of arrow, or of similar things;
or which were made according to the locations of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you about the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory comes back to its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if you take care it's a matter of stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is great, and you doubt the aposteme's heat: if you make it healthier on the cephalic side at once, even if there is little blood from the wound, and let the healing be opposite to the injured part;
and abstain the patient from repletion of wine and coarse meats.
And if he does not want to heal, let his food be diminished, and let him drink no wine, nor eat any meat;
and apply to the wound, where abscesses are coming, a cotton cloth soaked in rose oil or wine steeped in it;
and if there is no abscess forming, apply to the wound, so it is fresh and whole with its blood, and not moved by air or powder, which I will discuss a little later;
and if the wound is moved, apply to it some ointments, so that it may be healthy.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by tugging, if they are assembled by stitching, as I will say about wounds of the belly, from the stitching.
If the wound is uncovered from the bone, and it stinks, and holds on only to a little, if it suppurates; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard skin in place of skin. and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as broths and roasted meats, also as poultry, and similar things.
And if you find decayed skin or rotten flesh, and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut out all the rot, and throw it away, then cure it.
and if he has wounded in the wound or vein, which without delay, and it cannot be staunched by medicines, so you should tie the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then bind it with a thread. and if this does not benefit him, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which soothes thus that the wound has moved.
And the manner of the powder is this: take incense, one part; dragon's blood, two parts; living chalk, three parts, and powder subtly. and fill in the wound, and hold it firmly, until it heals well and joins with all its blood;
and then bind it well, and leave it unbound, so it does not swell; for one does not stop the medicine until it is healthy.
And never does one make a poultice of hot chalk alone, when one has not heated the blood of dragon, but rather that the arsenic has not moved the wound.
And if the arsenic has moved the wound, meanwhile in this state, then do not put this powder on it.
but apply to some digested ointments, or poultices made of wheat flour and honey, so that it pours forth well; then the treatment of other treatments until they are healthy.
And if the breakage of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers;
and I will tell you about the breaks of the head afterwards.
of the wound of the neck
The wound comes to the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between this and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it is the nerves, then there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment, and not to put anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat. and not to put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be soothing, as you heat it in gentle water, and mix it with rose oil, and cook it also in gentle water, and other mines of a similar kind, and apply moist unguents.
And if the wound is large, sew it up with bandages, then treat it until it is healthy.
And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, prick or pierce at a lower level;
and if the artery is cut, and blood flows out, then it dries up, and heals, and the cautery skill is a profession;
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the arteries, and the conducts are guarded, through which the food goes, if you cut the artery on the vein of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then strain it strongly, and leave it some days, then cure the wounds of excess flesh as much as it is healthy;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, seek it; and if it has broken bones, if you treat them as you can, and those that you cannot have, let them be until the wound ripens; and let it be drained and aligned with the outlet;
and if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on the powder that I have mentioned. And if it has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
of the wound of lance or of knife
If it is a blow of lance or of knife, and the wound is very deep, then consider whether the wound has become putrid, as soon as the patient complains: know then that the wound is mortal.
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put the powder at the first hour, nor bind it with a bandage that does not stop the bleeding. and look at the body, and observe the patient. but I put an attractive ointment on it, and apply it several times a day;
and if you do not have ointment, put much cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture,
and make the patient sleep on the wound several days, two, three, or more; if there comes no spasm, nor evil tremor of heart, nor signs of bad alignment; and when you see the good dispositions, if you know that the wound is saved. Heal the wounds with tents and other treatments, until they are healthy;
and if it cannot heal, and it is an ulceration, then you know that there is a fistula; if the treatment is as one must do it.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or in the chest or back, then treat what is in front.
If it is large, of cauterization; and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has taken hold of pieces, so that the wound heals, and the badly set bones are reset. and if they are not reset, let the wound putrefy, so that it lightens the extractions;
and of other wounds as other limbs are the judgments, as we have said.
for the rupture of the abdomen
The ruptures of the belly are great and middling and small;
from the great wound sometimes the intestine, or the veins of the intestines, because of the internal obstruction;
and the stitching is more troublesome, and sometimes it is better to have a small wound than a large one;
because one has to reset the intestines in place, so that they are not displaced from hot to hot; Because the intestine swells as soon as it feels cold, if it returns to points,
and because of this it is necessary to treat the affected area, for that reason one must reposition the intestine to its place like the others.
And know that the rupture of the belly is in four manners:
the common injuries occur in the injury of the belly,
and the injury of other wounds of the body and four other proper injuries are common to other wounds;
and they are more prone with the stitching of the belly, and I will describe one and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine is outside, and grievous thing is to restore it, this is by one of the two manners: or by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, where because the intestine is weakened by the cold.
And when it is chilled, warm it in some manner: soak a sponge or a bundle of cloth in hot water, then apply it gently, where you cook in hot water squatting and cypress and spike, and raise the intestine until the swelling goes down;
and often do these restraining winds, and it is wonderful that we relieve the soul by reducing the inflammation.
And when you see the swelling go away, moisten the intestine with water or wine and evil humors are cured, for it is aligned with the entry of a little thing;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small wound at the instrument where one gathers the blood vessels;
and the first treatment is to remove what is excessive in the cutting, that we should not cut unless there is great need for it;
and these are the instruments for making an incision:
if you cut within the curve and do not dig too deeply, and see there the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, if you put it back in place according to its natural form in its own proper place, look at it with care, for that is worth much.
When the wound is large, and it is on the lower part beneath the belly, it is necessary that you lay the patient on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and it is in the lower part beneath the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the injured parts. if you place them in a way that the injured part is higher than the other;
and thus it is necessary to administer what I say for great wounds and injuries.
Small wounds heal when they are well-dressed,
then you hold them in your hands, I mean a pitiful minister who pulls out the entire bandage with his hand, and brings together the lips; and it is the common way of stitching,
and it is the common way of stitching, and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound, I do not spare, and I fix a needle or it has a strong thread; and pierce the skin with the skin of the siphos,
then strain with a double thread within the needle of the said vein, then gather the eleven heads of the wound in a convenient way,
and then let the tenth finger of space, and fix another needle; then you thread the cord just as you did the first needle and do not cease from doing so according to what you have mastered of the needles until all the wound is restrained
and let the needles be moderate, between subtle and coarse because the subtle needles pierce all the flesh, and those that are too large cannot enter well: for it is necessary that they be blunt;
and it is not necessary to push the needles too deeply into the flesh and soft skin,
so that they do not pierce and open up the wound before the suture;
and then cut the heads of the veins, so they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and I hold taut or wrap around the heads of the veins to keep them steady, and let them be until the wound is sewn;
and this manner of cutting the veins is more suitable for small wounds, because he suffers from a needle or .ij.
The second injury is common, and it is that you gather the .ij. heads of skin and the .ij. heads of soft flesh together at a needle or where it has a strong thread in the middle; and when you have pierced these heads all together,
and when you have pierced these heads all together, if you reset the needle to the part where you started, in the manner that one cuts the threads;
and put a space between each stitch the thickness of a smaller finger;
this stitch suits the man,
and I sewed up a wound that one had in the belly,
who was wounded by a lancet and it was a wound more than a palm in size, and it was well into the intestines, about two palms of size,
and it was a wound in the belly. I restore the intestine then when it has been still 23 hours, for
and the wound was sewn shut just until 15 days, and it was cured, and it was healthy.
And the doctor had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and did not cure him with ointment, for I stood in a place where one found no medicine; and apply a gentle pressure more on the wound cotton very often in a day, and the washing of water and honey until it was healthy.
Now I will tell you the proper ways of stitching:
Take the needle and sew up the part that is torn just to the depth within;
when it has pierced the skin straight on, if you have sewn up the head of the siphaeus or the stitching or where you have sewn with the needle,
and have them pierce another part of the inner section just up to the outer layer;
and the understanding of this treatment is that you sew as the furrier makes the skins, and let one side of it dry for a while, and then take it up again, until the treatment is completely accomplished.
The second method of treatment, which Galen properly describes,
If it is so, like a fountain, which naturally assembles the damaged parts together. and apply one head to another head, in such a way:
fix a needle or head of a probe near the affected limb, and make it pierce only the area that is swollen. and let the damaged heads of the joint be restored. Then turn the needle, and make it pierce the weak part just up to the depth within. as it clears the syrupy thick liquid;
then make them pierce one and the other of the weak part just up to the depth within, in the other thick liquid of the mirach that are on the other side;
and it is the mother manner of stitching and the most common.
Galens says this passage, and no one bears witness to it.
one must cauterize the belly with three needles, or have a thread in each one;
and one must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew up wounds;
and know that when the rupture is within the belly, if it is the wound most grievous than the other wounds of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of the other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound in all its blood, thus showing that the art has moved, if you reset the intestine and the gut; then put on the powder of irritating charcoal,
if you reset the intestine and the gut; then put on the powder of irritating charcoal, and if he has moved his arm, put it back into its proper joint, as long as the wound is swollen; and cut the phlegm, and be careful of the skin, and the membrane; then treat the wound as you would others, until it is healthy;
and if you do not have medicines, put them on, as soon as the wound begins to fester, abundantly; and let him move his arm often during the day so it may be healthy.
For you have no need of other medicine in many conditions since the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will not affect the principal members, then it is necessary that you apply a light ointment of tempered heat, or in an ointment of rose oil, and put them between the fingers, and beneath the soles;
and if he feels pain or pruritus in the belly, and often it happens, if they give a cluster of red wine tepidly, and meanwhile the pruritus reaches just up to the intestine;
and they perceive it within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine that is called "hungry" cannot heal when it is wounded, and it's because of the weakness of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the approximation of its natural tendencies.
And if the wound's crust falls off, set it back in place just like the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and has turned towards black or green, then you must lie down the black humour that comes from the blood, which descends into it; for there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligament, and put the joints in place during the procedure below the wound until it is ready to be aligned, as the nerves and veins are freed, and the wound is prepared.
from the rupture of the belly
When the intestine is swollen, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in some ways,
because I saw that a man was wounded or pierced in the belly by a spear;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and was swollen and became fistulous, and thus he felt nausea and windiness;
I applied a treatment according to what I could do, and did not stop subtling until he was healthy, and the limbs were sound.
And when I saw him sound, I doubted that the patient had a bad humor in his belly; and he had no pain, but remained in better dispositions, and eating and drinking;
and they say that certain experimenters claim that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied off in some manner: take firm grips on large wounds, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the grip has opened the mouth, then place it on the two lips,
then put another foment on afterwards in the same way as before, until the wound is completely covered;
and sew up the wound. If the head sticks in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient,
and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is cut from the intestine of a beast,
in such a manner: take the head of this intestine thread that should be much loosened, and then tie it to the head of this thread, i.e., a subtle twisted thread of flax, Then thread the filament into the needle, and sew up the intestine, and reset it in its proper place.
and this manner of stitching wounds is not done except according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and large, especially when it is in one of the gut intestines, so there is no ingenious way to heal it, except with subtlety.
of a fistula or wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it swells up, is universally called a "fistula". and similarly when it is hairy and renders a bud.
And a fistula is according to the vertebra's hard, rough, and white nodulation, where one does not feel pain. and it is also hairy like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes in a clear burn, and sometimes dense; and sometimes little, and sometimes enough;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not clean, and there is no flesh; it is not except by one of the eight causes:
it is to know, by the small passage of blood or body; or through its malice; or because there is hard flesh inside, and on the lips, which does not let bad flesh grow; or where there is too much swelling; where the lesion is putrid, and the material is of bad quality; where the medicine is not good in the treatment; where because the corruption is a kind of pestilence; where the property in the region is slow in digestion, and slow in health, and weak by nature; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or it is necessary that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula which is done by hand operation.
Know that a fistula has in all tender parts of the body; because there are fistulas that come to the big veins, and to the arteries, and to the nerves, or in the spleen, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in one of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is no remedy but labor, and ignorance;
and if it happens that there is no fistula that does not approach exactly to the place I have told, and you have confidence in the cure, and you examine it, if you take a straight rod of iron or steel, the fistula is straight, if it is so;
and if the fistula is twisted, seek it with a subtle probe of lead; for the hairs grow flat within the twistedness;
and you should make a fistula with perforated hands and you cannot search it well by feeling, if you touch it with one of the perforations,
for the moisture flows from one perforation to another, and it becomes cloudy;
Then you should examine your power to know if it has bone or nerve, and is covered in the front.
and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it;
and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is near a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, cut according to what I have told you,
or in any of the places that I have told you, cut according to what I have told you, and burn for the putrid matter and the corrupted flesh that is within; and then the treatment until it is healthy,
and if the fistula is well perforated in the right place, then you should cut through deeply, as much as you can, then I apply gentle medications for the ague, and the poultices just at the head of the fistula,
then I apply gentle medications for the ague, and the poultices just at the head of the fistula, as long as the medicine corrodes the excess which is remained at the bottom;
and then he puts ointments on the healthy flesh, so that it be healthy;
and if it is not healthy by this, then cautery it as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut into it. If a vein or principal nerves are not causing you grief or harm, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is decay and blackness, so let the ruler remove as much of the decay as possible; then heal the things that are wounded as much as it can be healthy;
and if it is not healthy, and return to the beginning as before, You know that you are not able to move just then:
if it reveals itself and you ask as much as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the joint;
and if it is thus healthy, that's good. If you do not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot come to it; if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can treat it with tourniquets, if the extraction is done with an instrument suitable for this,
and if he has many bones, if they are all extracted, do not leave a single one;
and if moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, if you cut and moisten and flesh, and release the bones.
And if you cannot dislodge them within an hour, then place on the wound a poultice that induces rotting, and let them be so that the yellowness is around the bones,
and then they will have less difficulty with the bones;
and if it is a large bone, such as a thigh or a shin, if you remove so much of the corrupted matter that the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of the decayed corpse, and it reaches close to the marrow of the bone; if it is necessary to clean and cover everything up to the corrupted area, and then treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, if you prepare an example and help with your work.
It was a young man of twenty years old, who had pain in his leg for a reason that came from within the body,
so that the humors went to the leg, and it was inflamed with a large abscess, and there was no way to remove the cause by opening;
but the doctor, in their foolishness, opened so widely that the abscesses opened, and they run much of matters, and become fistula, and they come much of perforations that all glide smoothly and moisture of the body;
and many a mirror mirrored cure within these years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands,
until I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated, and those that run through the perforations to a large body; and the body of the young boy becomes red, and has a yellowish color.
I thrust a tent into one of these pores, and then sought out all the pores,
and found that some came against others from all parts of the leg.
I hastened then, and cut into one of the pores as much as I discovered a part of the bone, and he found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came just up to the bone within;
I saw that which appeared to me from the corrupted bone, and I believed there was no other corruption, except for that which I stopped;
and I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines, applying them gently for a long time, and could not soothe;
and then I recommenced, and discovered the bone as it was before;
and I found the continued corruption in the bone, and the swelling, and then the ostosis, and I thought to reunite the limb;
but I could not do more than cupping on a palm of the bone, and the traitor flees all his moisture, then I restored him with medicines; and he was quickly healed and relieved soon after,
and it did not need to recommence the work for a long time because of the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer, and for the fear of death that I had of him. For the evacuation of blood is often unsuccessful, but it was completely healthy,
For the evacuation of blood is often unsuccessful, but it was completely healthy, and a hard crust formed on the wound, and it was of good disposition and had no hindrance or contradiction at all, neither in going nor in coming.
and stop the blood flow, so that you extract the corrupt skin from below, and uncover the skin above the joint where you saw the swelling, so that the swelling does not affect the skin; and put a splint or a bandage beneath the bone for protecting the corrupt flesh; and it is necessary to sew as one can see and feel the corruption, and to sew again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, if the flesh is entirely uncovered; then put a splint beneath,
and then let it be from one part to the other the corruption, and let the sewer of the length of the corruption be few, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut off the corrupted joint, and let the bone or it contains from the other part;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the joints, then there is no other remedy than to cut off;
and if the corruption is on the finger of the hand, or on the toe of the foot, it is very strongly attached; but you must inquire about that corrosion, how it appears to you; and examine it in all the ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve contradict you;
and know that the incisors and the nerves for coping with these bones are many, according to the alignment of the bones and the appearance of the joints, and their thickness and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare each similar instrument of operation;
and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the methods for diseases; if you prepare the instrument you will need, according to what it requires.
for fire The head bursts out either because of denseness or because of fervor;
and when you have medicated that corrosion through the treatment of medicines, and it does not improve at all, then you should couple that member up to the place or where the corrosion comes from, if the patient escapes by means of death, or through spite, which is greater, than the defect of the limb;
if the patient escapes by means of death, or through spite, which is greater, than the defect of the limb; and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire, and afterwards there is numbness after the blackening, then it spreads to corrosion of limb after limb, and it takes over the whole body; if you hasten to amputate,
and it is by the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar ones,
the corrosion is at the finger's tip, thus the blame, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, thus the blame at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach up to the arm;
and if it reaches the arm, thus the blame at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death. and there are no better remedies than the quantity of its virtue;
and all this is done when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then it seizes after another joint;
and if it comes to the foot, it seizes the entire foot; and if it rises in the leg, then it seizes at the knee joint;
and if it comes from above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the patient die.
and the manner of copper or of sewing the limb is such that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister on one of the lower ligaments, and another minister on the other upper ligament, and you dissect the flesh that is between the two ligaments to a spacious width, so that the bone may be uncovered;
then place a dressing or bandage, and put a linen cloth on each part, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy skin, and let it come to the patient for another wound and abscess healing.
And if a flow of blood comes when you operate, then cauterize the skin hastily, or you put on some retaining powders; then return to your medicine until it is accomplished,
Then let the numb member recover with a convenient bandage, and treat it until it is healthy.
and I will count it as if he had a wound in his own foot:
he had a black spot that seemed to be burned by fire,
and that corrosion came first into his toe on his foot, so much that it took over the whole foot;
and when the man sees the corrosion, if he hastens to cover the foot, and it was healed;
and long afterwards the corrosion returned on the hand, or on the arm, and it came to me,
and I applied things that rebounded after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corroisons;
and it seemed to me that I covered the hand, and I did not want, that I had hope of rebounding the material; and fear also that he may cut off his hand, so it does not die. for the veins of the man were weak; and he despaired of all, and returned to his land, and he hastened to amputate his hand, and was healthy;
and I have not seen it happen except for the fact that one does something else, so one has mastery over it.
Here is the translation: and then they roar and burst, and the belly swells, and their eyes become dim, just like some vessels; and the skin which is above is as subtle as a thin piece of cloth, and they do not run to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such an illness is called "healthy",
but if it is so elongated that it comes just to the bone in the foreground, then it is called a "fistula";
and the skin if it is that you take off all around, and similarly when it is subtle, just like a thin layer; and do not be mistaken because of its corruption.
And if you find that the skin is wounded, and the corruption is not in the foreground, and the skin is thick with flesh, if the treatment of the clyster thus:
look at the sins are large, and the flux that comes from it is of foul odor, then the clysterization of Egyptian medicine which is thus made: take sage, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put skin in the vessel at the fire, as long as the medicine is red, and it thickens like honey;
and then take from that according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and cleanse the wound, and hold back the pus; and let the medicine stay there for two hours, then extract it by sprinkling;
Do this many times, until the breast is swollen, and the pus is released.
and it is never clarified with water of ashes, when this medicine is not available, and it is that you take ashes from the wood of a vine, and throw water on top,
then strain, and clarify, until you know that the breast is well swollen;
and if the patient cannot endure it, neither Egyptian medicine nor ash of cinders if they are treated with a mixture of water and honey or if they have a little bit of litharge in powder; or you treat it with a mixture of honey and wine, which has the properties of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the wound dry;
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the senses are well purified, if you clarify what makes the flesh grow in them,
and it is that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine; where you clarify some medicines and ointments, whose properties or treatments of the ointments I have mentioned;
and if the pierced skin of the back is small, and the vein of the cluster cannot enter, if you widen a little with an iron, and put in a tent of Egyptian stitching, or royal stitching, so that it may be widened;
and if the wound is too large, then sew and leave it slightly loose, so that the cluster or the vein can enter,
and if they pierce where the swelling is above, so apply the cupping or lower than where it is. For when the swelling is in the front, then do not let it be pushed back; and if you cannot cup the underlying seat thus as you have seen, if it appears in such a way that the swelling runs to the lowest place where it is,
and if you cannot cover the seat of the womb below as you saw, it appears in such a manner: that the belly collapses lightly downwards, and does not leave anything of the belly; and take consolidative medicines to put on the womb,
and stand above the drapery of the loincloth that covers the whole breast; then grasp with force at the spot of the nipple of the breast, a little larger than the first one, then there is a gentle pressure above on the other drapery according to the quantity of the nipple, and place it above the nipple of the breast to align the bow, and do not remove the large drapery unless after many days once;
and he who is above the perforated breast, often opens by opening the cavity, and know that which runs from the cavity, whether it is venom or little or enough, or digested, or undigested;
and take heed of the patient's feelings of pain or name, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has been extended in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps above the perforated breast, If you know that the senses are hurt already, and approach the saints;
and then disentangle it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you disentangle the wound, if you change to another dressing, and renew the binding.
And if the senses throw away indigestible matter after many days, know that the senses are not hurt. And if you come subtly to a long tension, do not despair of health.
For the health approaches. For it is men who slow down the healing of their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
and if the bowel indigests itself for many days after much work, know that the senses are not troubled;
and if the senses slow down to understand, and it is delayed, then apply medicines which are moist in substance and dry in virtue; If one's treatment is defective, because it has a large part of glass, and it's the last resort medicine.
Take defective treatment, and make it with rose oil, and the extract of old wine equal in substance;
then cook it and use it; and this same mixture makes honey cooked into a thick paste, when defective treatments are not present,
where you take mirre and aloe and incense, and the broth, and dust on honey when it is above the fire; and then in glueing, I drag, and it sticks to the breast, and often an Aristologist administers for a long time, and roots of celestial lily, which is also like flour of veins and a hundred;
and roots of celestial lily, which is also like flour of veins and a hundred; and in use of simples or compounds: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and in use; and if the treatment is prolonged, and it is not cured by this treatment,
and if the treatment is prolonged, and it is not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption is in depth, and makes an impression on the bone, or the hard members, or the ligaments; if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the finger
A boil is an abscess that grows beneath the nail of the thumb. or on the foot, or by chance it grows on other toes;
and when it is inflamed, and one does not take care, if it comes to an abscess of the sole, and corrodes and gnaws away until it corrodes the root of the nail, and by chance it corrodes the whole thing;
and there come the ulcers up to the bone, as far as they bring putrid pain, and the head of the finger is swollen and large, and the color is dark.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you cut to the fair flesh, removing all the superfluity which is more than the ankle, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is a great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses on the flesh in, and it begins to prick, and the blister, then you must put the straight edge underneath the nail that does not touch the flesh, and the end above, and cut subtly and lightly into the flesh, and apply to the remaining flesh of the wound burning and corroding medicines to expel everything;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut around it, and remove the decayed part, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed;
and if you see the decayed part corrupting, cut around it in this way, just as it was said before; then heal him until he is healthy;
and if he is feverish, and swollen, and he feels great pain, then it is necessary to heal him first; then cut the finger at the joint of the thumb, cutting across above;
and beware that the cut does not go too close to the flesh which is beneath the finger, for the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it happens, put something soothing on it.
The two fingers that are born in the hands of certain men by chance are all numb, and by chance it has a piece or bone, and never an nail,
and none of them grow at the root of the joint, where growth is in no way from the fingers. Those that grow on no knuckle of the toe do not move, and those that grow at the joint of the toe, perhaps move;
the size of one who is wounded is light, in such a manner: Cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: if you hold it too tightly, you cooperate.
In he who is born or should be in the rear, it is necessary that you cut around the round flesh just up to the bone. Then cut the bone to a suitable size for that, then treat it until it is healthy.
The sudden pains that come together come from birth, or from sudden injury, or from fire burn, or from similar things.
It is necessary that you cope with this pain, if the finger must be repaired according to its natural forms. then put between two tents or moistened drapes in rose oil, so they do not become painful. or you put between two pieces of subtle plaster, so that the wounds are joined, as it is necessary.
Here is the translation:
Bad humors
They are bad veins full of superfluous melancholic fluids that come from many parts of the body;
and they have more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry, than others.
It is necessary then that you apply no further purging of the colon, and then the healthy regime of the basilica.
The treatment with iron is according to seven methods: one is that they cut, and they draw out the black blood; and another method is that you open a vein, and draw out all the blood.
The surgical strike is according to this method: raise the first leg of hot water very strongly, so that the gross blood is subtly separated, then stretch the leg of the patient down from the thigh just to the part beneath the knee; then cauterize the vein in the left arm, or in the right arm, or in the third arm, of a large size,
then bleed and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one vein to the other, until as much blood as the virtue of the patient can suffer;
and then lay it down, and instruct him to abstain from eating black bile-inducing foods;
and recommend the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and do not harm the patient.
Here is the translation: then put him in a bath, and the swollen leg becomes red and hot, and inflates the veins;
and if you have no bath, heat him with fire, and then cover the vein from the loin to the knee joint, or in the part below the thigh;
then open the skin at the ankle, and scrape the vein of each part, until it appears when one feels it;
and you see it red and black, and when it enters under the skin it seems like a white cord;
Then apply the rule beneath, so that it is elevated from the skin, and then attach it to the onion's handle.
Then shape it in another way, thus two inches; then strip the skin from the vein so that it appears, Then lift it to the root, as you have done, and attach it to another uncle, as you had done previously;
Then shape another size, or more if you have mastery of it, then lift it, and shape it to the toe of the foot.
then burn with fire up to the second joint; then strip of joint in joint, as far as it goes entirely into fury, then the scab.
and if you cannot burn and raise, if you insert a needle everywhere, with a strong double thread. and burn and raise, and insert beneath, with a straight needle, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it goes in; and be careful that it does not suppurate, for if it suppurates, you cannot burn or raise, and it comes to harm the patient;
and when you have treated it all, put on the place of the wound a molten lead in wine and rose oil; and heal until it is healthy.
And if the veins are contracted and twisted and enveloped together, and they are not straight, as we have said, then it is necessary to bend them gently, but do not cut them off; and treat them as we have previously stated.
then it is necessary to bend them gently, but do not cut them off; and treat them as we have previously stated. The shape of the iron instrument with which one cuts the veins is curved, and does not cut too deeply, so that it does not cut into the vein.
and it is of thick curvature, for if it was subtle, it would seize the vein, but it is thick as we have said, and this is the form:
Of the civil vein
This vein is located in the legs, in warm areas where there are no herbs nor trees, and in earth where there is no moisture;
and perhaps it grows another part besides the legs, and this comes from the putrid matter that comes from under the skin,
as it comes within the body of snakes and worms, you will find between skin and flesh.
And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then it changes its location, and begins the vein to issue forth, just like a root of a plant.
When the head opens, it is necessary that you envelop with a piece of cloth around one and a half inches up to the nail, and the knee.
and let the poultice be on the leg, and every time it is not on the defect, if the envelop wraps around the poultice, and the tumor; and if it is too long, if you cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut into its root, until it is entirely separate; for if you cut into it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess and putridity or pus, and a bad disease;
because of this, it is necessary that it be treated little by little just to the head, and nothing remains or decays;
and it is sometimes this vein when it is treated with five points of a hand, or ten. and a vein comes to me, from which it issues from ten points of a hand's length, and when you cut it, if you find a bone or pierced place, and pierce it just to the bottom,
if all of it issues; and let the material that is within be evacuated, and apply to the wound medicines which induce purging without any delay, then cure it as with abscesses.
And sometimes at this vein many roots, and similarly when it opens into the joint of the foot, or where the foot. and there comes much of perforations, and where it jumps veins; heal the wounds thus as we have said before.
Of veins that grow between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "ox disease", because it often affects the oxen,
and it is a small vein that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body ascending and descending, and he will feel well along the alignment of limb by limb, as long as they straighten the skin or it heals, and thus be cured;
and it is caused by bad digestion of certain humors, if they come forth as worms and snakes and lice and roundworms in the belly;
and doubt not of its evil, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, perhaps it returns, and destroys the eye; and this has happened many times.
When you want to cure and treat, if one cannot force it except when it goes:
then it is necessary that you bind the limb above and below with a strong and tightly wrapped bandage,
then cut above and the arm is strong, and if the vein is deeply in the flesh, and you do not find it, if you cauterize with fire above, until it dies;
and the greatest harm it does, if it runs to the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye, hold the eyebrow firmly, then press on it, and pull it back;
and it is suitable to use the patient's purification of the body with medicines that dissolve bad humor pores,
and beware of rotten meat causing putrefaction.
From the pain that comes from flatulence This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to certain members, and then it moves from member to member; and I have seen what I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered a swollen arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm;
and afterwards, he will soon raise his eyes as if to a shoulder, more stiff than anything, as if living silver when it runs from one place to another;
the pain departs from that place, and fixes itself in the shoulder,
and then a little afterwards it ran throughout the whole body, until it came into the other arm;
then I account for her who turns inward towards the body, as I saw it.
I was very amazed at how she moved thus from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner. However, I had seen that many had wanted to move the pain from one place to another, but I had not seen it, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins, and because of this, it seemed that her windiness was constrained;
and it didn't appear to me according to this reason in those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and reopened veins.
And when you want to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, it appears thus as we have said, If you hold above and below firmly, and then press on it as much as that swelling constrains the blood flow there; and cauterize the spot; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
if you treat those who burst the swellings, as if foul pills, and serpent's pills, and similar others.
Of arrows
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they settle.
Their diversity is that there are those which have large points, and small ones, and notched, and hollowed out. and of those which have sharp angles, and of those which have lengths, and of those in which there are fragments; and that which settles in no member settles according to sharp ways: either in a principal member it notches,
As brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When it falls into a bad state of these organs, and the signs of death, which I will tell you about afterwards, appear: It is fitting that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many ways. and when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
And the signs of the brain when the arrowhead is in the head and pierces the bone, and the swelling falls which is on the brain, it is when there are symptoms of scotoma and numbness and vertigo in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and permutation of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes it is without strength in the nostrils, or in the ears; and sometimes it affects speech and voice; and falls from the white moist wound resembling a poultice, and also falls out as if bruised flesh;
and if this sign appears, you will know of the treatment, and remove the arrow if it is not inside.
The signs of the arrow when it falls or pierces, are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not loose. and by chance the arrow moves as if it were a poultice, and brings forth black blood, and produces coldness and cold sweat, and fainting. then you will know without doubt that death is approaching.
And the sign of the arrow wound that does not swell the forearm is that without excessive swelling from the wound, and the throat becomes inflamed, and the patient's complexion changes, and breathes deeply and quiets the cold arthritis.
And if the arrow head remains in the covering of the thigh, it is beneath the small ribs; and it causes great anguish and great pain and breathing; and moves all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrow head remains in the stomach, perhaps it jumps from the wound some undigested food matter.
And if the arrow head remains in the belly, and it does not pass a point of feces through the intestine, then there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrowhead remains in the bladder, and the urine jumps up and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other limb, as the arm and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the forearm and the elbow and the legs, and similar members, are safe according to various dispositions. When the arrowhead is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not venomous, I will tell you what happened to me, because that is why you do something similar.
It happened to a certain man whose arrowhead fell or was stuck in the root of the nail: I touched it, and I pulled from another part beneath the fat of the ear, and it was suddenly healthy without treatment.
And I pulled out an arrowhead that had fallen into the fat of the eye beneath the papery skin, and the arrowhead was embedded, and I could not touch it except for the point towards the hollow, and it was a large arrowhead from a Turkish bow, with an entire iron shaft without any ornaments; the game was healthy, and no bad accidents happened to it.
And one takes out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was the Arabian arrow at the ears:
I softened the barbs, and I made them subtle as much as I drew it out, and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted an arrow from a man's body, which was stuck in his belly, and I thought he would die;
and then when it had passed thirty days, he did not move at all from his condition; I cut into the arrow, and I extracted it, and I treated the wound forcefully, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see a man whose arrow fell out or down, and the wound was sewn over;
and the arrow remained within him, and it did not change its natural positions, nor did I find harm in any of his natural works.
And he saw another man whose arrow had fallen on his face, and the wound was swollen.
and he suffered great pain from it; and many other similar things.
And they extracted an arrow from the king's prince's nose, which had stuck in his brain, and it was slightly leaning to the right side; and the entire arrow was deeply embedded.
I was called to the cure after it had fallen for three days. If I found the wound very constricted.
I sought to touch it with a subtle finger, and did not feel anything; and he felt a piercing pain beneath his right ear. I thought it was from the point of the arrow.
I put on the patient a well-plastered digestive tract, because the intestines are not inflamed; and it appears to me that the intestines are of the arrow.
and it appears to me that the intestines are of the arrow. I put on the plaster daily, and resolve the wound again, and thus the patient remains for a long time in good health.
until he felt the arrow, that is, a day within his nose; and it was told to me. I apply the medicine to the wound with a corrosive hand, as long as it was uncovered.
and I touched, and felt the head of the arrow which had stuck into the flesh; then I probed into the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, so much that the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me;
and it crossed well into the limits within three months,
and then scarify if the wound is that I would touch the tendons, and the muscle on one side and the other, and cannot issue;
then I did not cease to subtily and ingeniously make maneuvers of strumments, until I took them for well-made tendons. according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, so that I may extract it, and restore the wound.
And the mirror shows that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or I have told you about the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, so that you set your treatment on those things which I do not say, for the book cannot take everything into account;
but wise masters compare well a little great thing, and on those things which are present and failing, Here is the translation:
I say that arrows do not issue from the limbs where they are fixed except according to seven manners. or through the soil or they enter, or through another part;
and that which jumps forth where it enters, it's an arrow entering into the flesh, and it does not jump forth at any time now.
And if it does not jump now, let it be until the flesh is porous within, and let the issue be cleared.
and if it is stuck in the bone, and it cannot exit, then leave it thus for some days, and move it every day;
and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, then pierce all around with a subtle iron, so that the eyes around are enlarged, and then extract it.
And if the arrow is pushed back into its place in the body so that it cannot be seen, if one desires to remove it entirely; and if you feel it, if you draw it out with no suitable instrument;
and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound, and due to the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or vein, if it is so placed that the wound may be large; and draw back the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow where it holds,
and draw back the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow where it holds, If you remove the skin which is implanted with .ij. parts through the muscles that you can, and then break or bend the wings of the arrow, so that you can extract it;
and then break or bend the wings of the arrow, so that you can extract it; and subtly be careful not to break the arrow, so that you extract it more gently.
And if you cannot do it at once, let it remain until the swelling has subsided, then extract it, for the extraction will be easier. And if you find that blood is flowing contrary to what we have said about the treatment in this chapter;
and beware of incising near a nerve and vein, and do not attempt to move the arrow without danger;
whether it is twisted or straight, or firmly or loosely; and place the patient according to the position they were in when the arrow fell on them; for it is the greatest aid that it can be, and if you cannot, then place it according to what the signs show you;
The arrow that comes from another part, where it opens into something of it, or the skin is swollen in that place if one sees or feels it by touch.
Cut then upon it, so that the tongs can grasp, and then extract it: if it comes out now.
And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly, so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then extract it.
And if it cannot exit, leave it still, and then recommence the extraction until it comes out.
and if he suffers from the arrow wound, it is, he should apply the poultice to the entire wound;
and if the wound is deep, and you want to administer a poultice, if he administers it, it will hide the instrument; if the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; and then apply force;
and if the arrow is hairy, he should apply the instrument with a pointed end, to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can. then heal the wound as it covers.
And if the arrow falls in the foot or thigh or belly or bladder or side, and it is near, and you can cut above, so you cut.
and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, so that is the task. and the treatment until it is healthy.
The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
And there are many ways of them: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
of the veins of the common body Of the veins from which one bleeds are 21, because it has or is the head 16.
it is to know: there are two bones behind the ears, which are called the "herbech" twain; and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing; and the two veins that are in the eyelids of the eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose; and the small wounds that are on the column; and the small veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and the small veins that are under the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
One is the cephalic, and it is the left side of the head, and the common people call it "vein of the head". and the vein called "faste" is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is on the hollow, and it is the one that one bleeds, which appears manifestly on the skin.
And the little vein is the one that is between the thumb and the finger, and if it rains on them;
and in the leg and where the feet are, there are three veins: one is beneath the curve of the left thigh, and the second sophene which is at the ankle of the right thigh; and the vein called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side;
and on the other leg are three veins beneath these.
The health of the veins that are behind the ears helps against ancient catharrhes, and migraines; and the qualities of the healthy one, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the qualities of the healthy one, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are of a rough fabric; then strain the patient's neck to a view, as long as the eyes appear behind the ears in the eyes depending on the head: where the humps touch your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, it is a sign of an inch;
then take the lancet, and push it beneath the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand to the entire vein above, and cut and open the skin and the vein well, you must make two traverses, and let out as much blood as you see;
Then hold steady and raise it, until it is healthy;
and I have already spoken about incision and cautery in the first book.
The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is worth migrating to an ancient one, and swollen, and accustomed optometry, and with the course of the watery eyes;
and the quality of the blood, if it is so as I say: and it is that the patient stretches out his neck, so that the .ij. veins appear openly; and feel the pulse beneath your finger, and then sign of an inch;
then raise the heart to the vein above your finger's tip, and put the lancet beneath, and raise the vein high, and the cupping glass, just as you have done with other veins, and make correction of blood according to your necessity;
then anoint the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton;
and then form the scar, and let it be until it is healthy; and we have already spoken of their cupping and their extraction, where the beginning of the book commences.
The health of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the health of the cephalic veins, as for ancient facial diseases, and for migraine, and for redness;
and it is of such quality that the patient strains his neck by twisting, so much that the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", of which this is the shape:
And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; then release the patient's neck, and hold the vein until it is healthy and never again swells up with a large flame.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
and the quality of their health is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting no ligament, as before;
then the vein, and let the vein be of two traversing, a little long, a little wide, for there is no spot of flesh.
And if the veins are subtle, perhaps they break; then make correction of the blood, as much as you have mastery over it, and then place it on the cushion, and bind it well.
The veins of the vein that you take from the ague, and from severe pain, and from facial diseases, Here is the translation:
and the quality of the health is such that the patient holds his neck, then he holds his nose with his left hand. and take a subtle flame long, and insert it into the labium in the space that is between the nostrils, for the vein does not open well enough, and the blood will now start to flow;
and do not let too much blood flow in, and make the blood flow according to your need, then leave it for a night, because it is almost completely restored;
The wisdom of the twelve guides helps in the strengthening of the vein, and at the beginning of meselry, and in many diseases, and in impetigo, and in corrosions, and in herpes, and similar things;
and the quality of the wisdom is that the patients stretch their neck one way and another, as we have said; and let the masters be above the head of the patient, and the patients sit on their seat,
then sound the vein of a thumb's length somewhat broadly, then draw blood moderately, or as much as the master is;
then redo another part in the other vein, then loosen the bandage, and hold the veins moderately; so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it just until morning, so that the wound may be healthy.
About the health of the liver The wisdom of the veins above the lips is recognized by a hole in the mouth, and by decay of the gums, and cracks of the lips, and painful nose and interior.
And the quality of the wisdom is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold their neck steady as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left; and recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that within them there are small black veins: Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: If you cut the largest part of each section, and also make a similar division of the veins that are above and below, because it's a very messy way.
Of the healthiness below the tongue The healthiness of the veins that are below the tongue helps afterwards the healthiness of the head, and it's at the narrowing of the throat, and in the diseases of the eye, and in the diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the healthier one is that the patient sits between your hands before the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks below on each side for a black vein;
Here is the translation:
The veins of fire cautery, which are commonly used, are healthy according to two methods:
where they prick everywhere, it is called "flaime" widely, or subtle olive oil if they cut deeply, and it is called "anesil"; and are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowing of the veins. The shape of the "flaime" widely known, is very renowned, and is wide as you see:
And it is necessary to open the veins with a full plain flow of thick blood appearing, and which contain thick blood and turmoil; and it's the form of the flaming ulceration:
and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for cleansing the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrine blood.
The cleansing of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with the diseases that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the feet, and in the belly;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to proceed carefully, and he must beware of the artery that is underneath. And if he touches the artery, and a stream of blood comes out, then it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and one must not be pricking the flame, but cutting so as to make a scar.
And if the abscess does not open manifestly, then it is necessary that you extract it, and change to another; where you feel no pain of it, or you touch on the vein in the arm: it appears manifestly; and the scab on the flame anesthetized, as we have said.
And if you want to know the condition of the vein, then it is necessary that you stretch out the arm, so that you touch the vein as much as you can feel the pulse; then mark the vein of the wound, and then stretch out the arm, and cover the vein with a flame anesthetized;
and beware that you do not strike into the artery when you see the limb swollen, for it is of the artery: avoid this then.
And if you see it swelling upwards like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is without an artery: hasten thou then, and put thy finger on for a long time, then remove thy finger if the blood is stagnant, which often happens;
let the arm be still, and let it thus, and do not move the patient; and be on guard, and do not move them until they are healthy.
And if the wound is not stanched, and it vanishes, and the medicines are not present, then cut the artery so it opens, for the head of the veins; and stanch the wound.
And take a piece of flesh from the fistula, and make it fat, and take one of the embers and lay it well just next to the other joint;
If the wound is stanched, that's good; if not, then apply a remedy, as we have said, of powders that stanch blood.
And the stanched wounds are not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the possession of the strength of the arm.
Here is the translation: because it is composed of the basilic and the cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to beware of the nerve that lies beneath, and if he presses too hard, and he touches the nerve, and it becomes inflamed and the veins are irritated, and by chance they cannot be healed;
and this nerve is often opened many times, and if it does not open in any man by its subtlety, then it is necessary that you sharpen the instrument anew; and avoid touching the nerve with your power.
And if he has a vein between the fingers, thus they make it two inches long.
The vein of the head helps, which draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
and it is necessary to bleed at the flame olive or at the flame martian, for it is the safest of all the veins, since it has neither nerve nor artery.
However, one must seek the lightest vein, and not grievously harm oneself when one first starts, and recommences; and by chance inflame the eyes of some men, when one fails at first, but it does not grievously harm. The quality of the blood is according to your thought.
The first thing you must know about bleeding, is that bleeding is not diminished for fear of preserving health,
and to avoid future illnesses; and let the bloodletting be done on one of the three veins that are near the elbow: namely, the cephalic, the fasting, and the basilic; and one should bloodlet in the beginning of spring, and in autumn, and in winter after menstruation, when the signs of fullness appear;
and one should bloodlet on the first day or the third, after 8 hours or 3 days.
The bloodletting that is administered for the illnesses has no fixed hour determined, but rather it depends on whether the need is by day or by night, at all hours and in all tenseness.
and it is not suitable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying a fetus less than four months until the seventh month. Nor should they cauterize the old who have passed 60 years.
And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever manner it may be, then it is necessary that they evacuate the intestines of a lighter cluster. if he has much bad flatulence retained, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful humors from the principal members.
One does not heal quickly who is too full of meat, nor one who is drunk, as long as he is feverish, nor dropsical.
and it is worse to be on the way to health after a passion of colic, and vomiting, and decay of stomach, and multiple conception by a woman, and labor, watching and fasting, and all that takes away virtue, or because of the arm or doucors body;
then refine the humors, if the blood is thick, by meat and by drinks and by medications, if you have a lot of power;
then enter into a bath, where nothing does him harm, to refine the blood;
and you bleed from the vein above the third rib, as we have said;
and beware of that day's work, and of puncture, and of luxation, and of similar things;
and be gentle and joyful, and let the vein be higher than the one from which you bleed, and rub the arm twice or three times;
then extract the ligature gently, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot correct the vein;
and then rub the shoulder with the hands until the veins swell, and feel it;
then anoint the sinew with a little oil of a small amount, then place his finger of his left hand on that vein beneath the shoulder a little where it wants to heal; so that the vein does not flee and fails to be pierced. For there are veins that flee as if cords from the sinew, and if they have such ones that are full of windiness; Here is the translation:
and if he opens the vein, it is the wound that is too constricted, because it is necessary that the surgeons be skilled in these things.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or on the side, if the veins are not inflamed.
And if the veins are inflamed, and the patient is in a spasm, leave it for a day or two, and do not bind the arm: perhaps he will come to abscesses suddenly; do not enter or bathe, then recommence the treatment as it pleases him;
and if the perforation is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not issue as much blood as you see, then make a hole in the same spot with the entire flame straightaway;
and hold the egg a little hastily, so that the eyes are inflamed; for this happens many times, when the wound is small.
If you see the eye inflamed, do not recommence the bleeding, and put a little oil of olives on it, for it alleviates the body's pain of blood, and is mixed in this vein the oil that is there;
and then administer the oil of olives in each bleeding wound that you bleed the veins, to staunch the flow of blood;
and this same mixture makes a triangular and bulging shape when one places it on the limb; if one subtly senses the vein and separates it when it is too large.
And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when it is not healthy except at the time when the opening of the vein is small, if you hurry, and place on the limb a moist sponge in water and in a little warm heat, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains on the limb for some days without any blackness or greenness, it will not harm him; and if you see, put among some things of aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calendula, master, or similar.
And many times there occurs an abscess and appearance at the wound of the basilica: put your hand on it, and if you find the soft spot at the compression of the hand, it is that bad appearance. Avoid then that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for it may happen in court without an artery; but the physician makes a plaster to harden the spot, then cures with another cure, until it be healthy.
And draw each one's blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Because the patient's blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it thin out until it becomes subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it suits the one who is full and strong, and has mastery of blood extraction, so that they do not make a larger wound, and the flames are large.
and to the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits them to bleed less often, and they should be bled in a slanting cut, not in a deep puncture.
and this manner of bleeding is free from decay of blood and from rupture of a nerve, and it is better than the bleeding that is done from afar rather than from near.
And to the one whose body fails at the health, it is necessary to give a mild poultice made from juice of green apples; if it is inflamed, then draw out three or four times the bad blood.
And if it is of cold complexion, then anoint before the health a mild poultice made from musky syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and well-fragrant syrup.
And if it pains at the health, after the flow of much blood, it is necessary that he drink broth of beef, and subtle fragrant syrup.
and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of a vein.
And if he wants to anoint his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when it is weakened by great wound, that he anoints little by little, according to the quantity of its continuous virtue.
And he who wants to anoint his arm after the first healing, and it has a strong course, if he anoints seven hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
And he who wants to heal from another part, if he should anoint on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood within the body that is already heated, and it brings fever; if one wants to treat a great quantity, and enlarge the pores as much as it bursts into a sweat. Then you examine all the signs of health, and place your hand on his pulse when he is healthy, so that death does not come into his body. and this happens often, when the healers are negligent;
and it does not matter when you see the arm dislocated, and make blood flow out a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press firmly on; nor if it is curved, he stretches the arm hastily, for this would be bad;
but let it be until it heals the second time; or you touch the tip of the flame, as long as the blood that is congealed at the mouth of the vein issues forth. and put it on the small piece of silk, and press gently.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
And if it is necessary to bleed the blood a second time, let it be in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is healthy in place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the method of the healthiness is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so that the fingers become red.
then it should be bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, then the healthiness now of the crossing, neither too wide nor too long;
and let the openings be wide, and let it be healthy near the joint of the hand, and if you cannot issue from it, then put the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough.
and if it is in this state, do not reinsert the hand into cold water, because one puts it more in winter than in summer;
and the health of this vein is safer than all other veins, because there is no artery nor nerve.
The health of the little finger on the right hand is good for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
Hold the hand, and put it in cold water, until the vein is swollen, so that one can see it; and if you cross the vein, and if you cut it entirely, do not cause any grief;
and do not inject too much into the marrow, for the nerves are very close to the bare flesh,
and then put the hand in warm water, if the wound is frozen, and cannot issue forth.
And when you have drawn out as much blood as is necessary for the task, then put oil on the vein and sew it up quickly, and thus do for each wound.
The health of the hand on the left side is good for the disease of the thigh, and do everything just as I have told you about the right side.
The health of the spleen is good for all the diseases that are below the body, like diseases of the liver, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its health is that the patients throw out their feet in warm water, and rub on the vein as long as it pierces. and he must place it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they go much in veins.
strain there where the vein is larger or more open, or at the ankle, which is more valuable.
And if you strain above the foot, so beware of the nerves that are underneath, and the vein of traversing as in a coping; and let the flames be gentle.
And if the saneness cannot issue from it, then reset the foot in the water, and let the vein be well purged.
And if the sinews fail for the first time, start again from above a little, because the joints are salty; Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make a soporific of the other foot equally.
The joints of the sciatic vein are at the gathering of strength, and its sinew is worth the pain of the hip, when it is because of hot blood.
And the quality of its sinew is that the patients are either in a bath or stretch above the gathering, and pull upwards with a third cord, two fingers twisting.
for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then you should try it in all ways that you can, and by crossing; and it is necessary that you touch it, for the veins are without sensation, and it is much responded to by many hands.
and it is necessary that you touch it, for the veins are without sensation, and it is much responded to by many hands. And if you do not find it, then feel for some vein that opens or gives a sign at the foot of the toe, and towards the little finger, and beware of the nerves;
and make a correction of the blood that you see, and then loosen the bandage, and put cotton on it and bind it; it is now healthy.
The applications of cupping.
Cupping is made of horns, or of brass, or of glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by striking and attracting blood, or without striking.
And this cupping that is without striking is done in two ways: either it is with full fire, or without fire;
and others on both sides of the neck; and the vein below the chin; and the vein of the shoulders; and the vein above the knees; and the veins within the arms; and the veins of the legs; and the ventouses of the .ij. veins; and the ventousation does not draw blood, except from small scattered veins that are in the flesh,
and because of this one does not get accustomed to it, as one does when making a vein sound; and it is not necessary that it be administered, nor at all by fire nor sense of fire, in any illness which comes from fullness, as long as the body is purged.
And if by necessity of illnesses it is necessary to evacuate, or by habituations, so we administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and meanwhile and in every tense;
because there are some who, when they have the task of bloodletting, weigh heavily on the head;
and there are some who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and there are some who experience a flow of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and spit out blood; and there are some who sigh, and see nothing but blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we command to apply a poultice after three hours of the day.
The health of the nose is helped by the grease of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it does not seem that it should be after the evacuation of all the body.
and this poulticing is in the place of the health of the head,
and it does not seem that he who is of cold complexion in use, or who has a catarrh, for this does them great harm;
and because of this it does not seem to me that the veins are used, nor those who have cold heads with bad diseases.
And those who are often wounded, if they become obtuse, and therefore it is necessary to put the cupping glass a little lower due to the doubt of obtuseness.
The cupping on the neck is in place of the wounded head and the basilica, and therefore it is useful for the contraction of the foot. and to a fracture of the channel of the forearm, and to a bruise, and to a replenishment;
and it is necessary to puncture, for it holds too firmly, if there is obstruction of the liver or stomach or heart.
The winds as it is called, affect the ribs on both sides if it hurts the head, and causes obtundation and migration, and constriction, and pain at the roots of the teeth.
and it is in the vein of the basilica vein; and it is necessary that you instruct the surgeon to place his hand so he does not cut the artery, and does not see the return of blood.
The winds below the chin affect the mouth disease, and corruption of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the vein of the .ij. lips.
The ventilations of the back are worth an illness that comes from heat and fullness.
The ventilations of the sides are worth as much as those of the veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins;
and instruct the surgeon to not make too many perforations, for the tissue is full of flesh, and knows of veins and arteries underneath.
The cupping that is on the back is like emerods of deep foundation, and like diseases below, and it is necessary that the cupping be large, and be of iron, so it has mastery to treat well; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
The cuppings of the legs feel openly, because they attract blood from all over the body, and are worth as ancient pains of the kidneys, and of the liver, and of the bladder, and recall the flowers; and are in the place of .ij. soporifics, and of .ij. chevilles, and altogether they enfeeble the body after long use, and bring about palsy in many dispositions.
The manner of applying the cupping is that you put it on first empty, and suck at once, and put it on hastily, and move evenly, and do not cease from doing so, until you see the place red and swollen, and feel the flow of blood; then firm, and reapply the cuppings, and take heed in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have tender flesh, and clear pores: if it is necessary to pierce once softly, and make large wounds, and a little deeply; and suck lightly.
And if the blood is abundant, it is necessary to pierce .ij. times: the first time to subtly open the way for the abundant blood.
And if the blood is very thick, it must be cauterized a third time; and when we want to draw out a little blood by little, it suffices to hold it back only once.
And if we want a lot of blood, we recommend doing it often; and if the blood is thick, we cauterize deeply, and the termination is that the coursing should be perceived suddenly.
and it is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin, and who have obstructed pores, that you open the veins of oily and dissolutive apertures: if it is in this way, with oil of violets, or sweet almond oil, or oil of cucumber seeds;
and if it is in a glass, of oil of cress, or of lilies, or of chamomile, or other similar things.
And if the superficies are large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsamite, or oil of anise, and similar things.
And if the skin is tender and has large pores, it does not need to be treated with oil.
but it needs to be washed after the ventilation of rose water, or cold water, or water of Morella, or water of Cucurbita, or water of Porcelain, or other similar things.
And those who have much moisture, if they rise from ajueil, or from the water of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
And those who have gross excesses rise from old wine, or from the water of brook, or from a decoction of anet or chamomile, or from other similar things.
and do not consider it healthier to apply a cupping glass before bathing, but rather after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep afterwards, following the cupping.
and it is necessary to warn when one should be cupped and when one has been cupped. And beware of those who are melancholic, and their blood is too agitated and inflamed; it is necessary that they take cold things, such as apples, grapes, and lettuce in the shade, and similar things;
and avoid pungent foods, and flesh of pork, and moist meats.
And those who have a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine moderately, which is between old and new, and avoid much, and avoid pungent foods and small birds and pigeons;
and the day when he will be bled, he must drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some men triple or muscat before bleeding, or afterwards, to comfort the main limbs; and let the blood be subtle, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
The bleedings that are not meant to hurt are those that are done on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagra, and on the stomach and the bowels and the loins and the thigh, for these members do not suffer from hurting in those places.
and do not perform it often because of attracting blood from member to member, as we place them on the limbs when they are not healthy; to reduce the viscosity that is in the limb, as we place ventoses on the belly and on the bowel to diminish the limb;
and reduce the pain, when there is obstruction or stone, if it attracts by its attractive virtue through adventure the obstruction, or dislodges the stone from its place;
and thus it is done when one places it on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained viscosity,
and these cupping glasses are administered empty by sucking so strongly; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water.
if as in bad illnesses of the chest, and in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with hot water or water in which herbs having been cooked are added to it.
The shape of the cupping glass administered by fire is thus:
And it has two fingers' breadth and half a palm in depth, and it has or is surrounded by the middle finger's width, a small opening, as if to pierce with a needle.
and let it be a scraper, soft before so that it does not bother the patient when putting it on the limb;
and have a handle in the middle of a crossbeam of iron or wood, to put a candle holder in place,
and they should be large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
for the cupping glasses of children are different from those of the old, and of the lean from the fat.
And one must then apply this cupping glass to the limb:
take the candle of wax or tallow, and put it in the cupping glass across the vein that is in the cupping glass, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the cupping glass so it does not burn the patient;
and then apply it to the limb, and be careful that it is on the perforations that we have mentioned, so that when one looks, the vapour goes out, and remove the cupping glass;
and take hold of the limb as before, and restart it often, if you have mastery.
In the cupping when it is administered in disease of the lungs, at all acute, there is no vein nor perforation, and it is not administered unless when it is full of acute, and is placed on the limb as soon as possible;
and that's the method:
Without them being administered unless in members where one cannot put cupping glasses due to their smallness, such as the lips and cheeks, and similar places; and in the tendons of the flesh, as we do to the bones or nails, and similar things;
and the quality of the skin is that when you find wounds that are in tender sweet nerves without pus, if you take them;
and put a bandage on the tender skin, so they become familiar with it, and have nothing in the belly; and then be clean of vein and of cupping, then rub the limb so it becomes red, and put on the wounds;
and when they are flat, and grasp, it is whether one can put a cupping glass, if he puts it, for it is of great value afterwards.
If that does not work, lift the skin with a razor, and then with water, very well, and then sprinkle.
and if the healthy skin is too far from the body of the veins, so much; I wrap a cold water-soaked linen cloth, and put it on, as long as the vein is constricted.
and if the vein is multiple, put on a broken vitriol ointment, or galena, and similar things, as long as it is constricted.
where you apply a hot poultice of fava beans, and let them sit until they adhere to the skin, then it will staunch now;
and if you have more of this sort, take other bloodless ones.
And if the bloodless ones do not want to take, rub the skin with fresh blood, or you fix a needle so that the blood flows out. and then apply them above, and soon as they feel the blood, they adhere;
and when you see that they are falling, sprinkle on a little of aloe and of burnt dust, or of ash, if they will now adhere.
Here is the book of fractures.
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Know, dear son, that the foolish wise men who wrote this chapter, did not find anything in the ancient books, nor did they read any letter about it.
and for this reason is estranged the knowledge in our land, because I never found any good one;
and I knew nothing, except through the knowledge of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the knowledge, and by experimentation, and by the habituation of my life;
and I have described to you here in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of instruments that are needed, as I did in these three chapters before.
It is necessary therefore that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the words and the chapters where wisdom places its understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a break or dislocation or twist or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hurry to heal the patient on one side and the other, so nothing hinders you completely, as weakness of body, or infants, or old men.
where the tension is not too tight, or too cold; and avoid cold joints, it's known that cold joints are cold, and flesh of goat and deer, and do not drink any wine, nor eat too many fat meats that fill the veins with blood, so you don't have fear of hot abscess, nor expansion of matter in the limb; if the patient returns to their first government which they had used.
And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or if they have viscosity, as if they were fed on thick soup, and rice, and bread, and pieces of meat, and bacon, and eggs, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things. For a good nourishment represents marrow and more quickly heals the break.
And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well taken in hand or rejoined according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, as with the bones of small children;
but there is no cure, reset the broken bone, i.e. thick tendons which are torn and join the limb together, so it enforces as if it were before; and do not touch any part of its work, and therefore it needs to be nourished with thick foods, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: And if it breaks with a wound, and breaks at all a small notch.
And in each manner has its engine, and its proper instrument in the restoration, according to what the memory brings back into its place;
and it is known that the breakage of the bone occurs because the joints are twisted, and appears well by palpation, and sounds to the pressure of the hand;
and when there is no twisting in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no breakage;
but it can have twistedness, or crack, or small fracture. It does not matter if you move the hand, but apply medicines that come here afterwards, and then hold it steady now subtly.
And know that the fracture that goes to the elbow, and are the two disjointed parts, it is necessary now to put them in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not form there.
and if abscesses form there, let it be for a day, until the abscesses are appeased; then set it equal on the muscles so you can lift lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of that which has pieces; then hold steady, as it will be afterwards.
And if there are broken pieces in the bone, whether it's two or three parts, or a hand or foot, or a small limb, or two or three cords, or a cord and your hand;
and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, you reset them by all means in their proper places on the muscles so you can, and beware that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient;
and adjust well the two joints of the bones according to their best forms.
And he feels well in his hand if it seems to him that it is not well: if it is straightened nicely, and not strained too much, nor pressed as those who come with their work of abscess and contraction in the limb, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is at rest, it should be well supported so that the patient does not move it, neither while awake nor while sleeping, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and take care that the limb is well supported so that it does not feel any pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not at rest, and you must put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain;
For when it feels no pain, it is not at rest, and you must put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain; and you keep it straight, so that no twisting occurs when it is restored;
and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and fingers and similar: it is necessary to envelop with gentle and subtle bandages;
and those that are large, such as the thigh and leg: it is necessary to bind with a strong and hard bandage, for wide bands encircle the entire large limb, and hold everything in place equally, so that there is no unevenness.
then the bandages are lightly wrapped, 3 or 4 times according to the limb, and hold the hand a little above the entire bandage, then go above the break and hold less, so that the break is slightly disengaged.
and soften the bandage little by little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy skin, then take another bandage, and turn it around again above the broken limb.
then return to the part below the break, and hold it moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first rule above.
Here is the translation:
And if there is inflammation or abscess, put on it something that soothes the abscess heat, and which removes the inflammation, and leaves it thus for some days;
then hold it with these strips, and let it be of the width of a large cane reed, or of wood from which one makes splints, or of palm fronds, and arrange it according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the strip which one puts on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
and let it be as long as it is necessary for the member to be in a state of smallness or greatness;
then hold steady on the staples just as you did at the first treatment, then tie above with a vein strip, just as at the first treatment on the fracture.
the more constricted it is, the less; and it is necessary that the vein strip be moderate, not too large nor too small, and be of a fine thread.
for if the vein strips are large, just as I have seen foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted threads of linen, and it is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and does not require that it has between each staple less than two fingers' width.
And if the patients are injured by the staples after the constriction in their healthy areas, then put under them swabs of linen or a layer of paper, so that they do not become inflamed.
When the wound is with the breakage, and the course is broken, I will tell you the treatment following this.
And know that it does not suit to stretch out the broken limbs on the first day. For when the limb is large, it does not suit to put these broken parts together before five or seven days, or more according to the severity of the abscess that occurs suddenly.
and see here the manner of the ancient plasterers to restore breakage, dislocation, and twisting: and it is that you take flour that stays as in the walls of a mill, and mix it with plenty of egg whites, and make this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring breakage to various dispositions, and also for women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another way to restore the fracture and dislocation and twisting: take abrasives and ladanium and enula and asa fetida and Arabic gum and mugwort, ana .x. З.; myrrh and aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; and make a powder, and mix with egg white; if the patient's complexion is warm, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and helps many men.
Another way to apply plaster that is worth twisting: take mugwort and vismalve, at 10; mirror and aloe, at 8; acacia at 6; Armenian boil at 10, and crush well, and mix with water or abundant egg white, and administer.
Another way to apply plaster to joints and ease their dislocations, and alleviate sudden pain, and the size of the bone, and the break: take new linen, and the poultice in a warm and oily substance, and put it on the affected area. This plaster does not restore completely, but it is good for alleviating hot abscesses, and properly easing pains.
Another way to apply plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and earth-based peony leaves, and crush them together, and make a plaster.
Another way to apply plaster for the restoration of bone breaks and to reduce the remaining abscess. Take root of vismalve, chamomile, violet flowers, fern seed, each a part; crush, and mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, mix with coriander oil or water, and use it.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And it seems that one should apply to the broken member, to restore it, things dried and a little warm, like myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to apply is good for a lesion and pain: take mugwort and decapitate the heads of men, or feathers of a bird, and visnaga, and adjust similarly, and crush, and make an application on the affected member.
And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone out of its place; if you do not loosen it by many hours.
And if pain comes to the place, or becomes inflamed, without rest or swelling, if you hasten, and loosen it, and remove the application now; and take a lighter dressing, and a sponge of seawater moistened, and dip in water, and lift up the affected member, until the inflammation ceases, and the pain is appeased. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply a dry or moist compress, mixed with water or rose oil, and place it on a nut, until you are certain of a warm abscess.
and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then resume the subtle treatment, and a little bit of emplastering, and do not strain it too much as before; and subtly until it is healthy.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you have need of emplastering and bandaging, then resume it, as you did initially for the first treatment.
And if it does not come to the limb as we have said, then do not delay further than 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 days; and never leave it 20 days, according to what one sees, until the bruise is evident, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh under.
Then the patient is held back more than at first, and the swelling grows fat, as I have said before; and if you see that the wound is drying out more than it should be, know that it cannot heal properly. Apply the warm water treatment gently, every time you open it up, and let that be each third day, and ease the bandage a little.
By this treatment, then the healing is cut off from the limb, and immediately they start to make the foolish mirror, which twists the limb wrongly: it's bad, and if it's a painful operation, and I don't see anything else but to ease the pain and open it correctly.
of various ways of fracture There are many kinds of fractures, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinguished.
For there are fractures made by percussion of a spear, and the neck of the bone breaks all the way to the syfac which is beneath the bone, just like a hedge or a pole; and because of this, this kind of fracture is called "hedge-fracture".
Where the spear cuts through the bone from above, piercing senselessly, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two great or small fractures.
And if there is an embedded percussion, or fissure, or break in the neck of the stone, or fall on the stone, or other similar things.
And if he has a persistent bruise that approaches just below the skin which is under the bone, or it is on the bone, and it is this wound whether large or small.
And if it is a wound that is located in the bone as subtly as a hair, and it is a small fissure, and for this reason it is called this bruise "capillary".
And if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or falling, or similar things, and causes a piece of bone to enter downwards, and it is like when the candle-makers make them fall into the candles; thus between the stones within.
And those who have damp or moist bones under their skin, as if they were children's heads.
and it has all these ways of breaking that small pieces are dislodged if they were like this; and I will speak about them in their place.
And we recognize all ways of breaks by the traction on them, and the inquiry with tension, and by the corrupt flesh that is on them.
The similarity of the hairline is known by this, that when one discovers the bone, and one rubs on it, then the black break appears.
In the treatment of breaks, beware of accidents that harm the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and numbness, and fever and ague, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in worse dispositions, it cannot be healed without doubt.
And if you do not see a sudden accident, and you expect healing, then begin the treatment.
And when the naval disease comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to open the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to open the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue under the bone does not become corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned do not occur.
And if the fracture of the bone reaches the tissue that covers the brain, then it is necessary to divide the divided part thus: and it is that you take hold of the head of the naval disease patient, and uncover on the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more softly than you can.
and the flow of blood comes to discover the bone, or a swelling appears, he is aided by that which is necessary, and it is that you fill the hole with millstone oil in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the swelling appears calmed, and be assured of the flow of blood; then begin to cut around the bone, and it is done in two manners of work: one manner is that you cut straight ahead with a tight binding, and this is the form:
And then I make another cut, larger than the first one.
And the second manner is that you have a number of diverse cuts, some straight and others wide, and are pointed, and are of iron indeed; and in working lightly, so that you do not blister the head.
And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce around, thus you will administer gentle touches with tapers, not too deeply so they do not penetrate beyond the bone, and must have a margin or circle above, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have more, if each one returns to its place according to the width of the bone, if you have tapers for every test; and it is the form of the three manners of tapers.
The quality of piercing around the broken bone is that you put a taper on the bone, and turn your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the taper in another place a little later, and do it all around, then cut into the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone with your hand, or with one of the instruments you have, such as pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the spleen.
And when you have pierced the bone and extracted it, it is necessary that you prepare the instrument which remains attached to the bone in every other way, resembling an incisor, but it must be more delicate and subtle than the other incisors.
and if it remains nothing of the small bones, no numbness of the scalp, if they lightly touch the instruments; then heal the wound with tents and ointments that we have mentioned.
And another manner of surgery is that which Galien says, which is more wise; and he praises it highly, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, there where the break appears, so that when you have discovered that part, then put below the head of this incisional instrument, whose form is:
And do not cut from one part, and the part is ague in the .ij. coast, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently cope with the entire bone, and take good care of the web that is below;
If it is inflamed at the bone, lift the bone lightly, for one does not sense well without harm, and senses fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate up to the membrane, and the bone is so badly broken above, and there are small pieces, thus it is necessary to remove that asperity, and to extract the scales at the subtle raspings you must have diverse quantities, to arrange in each place the most convenient, according to the work and figure of the fracture.
If you rasp beforehand with large raspings, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing that until it is well.
In each of the other hair-like fractures and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you arrange the cause according to its direction; and this is a thing that is not readily apparent to one who has not put his study into this art.
And if the wound is uncovered, it is necessary that you apply a dressing of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and put it on the wound; then take another doubled dressing in two or three layers, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first dressing; and do this more lightly than you can, so you don't irritate the wound, then apply from above another layer, and don't constrict it further until it holds the wound sufficiently;
and let it be thus for a day or two, until the sharpness of the abscess is appeased, then dislocate it, and apply medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of veils, and powder of incense, and aristologe, and similar things; and make powder from these things, and put on the wound, and apply again medicines without sharpness, without biting;
and beware that the wound is not too clean, lest you don't leave it inflamed, nor let it assemble in a swelling, for when it assembles on the canvas of the brain, it corrodes and putrefies, and brings great harm to the patient; for when you put on the wound something biting, it becomes necrotic from above.
Here is the translation:
And if nothing comes from the fire that one has placed above, which virtue it has, if it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and two parts of rose oil and glue them together, and put it on the wound. then heal in many ways of healing as he needs, so that he may be healthy.
Know that often the two parts of the nail are broken above, or one part by the joint, for they are two bones; and the one beneath is cartilaginous, and does not break, so it does not make a swelling or twisting, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you apply your small finger or instrument to the nail, and put the same breakage into your finger's index, and in the pouch by default, so that the nail regains its natural shape. and do this lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the nail, and cannot come to the joint, then it is necessary that you put it even at the head of a slightly large vein.
And if the break is of two parts, then make another one, and hurry to restore it on the first day, so you can;
if not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscess has been calmed, then it will be at the head of the nail, where the break is in one part.
Where you touch another part, the break is there; and let the tents be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
And direct any restorer that one should soften the tents in burr, and move each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be softened with a concoction of egg white, and powder of mill; then let the tent, until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
And sometimes touch where the wing of an eagle is in place of tents, and if there is a soft drapery inside, and it holds the break, and soothes the patient within; or do what you have seen.
And if abscesses come to the nose while you operate, if you meet cerate or cotton softened in rose oil, or in a little pouch of dragon's blood.
And if abscesses do not come, then apply an emplaster made from flour of sisament and powder of incense, mixed with egg white, then place light poultices on top, and do not bind where it is not necessary.
And if the break in the nail is small, and it is broken into little pieces, then extract the fragments comfortably for him, then sew up the crack, and treat the things that are causing harm, and quickly, just as with comfortable emplasters and ointments for him.
And if he has no denseness in the nail, then treat it with tente, and apply a compress of plantago, so that it may be healthy.
Of the fracture of the jawbone
When the jawbone is dislocated downwards, and there is no point of injury beforehand, and the break is dislocated so slightly, and it does not break into two, unless the cartilage within is crushed, if one recognizes it lightly.
It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left jawbone, then put your right index finger, and gently put the break into place, and hold it with the other hand from behind, and make it even.
And if the break of the jawbone is dislocated inwards, it is necessary that you administer extension from inwards, as much as it becomes even.
And if the movements of the teeth occur, or fracture, if you restrain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jawbone a cerote, and put on it a double wrapping; and put on the wrapping a large and well-made staple, or a piece of even leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, and bind it to the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see the figure changing, dislocate it on the third day, and then reset to the point where it changed; and apply a poultice made with powder from the mill with abundant water or flour of six-month-old wheat, after you have removed the crust; and apply a light poultice, and if the poultices are effective, and the disposition of the patient does not change, let it be until it is healthy; many times it heals in twenty-two days.
And if abscesses occur, treat them according to what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, reset the broken bone in its place; if you subtly remove the extraneous bits that are not necessary to the bone.
And if the wound is constricted, expand it with flame according to the necessity.
And when you have gathered all these pieces, and there is no delay, then cauterize the wound, if it is large, and apply suitable poultices to that, in order to heal the flesh, so that it may be healthy.
of the stronghold The stronghold breaks more often beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the break is in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two places, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
And the operations are when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the stronghold broken; and the other stretches out the neck towards the part; then sets the break in your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor movement.
And if you have to treat more extensively, then place under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or leather, and let it be thick according to your need; and steady and lift the forceps, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you set the fracture evenly.
And if you cannot manage the head of the forceps at the forefront, because it comes in the opposite direction, then it is necessary that the patient leans back on their hinder part, and place under the shoulder a small pillow, and push the minister's shoulder down, until the bone of the forceps is lifted.
And then adjust the fracture with your fingers, and if you feel roughness, it is necessary that you bend over; and draw out the lighter pieces, and if the bone cannot join due to any prominence, take one of the incisors you have; but place under the forceps this instrument, to ward off the swelling.
and it resembles a spoon, and is not a chisel, and let it be as wide as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the instrument; and have .ij. skill, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, just like the routing of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
and when you are assured of a hot abscess, cut into the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt it is a hot abscess, then fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
And if the hot abscess comes, apply a dressing with oil of roses and in vinegar and wine, and put it on.
The straightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and without fracture, is that you put on the bone a plaster of powdered millstone and egg whites, and put light bandages on, and put a splint underneath, if you are skilled in this; then take a very wide bandage of a palm's length, then put a double-layered dressing on the bandages, and the plaster; then take a subtle stick of two fingers' width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage stays in place; and put the stel on the bruise, and turn the bandage on the neck, and beneath the healthy part, and beneath the affected part; and the reset of each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the bruise firmly, and you clearly see that the stel does not move above the broken bone, if you reward it every day, and when the ligaments relax, if you restrain it;
and make the patient lie on their back, and place a small pillow under the axilla, to lift the shoulder high; if you adjust the break of the clavicle by adjusting the alignment of the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the neck, and do not dislodge it so a bad accident does not happen, until twenty days.
then reapply the poultice, if you see that it is necessary, and hold it in place and leave it thus, until it is restored; and it is restored to its best state within twenty-eight days, and in less than any other remedy.
of the break of the shoulder
Because the shoulder breaks or dislocates its joint, and it does not set properly except by touch; if you adjust according to the shape of the break, and reset according to its natural form, in all ways that you can; then place on the joint powdered millet with abundant egg white, and gentle bandages, and put on a double layer of cloth; then put on a wide and subtle strap, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the strap is not aligned beneath the shoulder, adjust it with linen threads, so that the strap is even; and then hold everything together with a strong tight bandage, so that the strap does not move from its place, and examine the patient every day; and all the times he complains, hold him tightly, and adjust the strap if it becomes loose from its place, and ease the patient on his side; and the shoulder is restored within twenty days or twenty-five. And when this number is accomplished, then release, and be sure, for it is not good to set oneself free lightly.
And if a part of the bone protrudes forward, and not below the heart, if it is above, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the forced abscess to appease.
of the breaking of the foot
The foot is not often broken in the middle, but it happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken within, it declines below, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks alignment, and becomes crippled, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the fractures in the broken bone, and feels well afterwards.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and you put a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs of the sides with your hands, and subtly adjust to make it even in all ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on plasters and bandages of subtle salt water, or other lighter dressing, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the round ligament to the back, and hold it firmly, and reward every hour the treatment, and if it is restored, then restrain it; and if it is loosened, due to corrosion or pus that comes from the wound, or pain or abscess, hasten, and loosen, and remove the plaster, and address what has come in ways of cures; then restore the plaster, and hold it firm until it is healthy.
of the breaking of the ribs
You know that the breaking of the ribs only occurs because they are large behind the back, and at the inner head, and do not bend except when they are slippery; and one feels it well during the inquiry in both.
And the resetting is that you put even the breaking, as it is necessary. And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a stick, so you have mastery of it.
And if the breaking of the ribs declines inward, the patient feels very great pain, and numbness, just as with pleurisy, because the bone touches the membrane; and it reaches to the points, and all and vomits greatly, and it is a grievous wound, and the old men have put great effort.
And if there are those who say that they need to administer foods that inflame the stomach, in order to relieve the breathlessness at the time of the fever.
We do not do this, because hot abscesses do not come to life, if they have not arrived. And if it has arrived, then bleed it.
And they say that one should not place ventouses on the skin, to suck out the bad humor, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the ventouse attracts the excess humors from the skin due to its weak disposition.
And they instruct to cover the limb of a bruised ankle in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to set the ligature evenly, then it is cured by the treatment of pleurisy, meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear by the os that touches the fabric, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to cut into the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to protect the wound; and then one must make a incision, and draw gently, and then close the lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat with emplasters, until they are healthy. And if abscesses come, then place soaked dressings in rose oil, and put them on the limb; and treat meanwhile the limb of those who need to have an abscess, and apply poultices soothingly onto the rib where it is needed, until they are healthy.
of the breakage of the neck
Sometimes a breakage comes to the bone of the neck, and soon it happens that it breaks; and also it has a curvature of the spine. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take heed, you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, you do not feel it. Know that he is mortally ill in several dispositions, and if they move well and feel good when held firmly, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's illness is cured, so you put a cure on it.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take heed if the feet are softened, and if the accidents that are in their hands, and on the back there is windiness and involuntary evacuation; and when one has evacuated on their belly, then there is involuntary evacuation. And when it is evacuated on their back and they want to sit, they cannot. Know that he is mortally ill: do not labor in vain in his cure.
And if this accident does not come to him, it is the lightest thing.
And the cure is that you apply if there is a hot abscess, apply to the spine oil of rose or oil of rue, as much as it is alleviated; then apply one of the comforting and drying emplasters, and bind with a lien, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where they feel the pain, until they are healthy. And if some bone becomes dislocated, it is necessary to cover over the heart; and take out the bone, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound, so that it is large, in a stitch, then the treatment with ointment, healing the flesh as much as possible; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the hip", you put your pouched hand on the left, and place it evenly on the other hand at your power, then put the plaster and the staple above, so that you have mastery; then hold steady, and if there is a dislocated bone, make it thus, and take out, and treat the wound until it is healthy.
of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Because the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it is, then there will not be a small amount of diminishment at the head; and make a long bandage, and decline to the partitions, and comes to the patient's pain in the leg, and swelling, and inflames what is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as much as you are above the fracture; and know what the fracture and the shape of it are; and if the fracture is at the head only, then put evenly on that fracture, so that it is in its natural shape.
And if the break is too long, or it declines inward, then make the patient sit on his stomach, so that the restoration of this break may be apparent. And when you have set it straight, put on the plaster, then put on a stick of wood or of oak, and hold the break steady, so that it does not move; and apply the poultice beneath the ribs, until the ligature is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if an abscess comes, do not touch it, until the abscess is appeased, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it is necessary, so that there is no bad accident; and this is the method.
of the fracture of the shoulder
The joints are those that are between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is fractured, one must restore it according to one of the following methods: one of which is that you take a full moleskin plaster, according to this form.
And lay the joints in a high place, and sit the patient on a chair; then you put a broken arm on a wooden splint, until it reaches the armpit, and has a curve of wood, then place on some heavy thing or the ministers extend downwards; then put the mirrors to adjust the fracture equally with his hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other method is that you support the patient on his shoulder, and tie the hand to his neck, then command the ministers that one holds what is on the fracture with his hands, and the others hold underneath all the joints, and extend each to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is too forceful, hold steady. And on the breakage, and extend each of the ministers to their part. And if the breakage is close to the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put a gentle ligature beneath the joint, and another towards the side, beneath the breakage; and also if the breakage is on the side, it is necessary to put a lighter ligature, without effort, until the breakage is even on the limb, and on the side; then put the breakage in place, as it is necessary, and hold steady, so that the abscesses do not come.
And if abscesses come, do not hold steady for seven days, and put on a soft, moist cloth in oil and rose water, until the abscesses are appeased; then hold steady, and the manner of holding is that you place the dressing on the breakage, then assemble the arm on the joint, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and place the bandage, and hold steady on the joint, and on the arm, so that the arm is in a state of rest, so that nothing disturbs it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a splint, and place on the breakage a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint two fingers of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes over the breakage two fingers from each part; then hold steady with the splints, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the breakage, more strongly and less in opposition.
And if you see the positioning of the stars, and the constriction, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, if it lets it bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine each 14 days, the bond which must not become inflamed in life, or the nourishments cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted. If it is addressed, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, then do not loosen it sooner than 14 days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back, and put their hands on their stomach; and place underneath the joint a plain linen cushion, and examine each hour of the day or night, that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or is not softened by the bonds; if it is addressed by the power of medicine, and give the food that we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food is at first subtle; and when it begins to recover, then let it be thick. And it is customary that the joint and leg should be restored within 40 days or so; and then one must loosen and administer baths and medicines of ointments to heal the limb. And if the constriction is lazy and swollen, then delay loosening for 50 days or two months.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of 18 bones, which are called the "foscile", of which one is small, and it is the one that joins the pouchet; and the other is large, and it is the one that is underneath, towards the little finger; by chance breaking the large foscile solely, or the small one, and by chance they both break together.
When the small fosciles are broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they break together. If it's the small foscile that's broken solely, then you must extend it lightly, and set it evenly.
And if it's the large foscile, then you must stretch it more forcefully; and extend it on a cushion, and hold the pouchet of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so the patient doesn't suffer any labor; then extend the ministres as an arm at the part underneath his hand, or at the lien, and another ministre at the other above. And then set the mirrors evenly, according to its best form.
And if it breaks into pieces, then put each one in its place, and if there is no dislocation that pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then fix it thus and the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the breaking of a wound, I have spoken of it to the singular chapter; if you take the treatment.
And if at the beginning of the restoration, apostemes wounds occur, then glue; I apply a bandage made of oil rosé and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and apply the bandage subtly, until the apostemes wounds are alleviated. And then remove the wax, and put the plaster of flour with an abundance of egg whites, then place the staples, and let the staple of the wound be stronger and a little larger than the others; and know that it should have twenty staples or arms in various dispositions: either the break is in one of the bones, or in the .ij.; and hold more above the break than another part, and touch less while approaching, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are on the break be soft and moist, and not hard nor dry; and let the thread, which is stretched, be of linen, not too large nor too small, as we have said. And treat the limb and the ligament afterwards for some days. And if some bad accident happens to the limb, as if a pruritus comes to the limb, then it is necessary that you pour cold water on the limb, until the pruritus is alleviated; and let the limb not be tightly reposed. And then resume the bandaging, and if the ligaments are weakened and the bones are disjointed, and similar things, then address it.
And if you take care that the numbness does not come to the limb, because it is too constricted, then it is necessary that you loosen it a little, and let it be for some days, until the numbness is corrected, and then it will be restrained.
Here is the translation:
of the fracture of the hand
You know that on the back of the hand and as we have few fractures, and it does not come but rather frequent sprains.
And when the finger of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient sits crossed, and sits directly in front of him evenly; then put his hand on the extended toe, and extend the ministres the broken bones, and set them even with the mirrors, so they are well joined; and apply the plaster and bandages, if abscesses come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the swelling; and be enveloped in a linen cloth.
And if the fracture is at the base of the thumb near the belly of the palm, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to hold it against their broken thumb; and then bind with a long bandage, and let it be the splint of soft leather as big as the thumb of the hand, and bind it, as it is necessary.
And if the fracture is in the forearm, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand is covered and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and tighten the ligature between the two.
And if the fracture occurs in one of the fingers, it is the pouch that makes it equal, as it is necessary; and bind it with the palm, and see if you put a small straight splint to lift the fracture, and do not move; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the index or one of the others, make it equal, and bind it with the healthy finger that comes after; or you bind them all together, that makes them steady, or you put a splint on top, as in a pouch; and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of hot abscesses, and heal what has come, as I have said.
of the broken hip
The bone of the hip is often broken, and it is clearly seen when it twists in front and behind; and the restoration is done by binding the ligature above the fracture, and another below. And the patient puts it on his face, then each minister extends his bandage to its equal part; and it's when the fracture is in the bone.
And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, then one of the bandages goes towards the finger, and the other below the break. And also if it's close to the knee, and then the bandage should be below the knee, and the extension downwards; then put the mirrors on the bone evenly with its .ij. hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the lie, if abscesses occur there.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down and then return to your work and your treatment; the lieure is done in such a manner. It is necessary that you envelop the fracture with .i. double-layered bandage in .ij. or .iij., and remove the superfluous part, then twist the leg so that the talons come to the root of the nail, and put .i. thread long between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and make the chief thread above; then twist the bandage on the leg and on the thigh, and put it on the fracture, and put a staple on the bone of the leg; then fill in the empty space between the leg and the thigh with a soft drapery to make equal pressure, then start to tie firmly .iij. turns or iiij. on the fracture; and when you go above the fracture, and less constraint; then take out the .ij. threads that you put between the leg and the thigh, and remove the .iij. staples that are above, then return below to the chief thread, so that you come to the foot; and it is constrained, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, then if no abscess or inflammation occurs similarly.
And if it happens, if it dislocates, and address what comes from it, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, then it must be extracted, whoever can; and if they cannot, then it must be broken, and forced out; and the treatment is as we have said, until it is healthy.
And no time is the joint broken thus that one puts them back, as in the joint and in the arm; nevertheless, in the restoration made thus it does not shut out the patient.
And know that the joint is restored to its place, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
of the gutter of the knee
Here is the translation:
And the restoration is when one puts back in place what is crooked in its two joints, so that it is assembled as one can; then put on the plaster, and one puts a round stave, if you are skilled in this, and hold steady as it suits, then rewind all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, as for hot abscesses and similar things; if one puts back in place what suits each accident, so that it is healthy.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are .ij. bones, of which one is called "straight" by right, not "malleolus", and the other is called "fibula"; and there is a fracture just like it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is similar to that of the crooked arm, and the work is all the same.
And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
And if the delicate bones are broken, they turn forward.
And if the large bone is broken, they feel great pain, and it is clearly seen; and it turns inward. Then apply extension, and make it even, and arrange the bones evenly; but however, it is necessary that the break is gentle, and there are multiple pieces, so the extension should be minor and lighter; and adjust according to its strength.
And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints that surround the leg on one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee down to the foot; then wrap them in two layers of bandages above and below, and bind them in the middle, so that the leg cannot decline either to the right or to the left, and thus it is good; and no one should remove the wooden splints for the length of the leg, and it is made of wood, and they put it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly done it heals the broken bone where there is a wound; and move the leg every day to see if there is an abscess or another accident; so cure until it is healthy.
of the breakage of the bones in the foot
At the ankle, there comes no break, but sometimes two bones come to a break and sometimes two poxes, and it does not happen except in more dispositions.
And if there are two bones broken, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot on the shin, where the bones are raised; then press until they return to their places; then apply a poultice and stoups above, and put under the belly of the foot a small table at .ij. plain joints, then hold the foot firmly in place, then you have enveloped drapels around, and other things that you need.
And when 3 or 4 days will have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether broken, whether dislocated.
And if there are some of the two broken bones, reset them, as we have said about the fingers of the hand; then put on each broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little larger, then put under the foot that table that I mentioned, and hold it firmly in place; and if there are 3 or 4, or more, broken bones, put on each finger a splint according to its quantity, enveloped in a linen drapel, and hold the table under the foot; and let it be fixed above the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, from what we have said; and search for each accident as it is necessary.
of the fracture of the bone at the thumb
When the bone of the female nature is fractured, if it is made to swell, then incline it towards the back part, and hold it from behind; then fill the bag with cotton, and put a large amount as needed; then remove the woman, and lift the back part little by little, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with the stitch; and when she wants to urinate, if you remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and thus do .vij. days or a year: if the fracture will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of birch, and tie a string around the perineum, and blow the whole bladder into the nature; then blow strongly into the string, until the bladder is inflated inside: the nature will return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until it is healthy.
And when the bone of the thumb of the man is fractured, or of the woman, if you restore it thus as we have said in the bone of the thigh; and these nearby fractures are not hidden from one who puts their study and use into it, and attends to my book. For the fracture signifies more dispositions for the right way of restoration: then give them.
On the wound, when it is broken, take a mouthful of oil and anoint the wound; then wrap drapels around it, and let it be for several days or weeks, and it will heal quickly.
of breaking with a wound
It is necessary for the one who breaks with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be healthy now, so that the healthiness that we have mentioned bear witness.
And if the wound is healthy, with a mixture of vitriol, if you have nothing else, then begin to restore the breakage at that same hour, or on that day, lest abscesses and ulcers appear.
And if abscesses appear, let the restoration wait until the ninth day, as long as the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, for you will cause a bad accident to come.
And if the broken bone appears uncovered on the heart of the discovery, then it is necessary that you put it in a lighter position with your hands, in small extension.
And if the extensions are not appeared to put equal with your hands, then reset it with this instrument which is of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary to take 3 or 4, according to whether there is need in each cure of fracture; and let it be rounded and a little thick, so that it does not slip into compression on the limb in your work, and let it be smooth beforehand, and thick from the middle onwards, thus:
And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved head be placed on the apparent bone; and the button is put in place once, so that it holds, and let them be equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it is necessary that you cut the head of the bone, so that the instruments have possession of it.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, take the handle of a suitable instrument, whether it be an incisor or a saw, to your power; then remove what is stuck in the bone with rough touches and minor scrapings.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position. Do so much that it is in its place, then wrap it in a black stippled cloth, and properly if it is in this state; and do not put anything oily on the wound or any other thing where it would cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer these things when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the breakage; and many times foolish doctors have done this, and have caused death or corrosion on multiple occasions; and may the strapping be more gentle and softer than other breaks.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents may occur, as we have said, and you feel pain in the place, do not put anything on it; but wrap around, in the place of these, rough cloths, and bind them. And when you see afterwards, in a day or two, to anoint the wound with a balm, remove what you had put on at all cost, and apply ointment to heal the wounds, as we have applied tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
And it is necessary that you unbind the limb three times a day, in the morning and evening, so that it may be loose and healthy.
And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the bowels are emptied lightly.
And if it happens many times, and it cannot be reunited but rather breaks again, know that there are small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you touch the wound with tension, and remove all those dislodged pieces that cause that pain.
And if fistula comes to the place, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in this chapter before. And when the bone is broken, and open on the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large members, do not touch it at all, for many times death comes from it, but let it be until it heals; perhaps it will fall apart after 20 days or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it alone.
of the bruises that come onto the skin
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains weak and subtle afterwards, it happens for many causes: because one is that it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should be; or because there were too many bandages, and could not bring nourishment to the member; or due to multiple manipulations; or due to too great movements, not in their time; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient's body lean, and make the body tender, so that the blood may be multiplied in him; and administer baths, and give joy and happiness; then put poultices on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the manipulation often brings water, so that the nourishment flows to the member; and it returns to its natural shape.
the member which is twisted after the healing
Here is the translation:
And often the node is removed by continually and lengthy rubbing with moist hands. And then the movement is diminished in the limb at every hour.
And if the tortured area is inflamed and hardened, like a stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, if it is necessary to cut just up to the bone, with subtle and light incision; and put caution and study into the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to none, if it is necessary now to reassemble without delay.
For if you delay, the limbs become swollen, and by chance if you reset them to their place; because it is not necessary that you move them at the hour when they are swollen: many times it brings spasms and other pains.
Always, when it happens, make the patient healthier, then leave him, until the apostemes (abscesses) are appeased; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then reassemble it lightly, and cure each member as the cure comes into its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the limbs from head to feet.
of the jaws
Sometimes it happens that the jaws are dislocated and numb, and the dislocations of the jaws occur in two ways: either they are somewhat out of their place, and slightly numbed; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and entangles its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns through several more precise positions.
And if it is entire and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
and in such a way that the ministers hold the head of the patient, and insert their fingers as if to grasp with one of their hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and let the other two fingers be spread out, to set evenly; and instruct the patient to loosen their jaws, and move them from all sides.
And let him put it evenly, until it returns to its place.
And if the reset is grievous, meanwhile it is the two jaws together, if they are warmed with hot water and oil, until they are lightly loosened; do not delay in resetting, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth is well closed without becoming numb, then place a moist cloth made of rose oil and wax on it, and tie it lightly with many ligatures.
and the patient lies on his back, and his head is supported between two cushions, so that he does not move to the right or to the left, nor does he strain much with his jaw, but takes a light bite, until the pains are alleviated, and the jaws are relaxed;
and then he chews what he wants lightly, and does not strain to open his mouth while eating and drinking, until the jaw is well relaxed and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be reset to their proper place within an hour, and are not converted to their proper use, then fever and habitual discomforts come, and by chance, a solution of stomach troubles, and by chance, a vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of danger; and many times he who has had it dies, within eight days.
of the force
The force cannot dislodge from the thickness of the bone and from the flesh, and is dislocated many times at the defect, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient places himself on his back, and stretches out his arms; and then presses the limb firmly with your palm, and it will return to its place; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it in place.
and the joint that is towards the side cannot dislodge; if not, and if it does dislocate many times, you must reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it in place, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healthy.
and thus the same is reset the head of the shoulder, when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in four ways: one is when it dislocates at the part of the joint below; and the second is at the part of the foot; and sometimes it dislocates at the upper part, and this happens rarely;
and it does not dislocate backwards for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inward for the sinews; and many times it dislocates downwards towards the joint, especially for those who have little flesh, because for those who have little flesh, it hastens to settle; for those who have enough flesh, it settles at points, and returns to points.
And by chance it happens to some men that they receive a blow or fracture, and the shoulder is inflamed with a hot abscess, and he believes it is dislocated because of this.
It is necessary then that you examine him, as long as you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that the dislocation occurs when it falls towards the axilla, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a clear diversity. and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the axilla touching the head of the shoulder, just as if it were a hole; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move with any movement.
and thus, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly on the toucher;
and this kind of dislocation does not force one to reset, when it is new, or if the patient's affliction is evil.
And the method is that the ministers lift the hand of the patient above, then place their fingers beneath the axle, and lift the joint with force above to the level; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it above, then place it beneath; if it will be hastened.
And if it does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and the minister should arrange soothing and calming remedies, such as a decoction of alder, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be administered.
Then the patient should be placed on his back, and a strap of equal width is put underneath the axis, not too soft nor too hard, then the doctor places their heel on the strap, and lifts the head of the shoulder gently, and treats the hand of the patient.
and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downward; that shoulder returns now entirely, and if you see that you reset it in this manner.
and it is necessary that you make the patient present, who is bigger than the patient; and be straight towards the side, and push the shoulder underneath the axis of the patient, and lift the axis high, so that the patient hangs in the air. and another minister treats the hand of the patient downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too lightweight, then weigh him down with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And you reset it in another way: and it is as if one sticks a long stick into the ground, so that the head is also straight like a pistol, and is not too big nor too slender; then put it under the patient, but they should have soft drapery underneath, and the patient should be standing straight for a long time; then their hand should be extended downwards from the other side in a straight line, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
and if it does not want to return despite all these things that we have said, then make this cure: take a stick of two cubits and three fingers in length, which has the head bent to enter obliquely beneath the seat, according to this form:
then place it on the head of the stick with soft drapery, so that the stick does not touch the patient, then put it beneath the seat of the patient; and extend your arm on the stick for a long time, and place the shoulder on the stick, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on a support of a chair of suitable height, and extend the hands downwards, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return to its place now.
And when it is in, whatever way it may be, it is necessary that you put under the shoulder a layer of equal wool, then apply the plaster made from powder of soft mill, with incense and burnt hoof, on the entire shoulder and around, then hold underneath the shoulder strongly, and turn the ligature on the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let it remain thus.
And it is necessary that you feed him little by little, as long as the limb is comforted, for he will heal faster; and then feed more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is strengthened and not softened, it is healthy.
And if the joint is swollen from moisture or another cause, it is necessary that you administer cauterizations to three places, as it is described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is damaged or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that occurs at the foot, and in the hands, or behind, is caused by impulse, and stretching of hands, and administering another treatment; and heal until it is healthy.
And if after healing, numbness comes to the limb, and later on it is slow in movement, if the patient has bathed many times, so that this numbness is alleviated, and it returns to its original nature.
of the dislocation where it hurts
You know that the joint where it hurts is alleviated at points, and at points it returns; and it is alleviated from all parts, and meanwhile before and behind, and the dislocation is not fully restored, for one sees well and feels well; and alleviated according to each figure. And when you join the hurtful joint with the healthy one, then you can see it openly. For the joint is twisted, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset thus, that abscesses heal quickly, for if the abscesses heal quickly, it would be grievous to reset; and by chance they cannot be reset completely, especially when it is in the rear; if it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration is, when it is such that you can reset it, that you extend your hand to their two hands; and their arms be expanded, and the hands of the mirror according to the count of the interior, above and below, and put the jointure at their fingers assembled, or at the root of their palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and presses from the root of the palm the count that is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold two ministers, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer long and wide.
and when the doctor approaches to join the joint with his hand, if he anoints it with no oil to soften the joint, then he forces the joint strongly, until it returns;
and when it is in its place, if he puts a dry plaster on with some egg white, and strains strongly, and bends the arm at the neck of the patient, and leaves it for some days, then he disjoints it.
And if the joint is closed in its place, then disjoin the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not close well, then restart the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then disjoin it.
And if he feels discomfort after the rejoining of the joint, and it moves, then bathe it well and rub strongly, and press until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a fat sheep's grease, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make him enter into a bath. and when he sweats, steady friction to the joint immediately, then put the nail back on, and then in a bath; and thus do it two or three times, until it is healthy; and if you see that, set fire to a warm moist cloth with boric powder, and hold it tight; if it returns to its disposition.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is easy, more than the other joints Anyway, it is necessary to reset it quickly, at the same time that it dislocates, so that the limb is not swollen, or that an abscess does not form there.
And the resetting is that you put the ailing hand on a table, and extend the fingers of the hand, and align them evenly, so that you place your palm on the appearance of the joint, and bend it until it returns to its position.
Here is the translation: And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand on a table, and the mirrors place their hand on the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it is good.
If not, then hold the poultices calming the swollen abscesses, and let them thus begin to heal again.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in its place after several days, then the twisted joint remains.
and do not annoy the patient further than that the hand is numb, and cannot hold anything at all: then know that the nerves are damaged, or the arteries; if there is no other remedy for it except to cauterize the case, and by chance nothing else will help.
And when the hand is in its place, set it on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it steady and let it be; then disengage it and let it be thus.
And if it cannot move well, and there is no stiffness, apply warm water compresses, and rub until it is healthy.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated in certain parts, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the belly.
Then they are ready, and push the dislocation into your pouches as long as it returns, then hold the top of the back, and bend towards the part where it is disjointed.
and let it be for a few hours, and then make it equal on that day; and bind the limb, as we have said, and loosen it during the day, and make it move, and relieve the limb; and do this often, until it is straight.
and do the same, if it is dislocated at the wrist, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy; and do the same, when it is dislocated from another part.
for the dislocation of the spine in the back
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of healing, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations suddenly occur without will, cannot be held back, and many times some member becomes soft, or the two hips or the two arms.
And many times the spine changes to four parts; that which changes at the back is called "kyphosis".
The treatment is that you recognize that kyphosis has come from childhood: if there is no point of healing or sanitation from the whole body.
And that which comes from falling or from percussion or similar things, the ancient ways of cures by grand words, where it does not have much benefit in all.
But I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in diverse ways.
I say that in the gibbosity that comes to the foot before, no one is healthy.
and also that which comes directly to the ribcage, and one cannot cure those except for that which properly comes to the back, as I say.
and it is that the patient should be stretched out on a level bed, and have a strap placed beneath him, so he does not slip.
then fix a thick stick at the head on the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a bandage beneath the patient's joints, and another at the thighs, and at the knees, and at the ankles.
and two attendants adjust the bandages, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the thick sticks.
and be well fastened, the stick as we have said, and the doctor places his hands on the spine firmly, until it is reset.
And if it does not return with this treatment, take a tube of three fingers' length, and place it beneath the patient's spine, and the patient should be in a straight position, and put the head of the tube beneath the patient's spine, then place the middle of the tube on the vertebrae; and place the mirrors at their ends on the other head of the tube, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, do it with the tourniquet that turns by hand.
And it is that you place three stitches at the head of the patient's arm, and three others at the ends, and between each stitch, above and below, a palm's width of space.
and have in each stitch a small perforation, where the tourniquet runs, and the stitches are firmly fixed to the ground, so that they do not move; and between each three stitches have one turning stitch, where the thread turns, and have in two turnings two small stitches of a palm's width, to turn the tourniquet.
and then the ligament that is among the bones at the turning towards the head, and the other ligament towards the feet at the other turning, and each of the ministers turns its turning to all the ligaments, and the masters place the spine evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, then place on the emplaster of desiccative with a lot of egg white, and then the staples, and then the stick of a tablet of two inches long, which grips the limb of the humpbackedness and the part of the healthy spine, then tie with a ligament, as we have said, and use the subtle nourishment of the patient, until they are healthy.
and if anything happens at the end of the health, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the stick that we mentioned before; and no time is wasted in administering it on a piece of lead.
and no time does the appearance come in the rear of the spine of the back, and think that it is dislocations; and it is the bone that opens, because one should not have presumption: perhaps death may suddenly occur.
of the dislocations of the thigh
You know that the joints of the thigh and the joints of the shoulder only come dislocated, not as with other joints; and the joint of the thigh is dislocated in four ways: inward and outward, forward and backward; and more inward than outward, and a little dislocated forward and backward.
And the sign of its dislocation inward is that when one joins the ailing leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the patient's knee than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee at the fire. and it is the limb that is below the inflamed abscess, because the head of the hip joint comes there.
And the signs of the one for whom it comes to the fainting, are that these accidents are contrary to those beforehand.
And the signs of the one who faints beforehand, are that they stand well on their leg according to the accomplishment; however, do not double-cross the knee without pain, and if you want to make it better, then it cannot advance, and holds back his urine, and inflates the groin, and when he goes, then it passes over the ankle.
And the signs of the one who faints behind, are that he cannot stretch his knee, nor double, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and it is the head of the thigh at the place beneath the ribs.
The reminders of this resemblance of dislocation are that you should beware that the dislocations are ancient, and they stay according to their disposition, so there is no cure; and it does not seem that he has a presumption.
And in that case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of the three manners of dislocation, if you hasten to turn the joint, and straighten inward and outward, and move to the right and left; perhaps by chance it will return, and there is no need for another cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare one strong minister, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand in such a way that he puts his hands under the thighs, then binds with a soft bandage around the thigh; and another holds the head of the bandage;
and they stretch above and below all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This manner of extension is common to four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If this is not so, it is necessary to put a cure on its similarity. When the dislocation is in the buttocks, it is necessary that you place the patient on their healthy side, then put the bandage at the root of the hip, and the joint which is below the groin, then extend the bandage upwards towards the groin, and towards the strength.
Then take another minister by the arms, and embrace the large joint of the hip which is diseased, and extend it to its former shape: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, it is necessary that you bind the four feet of the diseased patient together with a strong and soft bandage on the four heels, and on the four knees, and so the diseased leg is extended four fingers more than the others;
Here is the translation:
And when the dislocation is at the fault, it bothers the patient, as we have said in the one who has gout, and stretches the ligament properly on the affected leg, and also on the foot.
then put the splints, one at the head and another at the feet, then fix the splint between the hips to the patient in the form. and have placed moist cloths around, so that it does not harm the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the mirrors set equal in his hand for the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good. If not, put on the table, and press as we have said in the case of gout, and bother the patient on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the injured leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and place the fingers of one hand on the edge of the injured limb, then press with the other hand, and extend downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in back, it is not necessary to stretch the injured limb downwards, nor lift from the ground, instead it should be as if the hip was dislocated at the back, as we have said about lying on the two hips. and it should be on its face, and the bandage is stretched out as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table.
and it will be a point when the injured person stretches out their legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hips, and put in place the plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
and rest for 3 days or 4 days, then disengage, and put the plaster on top; and if you see that they are even, hold steady, as before, and let it be for 3 days; then disengage, and make it go slowly, until the limb is comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knees are dislocated in 3 ways: it is to know, within and forward, and backward; and do not dislocate at all in front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg to his thigh, and if it does not straighten at his thigh, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and put your foot against his feet;
then take his knee in your hands, and withdraw between your two, then bend the two joints of the knee together; and another minister extends his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he has his leg aligned lightly with his thigh;
and put the plaster on, and adjust the leg to the thigh, and bind them together firmly for two or three days, then remove it; and do not trouble the patient further, until the limb is comforted.
And if the limb is not at all points, then administer a strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it be healthy.
from the dislocation of the ankle
The ankles are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, and within and without.
And the signs are that the shin is inflamed, and it pulls towards the part where it is dislocated:
The joints are easier to reset, and one must extend them gently with one's hands when they are swollen only slightly.
And when it is dislocated from the entire total, it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright, and hold it firmly by the thigh, above the knee;
then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left, several times, then hold it high up, and beautifully place the foot high up;
and do this several times, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns to its place, that is good; if not, start the work again, for it will return;
and if it cannot return thus, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix the foot firmly in the ground between his thighs, and wrap the blankets around him, so that he does not dislocate again;
Then the ministers touch the thigh, and another minister stretches out the foot with their hands or to the ankle, so that they lie on the collar bone of the foot; Then each minister stretches out evenly, and the straps are placed between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when they are stretched out;
Then the mirrors are placed evenly to set the dislocation with their hands, and another minister touches the healthy leg below, and the dislocation returns quickly.
And when it is in place, set the plaster and stuffing above, and bind firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the veins that are on the back of the knee, so that the ligaments are not too stretched.
Then let it be for three days or four, and hold the bandages in place, then loosen them on the third day or the fourth, and deter the patient from moving for three days; and if it goes beyond this term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses appear, it is necessary that you treat them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
of two
When the fingers are dislocated, they must be beautifully extended without effort, and it's a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any of the toes or fingers, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns to its place.
and when it is aligned, and there is no opening, then place under the sole of the foot a table at the joint, then hold firmly, and let it be for two hours, then release; and make it rest, until it is healthy.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with a dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often it happens that the patient dies.
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, be wise in the art and do not use it lightly for a long time, and be pitiful and merciful and slow, not hasty.
and use gentle remedies at the beginning of hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health. and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place now, so that the hot abscesses may depart.
and when the limb is in place, if you apply soothing remedies to the hot abscess, and heal the wound, as it is fitting, with dry ointments;
and if there is a dislocation with a fracture, and you adjust the bones, and do what we have said about simple illnesses;
and beware of entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, for it will be of no value to you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and your body. Amen
