Here is the translation: And it came to me in a vision that I would accomplish this with the treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from everything, thus the science is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of the fires except for small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed off and the science is estranged.
It seems to me that I will vivify it in the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will gather together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, it is the art of medicine extended. And it behooves him who undertakes to immerse himself in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of members, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and brains and the number of holes, and the movement and of moving veins and of resting ones, and where they issue from.
And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name with the nose is much, and with the work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, beware lest he falls into error and kills men; thus I have seen many times more of those who undertake this science and abandon their sense and their experience.
Because I see a foolish doctor who treats an abscess on the neck or a lump in a woman's throat, and he touches the arteries of the neck; for so much blood comes out that the woman falls dead in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in an old man's bladder, and the stone was large; if he carried away with him a piece of the bladder, and the old man died within three days.
And I had already been called by the patient to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if one touched it, he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took in care the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the breakage he had a wound; and the doctor, due to ignorance, held the breakage together over the wound by strong binding, and did not leave the wound any space to breathe, and left it thus terminated; and he commanded that it should not be loosened at all; and it remained thus until the leg became entirely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and dislocate the leg; and when I saw it was dislocated, he was in pain and did not feel any pain.
But all the way the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the limb was almost completely lost.
And I saw another wound that burst open an abscess, and then it became inflamed due to the evil of its dominance.
For cancer, when it is full of melancholic humor, it does not seem that one should touch it with iron unless it is in a place where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
And for this reason, third son, you are in need to know that the work of hands is divided into 12 divisions: it is to know whether there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show you in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary that you guard yourself against them, so that foolish people cannot speak evil of you.
Take up your arms in caution, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and salvation; and leave the grievous maladies of sorrowful sanity; and lay down your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galien says in one of his warnings: "Do not take care of a bad illness, lest you be called foolish by the people."
I have divided this treatise according to twelve chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medicine cauteries, and this chapter is organized from the head to the feet; and it deals with the forms of instruments, and the ways of performing cauteries, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping glasses and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is organized and deals with the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from the head to the feet, and deals with the forms of instruments.
Here is the translation:
I say that the qualities of aid and usefulness are the longest discourse and subtle science and secret responses; and from this speak the wisest of the wise ones, and agree to it; and I suffer few words for them, because I reduce their length.
I say that fire cautery universally aids every complexion where there is matter, because there are two complexions: it is to know that a hot complexion has matter, and a dry complexion has no matter.
In hot and dry complexions together with matter, some devised none and said that fire cautery is great aid; and the others disagreed: that fire cautery is not suitable for diseases coming from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to cure hot diseases by heat, nor through dryness; and he who says the opposite claims that fire cautery provides great aid for hot and dry diseases that come from the bodies of men. Because you examine the body of the man and his moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it true many times through experimentation.
And in this way, no one should interfere except those who have experienced it, and who know through long use the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the happenings and the space of the tenses; we do not fear other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses. And all the mirrors assembled and agreed with the cautery.
And know, son, that assembling fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than medical cauterization.
For fire is simple, and does not come except to the member that is cooked, and does not harm another member if it is not named.
The burning medicines pass from one member to another in alignment, and bring about the limb's grievous wounds through sanitation; and by chance, they kill the patient.
The fire is powerful because of its height and the goodness of its substance does not make it excessive, if there is no excess.
And I have found this through experimentation and the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it is established on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I reveal to you the secret which is deposited in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out bodily diseases, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agree on what time the cauterizations should be done, and they select the suitable moments.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries are immediately relieved by the aid of cauterization; and likewise the cauterizations are for necessary pains and hastenings that cannot wait for the time when greater evil may come to the limb.
And do not think anything, dear son, as the foolish doctor does; for in the disease that is healed by cautery there is no return; and they say it thus; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that cause pain, and is worth more than medicine due to the speed of its value, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
And it is possible that the disease worsens at times according to the patient's complexion and the place of the disease and its virtue; and they are assembled in him the excesses through the acquisition of foods and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered in the place where there is little excess and moisture, as cauteries of density for pain, and similar things, and this pain does not return; but it happens little.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth more than medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cures for any disease and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it is worth. Then it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
The ancient ones said that cauterizations with gold instruments are more effective than those of iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the eyes of cautery do not make putridity, but it is not true as I have experienced it, and found that it is seen in some homes; and cauterizations with gold are worth more than those of iron, just as they did say.
And in every way when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know how it is heated by the color of gold, and it is quickly cooled down; and if one heats it too much, they make it into fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
And for this reason we use cauterization of iron that we have made more suitable to our work.
Now I have ordered this chapter according to the chief joints just below, because it is easier to find the way.
for fire cautery
These cauteries are good for moisture and cold on the brain, and in it there is a remedy made by the cause of a disease called "soda", and by the cause of many humors which descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for multitude of noises and pain of teeth and pain of throat, and also for all diseases that come from cold if like paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by medicine solving and modifying the head, three or four times, according to whether the virtue and the age and the habituation of the patient can suffer; and then make the head of the patient rest.
And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands on the soles of his feet; afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes; and let your two fingers come there where the blood flows, then heat up the cautery which is called "olivare", whose form is this:
And place the sign of ink on the affected area, and make an incision by gently prying and twisting your hand little by little while rotating; then remove your hand suddenly, and re-examine the area if you see a small opening; and if you do not see it, start again with the cautery until you see the opening as I have told you; afterwards take a bit of silk, and put soft cotton inside, and place it on the affected area, and let it stay for three days; afterwards put a warm compress in a cloth; and leave it there until the wound is opened; afterwards treat the wound of the attachment which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
And the ancient ones said that the more one delays treating the wound, the more it suppurates; and therefore it is necessary to assist movement.
And they said that one should not leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
And others say that one should leave the cautery so long above, and thrust so strongly that one removes as much of the bone as the vertebrae that women put in their fuseaux because the humors issue forth; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one should cure and soothe.
And these two manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good in every way, unless in some homes where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the head is weakened by the continuous natural solutions, as we demonstrate in other members; and also since the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more saving and healing for me, and of this use I often assemble salvation.
of the old pain of the head
When the entire head comes to chronic pain, and lasts a long time, then the patient should use remedies such as yeris and pills that are called "cochie", and of purging the head and eyes and applying poultices; and if they undergo the cautery that we mentioned before, but it is not effective.
Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize below where we said to apply the fire earlier.
After making fire cautery on each horn of the head just to the bone, as we said before, and make fire cautery where it is called "vasselz"; and it is in this way that one applies ventouses; and hold your hand so that you do not touch just to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it seems that the cauteries of the horns are more subtle than those where one makes fire on the middle of the head, and this is the form.
For the fire of the head When in one part of the head there is sudden pain, and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is purged by mondifying medicines, and other cures that I have mentioned in the division of diseases are made, and all this does not profit: then one makes cauteries according to eight manners, that is to know medicine ague and fire.
The cauteries of medicine ague are that you take a sweet almond, and remove the shell and the kernel; then make the temple where the pain holds in such a manner that you can replace the sweet almond under the skin; and when it will be replaced, bind it well and leave it thus for ten hours; and then remove it and treat further with the sweet almond, and leave the wound thus for eight days or nine; then put on a cotton plug soaked in butter until it becomes porous.
After the treatment of anointing until it is healthy; and if you see that this is done with some combining medicines that I have written or described in the treatise on combining medicines.
The iron cautery is according to this method. Heat the cautery of iron, which is its form:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a hook or has little curvature, and in the middle a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold with your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that the majority of the skin where the cautery is applied be burned; and lift your hand so the artery does not become hardened, which is deprived, and decorates abundant blood.
After putting cotton in oil of sesame, and placing it on the spot for three days; then I put moist cotton in a poultice, and then cure the spot of inflammation so that it be healthy; and if you want to cauterize this emigration with the cautery called "cultellare", at all points, and beware of touching the artery in this emigration which is not ancient.
of the migration
Here is the translation:
And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the enemy at the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in this chapter on extracting the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. cuts; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears due to coldness
When pain comes to the ear from cold, and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery which is called "points", because it is the form:
After pointing all around the ailing ear, or around the .ij., where the pain holds in both, and you straighten a little below the root of the ear, then you have signed the place of an inch; and it has .x. points around each ear; after cure the place until it is healthy.
from the torment of the mouth
Torture that must be cured by fire cautery is not suitable except for those that move with inflammation, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not perform cautery on similar things that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
When you cure this kind of torture that moves with inflammation and evacuations of head and gargling, and it does not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with .iij. cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little below the temple, and the third at the adjustment of the .ij. lips; and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery on the head of the ear above a little below the crown of the head, and another in the temple also long as a finger; and leave the cautery there until most of the heat is absorbed; and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the resemblance of the cutting instrument that we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the cutter be a little larger; after curing the wound thus as I have said before, until it is healthy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then you make three cauteries: one on the three horns of the head, and one in the head, and one on the vessel called "vasselz" as we have said before, and another cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and so be cured thus as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this illness it is necessary to give the patient large draughts and mondified pills to clarify the brain; after that, place the entire head of the patient in a sinapi plaster, which is written or treated in the treatise on plasters; and this is the method of cautery: if you do it as I have said.
If it is thus, good; and if it is not, make three cauteries within the head descending to the neck, with a space of two fingers between each cautery; and treat as for others, and if you have seen them joined, and the patient is suffering, make one cautery in the middle; and if the master is, another on the horns, and treat until it is good; and so are the cauteries called "olivare", as I have said before.
of the coldness of the head It is necessary that the head be purified with years and with what we have said before; afterwards, raise the head of the patient, then do fire cauterization on the head and on each horn, and behind and on the spine of the neck; and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, do three fire cauterizations on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most burning heat is arrested, and lift your hand; afterwards, cure until it is healthy, and it is the cautery that is called "olivare" which we have said before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to purify the brain with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is severely suffering and unable to take medicine.
And if it's an infant who cannot yet suffer, make them gargle and chew food moistening the brain often with good meat; afterwards they take the head in a circle, and do fire cauterization according to what we said before, and fire cauterization on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffers, make them undergo fire cauterization as I said for one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the fire cauterization be olive according to the method I said.
If the patient is an infant, make them undergo subtle fire cauterization according to this method:
When the cause of melancholy is excessive or corrupt and gross moisture, then cauterize with such fire cauterizations as we said for one who has paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will clear their brain, according to what was said before in the division.
After the head of the patient is reposed; after make a well-made circle, as if it were a circlet, and place it on the head; and the patient should be crossed, and held firmly in all parts; after present the liniment, and take measures against old burdock bruises; and heat the cautery at moderate temperature, so that two fingers can suffer it; after remove the circle from within the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient each week once with another good government, until they are healthy.
Where you see that the fire cautery is done, making many points throughout the entire cautery. This manner of cautery moistens the brain similarly; and then put on cotton wool in a burrow and in the fat of a hen.
of the warmth of the eyes When warmth comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient thing humecting the head, and ward off all moisture, and make sweat or bathe many times a day.
After commanding to rear his head, and make him cautery in the head, and make him .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples if the descent of warmth is at the .ij. eyes together, or in one place where the descent is; and cut off all the veins and arteries that are under the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of the efflux of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then staunch it with a piece of powder as you can.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incising the cautery, how you will set it in place; and no one ever cauterizes or touches the two eyes behind.
at the course of the tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that appear as a cold, phlegmatic humor in the head; and one sees that it is superfluous, then I do the cautery that I spoke of at the beginning of the treatment, descending to the eyes: one cautery in the head, and two cauteries on the temples, and two cauteries or touches behind the eyes; and if there is need for more, then cauterize gently above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
at the course of the tears through the depths of the eyes
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit at all, then give a drink to the patient with three evil humors; after he raises his head, and make him undergo fire cautery or mild olive tree cautery; and apply three cauteries of the cautery that is called "clavilis" on the three veins, a little below the eyebrows; and beware of the artery that you do not touch it. And this is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
When the skin of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery that is called "olive tree". For it is the form:
And if you see that three cauteries are applied on the three veins as long as the veins are; and do not leave your hand there unless the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair that pricks the eye Many times it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted into pains, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries in two ways: that is to know by fire or by ardent medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient in their healthy state; afterwards, draw on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as if the foliage of a mirror, and it is the beginning of the sign from the hairs; then I put wet cotton in the glare of an egg and musk oil on the eye, then heat up the cautery according to its form.
After cauterizing on the affected area which you have marked little by little several times, so that the heart be at rest in that place; and the signs of the health of the skin are that you see the parchment retracted, and the hairs lifted to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it be thus for three days, then I put moist cotton on a wound so that the scabbing is removed; after the treatment of the joint so that it is healthy.
And if after this the hairs come, and the parchment is softened, then restart the cautery on the same place, as you did previously; and if the hairs are fallen out, if you cauterize so that the parchment is lifted to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye with the hair.
The burning medicines are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow so they are great and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and living chalk, one .З. each, and mix them well together; and do it quickly, so it doesn't cool down, then spread it on the shape you made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the eye's parchment; and if the disease holds in one eye only, you should operate on one, and if it is in both eyes alike, and put under the eye moist cotton in a stream of water; and the head of the patient should be healthy and show your finger pointing to the medicine, and press a little and loosen all the times that the patient feels the sting of the medicine, for they feel the sting as from fire. When you have made them grow long, then apply medicine to your finger. And when the mortification has passed, lift the skin of the area, and reward yourself if you see the skin lifted as it was lifted by fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good. If not, then apply medicine to the skin again or the medicine did not work, until your operations are even, and your eyes are at a point; then put on soft cotton in a warm place until the bitter courses are chosen, after curing the skin of the joint which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
And if you are more skilled than to well guard your operation with great care so that it does not affect the medicine in your eyes.  And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, then recommence the medicine on the skin which is softened by the proper skin, just as you did before; after curing until it is healthy; and this is the form of the leaves of the dead mirror:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to their constructions; and do not deviate from the right path for him who is studying this art.
of the treatment of a fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in a healthy position; and hold the bandages around his head with your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does he nod his head; afterwards apply cotton soaked in water or juice of persillion on the wound; afterwards heat the cautery which is thus: and shape it like a hollow pen, so that it fits the cautery; if you see, if one part is pointed towards the other, and if you see, if it is also like a tent; but anyway, this which is shaped is of no use for your work.
After pressing the fistula which is overturned, and removing the putrid matter, and the dryness; and if it is closed, open it, and remove the filth from the wound; afterwards place on the cautery in a hot form, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nail below the eye, so that your hand does not make a fool; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrodes it.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: and they make a quantity of .Z. of poultice; and hold your hand or camphor firmly, and the patient does not move at all, so that the warm poultices do not run on their oil; and it is necessary to put on the patient's eye a cotton wool soaked in water or in wine: the poultice is suitable for fistula, and the healthy person marvels at its sanitizing.
And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have spoken of, it's good. If not, then it is necessary to administer pustules to the nose, and bring the fistula back to its proper place according to what is needed in its own location.
of cracks on the lips Many times, cracks on the lips occur that are called "poils", and similarly on the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks of the bone that we have discussed in divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then apply a small cautery scalpel according to this form:
And insert it hastily into those cracks until it reaches just at the font; afterwards treat the bone of cartilage until it is healthy.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth, afterwards it makes a putrid and rough fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit at all: then it is necessary to apply a cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; afterwards boil or pierce the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron reaches just at the font of it, and behind the bone; and do this one or two times, afterwards treating what we have said in cures, until it is healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the bone and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
two movements of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not work, then put the head of the patient in a healthy position; afterwards heat the cautery in such a way that you place a chain over the tooth; and place the hot cautery hastily, and hold your hand so the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards remove your hand and restart the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
And in this way the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
of the pain of the teeth
When pain from teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or decay, and the treatments of medicine do not work, then it is necessary to resort to cautery in two ways: and cautery by burning and cautery by fire.
Cautery by burning is such that you take burning coal from a valet, and the tip in an iron or copper spoon; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and boil in burning coal, and place on the aching tooth immediately and hold until it cools; and thus do often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see the coal and cotton in burning cold, and place on the aching tooth, and place on the iron so that the fire reaches the decay of the tooth.
The fire cautery is such that you take a iron or copper rod, and make it thick so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; afterwards heat the cautery, so that its form comes from there afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold with your hand until the cautery cools; do this often, for the pain will be relieved that same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with good coal in the impression of this cautery, and then remove the rod forcefully; and this is the form of the cautery:
When the scalp lesions are of cold and moist humors, and do not respond to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery iron from that place, and open two holes for the fumes to exit at the cautery of the other part; and apply the hot cautery on the abscess once, or as needed, until it reaches the source of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and apply a soft cotton dressing soaked in boric powder so that the wound is clean; after healing, treat the wounds with ointments and tinctures until they are healthy.
When the moist humors prevail on the channels of the arm, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by medicines that dissolve; afterwards, make a cautery at the root of the throat, and beware not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn the skin but only a little. Afterwards, make another cautery at the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and it is the cautery that is called "clavile" from which we have the form before; and heal the wounds as we have said before, until they are healthy.
of the tonsils When all the illnesses of the arm are from cold moistures, and the patient does not have fever or shivering, and it is an old illness, then you make two cauteries on the forearm in their places; and another cautery between the chest and the shoulder blades; and let the cautery that is called "clavile" according to the form mentioned beforehand.
And if you see, make a cautery by pricking at the entire cautery that is called "poins" because the form is thus beforehand in the illness of the ears; and let the poins be just up to ..., or as needed. Afterwards cure the limb according to what has been said beforehand, and let the cauteries be at three points according to this form:
And because they are lighter cauteries, because you make three of them at once.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After the patient is laid on his back and on his side; after you raise the heart which is inside the swollen area with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery iron that has .ij. nodes because it is in this form:
and cauterize the heart as much as it pierces just to the side, and thus the figure of the cautery is assembled with .iiij. cauteries; and because it is made with the cautery iron that has .iij. nodes, therefore the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the cautery iron that has .iij. nodes:
And at no time is it joined to this .i. nerve because it has .viij. cauteries.
After putting fire cautery on the affected areas with silk; then make the patient rest, and do not move their limbs too long so that they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, this thing happens rarely, then make fire cautery on the thick part of the fire cautery claw, or many cauteries by pricking. For the joint is re-formed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
of fire cautery of pleurisy
The old people said that one should make fire cautery for pleurisy of aristologe roots, and in this manner: take a long root of aristologe, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and let it be as thick and as long as your fingers; and grind it into oil, and heat it over the fire, and apply cautery. Apply one cautery between the ribs and the neck, and two small cauteries a little ways apart on the part that is below the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining slightly backwards; and one cautery in the chest, and another above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and one as well as the sides of the chest, which deflects the cautery that is between the shoulders; and do not press with your hand, but make it open just like a scent.
Here is the translation:
of the worst
When you cure the disease of the worst of what we have said as divisions of cures, and it does not benefit at all, then they add three kinds of cautery that are good for everything.
One of the ways is that you make three cauteries, or four, in a line according to the length of the worst, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cautery, and let the patient be aware of it on his back;
and another way of cautery is that you heat the cautery that has three nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and raise the heart which is near the worst, or where the pain of the patient comes from the left side, and let the elevations that you raise the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Here is the translation:
of dropsy
Cautery is of no value to the dropsical, except in the manner that is called "asclytes". When you treat according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary to make four cauteries around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one on the chest; and so the cauteries should be well near the width of a finger.
Afterwards, let the cautery be opened for a short time, and do not leave the treatment of the patient's ailment after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the four intentions will be together with the aid of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the club-like shape that we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been placed here before.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and are full of yellow water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular; and hold your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too much in depth, so the yellow water would be driven out, and the cautery should be according to this form:
After doing so on both legs, make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the cutellaire; and let the cauteries be of a length, one beneath the knee in front and the other behind, within the leg; and leave the cauteries on for a long time without curing, so that the water is expelled; after which cure the other cures that we have said.
of the menorhea
Here is the translation:
And if you see the abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make them undergo cautery on the fingers, and apply cautery to each spot, and small cauteries on the stomach below the waist, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good aid.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or one or several, and are ancient and are of gross cold and moist humors corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, if you make cauteries: .iij. on the spine of the back, that which is all deflected downwards along the almond-shaped and triangularly; and .i. cautery below the anus, .ij. two.
And if you think that the stomach is cooled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face inflamed, then make a great cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the cauteries of the key; and let the cautery stay long enough. After treating the place until it is healthy.
of the fleshiness that is named "thelul"
When you burn the fleshiness called "thelul", if you heat the cautery that seems appropriate, and then apply it thoroughly to the burned "thelul"; and hold your hand so the cauteries reach the base of the vein, where the blood flows freely; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of "thelul", if you cauterialize each one as we have said; after the treatment of useful remedies, they will be healthy; and if you apply a large cautery to the affected area, it will be more helpful.
of a badly healed wound
When the patient cannot endure the pain of a high temperature, which we will describe in its place, then comes such an illness that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Here is the translation:
of the disease of the kidneys When pain from cold comes with great windiness, and does not take hold of a woman's womb, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to the loins on one side and the other at the clavicle cautery that we mentioned before; and if we make many cauterizations in a line, they will bring greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and fragile from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then apply cautery to the lower part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin, and one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery as long as we need for a cure; and make one cautery above the back, or two if you are in great need; and make clavicle cautery according to the form mentioned before.
of the marrow When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their terminations delayed; and when they come, it causes great pain: then it is necessary to perform .iii. cauteries around the belly, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and .ii. cauteries above the back; and let the cauteries be gentle, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the joints of the department are twisted, so it is necessary to cautery the patient on the hip joint with a .i. cautery similar to a circle, and mark in front of the joint around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those with which one has cautered the stomach.
And if you are not present for the cautery, make three cauteries of the olive tree, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the wounds; and cure until they are healthy.
of the pain in the ankle When pain comes in the ankle joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is not cured by what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is ancient: then you must purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
After making the cautery; and the way of making the cautery is according to three methods: it is to know how to assemble burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many methods, one of which is such: that you make three triangular cauteries on the ankle joint in this form, and make a good profoundness and greatness, and leave between each cautery the width of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive-tree-based; never make a cautery in the middle on top of the ankle joint, because there are three according to this form.
And if you see that the cautery is applied to the circle that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the thigh; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire thigh, and all the spaces around the heart are burned.
And it is the method that one does in sciatica, when the pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach just to the knee or just to the leg. And if it reaches the knee and the leg, then make .ij. cauteries there where the patient says that the pain holds, and .i. cautery above the ankle .iiij. fingers, a little on the left side; and let the cautery be cutellaire, and let the spaces around the heart be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends just to two fingers from the foot or almost there, then apply the cautery where they feel the pain .iij. points or .iiij. at the cautery which is called «points».
And if the mastery is, then do more of it; and if they know that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, then make a cautery at the cutellaire or circular cautery, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more great nuisance and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot also, and was pierced and corrupted to the point where the foot was. After a ventosity of the belly from which he got death.
And if the pains are in two parties together, make cautery on one and the other, in this manner. // And the wise men said about the cautery of the thigh, that it is in this way, make a hot iron and let it be at the top as big as an egg from a duck, or a little less, and let it be between the two spaces at a distance of an inch, and let the spaces be above two inches, and let them also be like new ones, and they have a well-made iron handle; and this is the form:
And let it be heated until it is completely red and gives off a sweet smell, and then place it on the thigh of the afflicted hip, and turn it around the healthy side; and cauterize once with a hot iron and leave it for three days; and then make an ointment of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the treatment is done until it is completely healed.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its severity, and we see few who use it; and however this is one of the good cauteries, which can alleviate suffering, and there where it is needed.
from the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from a fall or percussion or by excessive evacuation, or by expansion of cold matter, none of these appearances is worth cauterization, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after this that the patient is void of fetid pills or other appearances, that one makes on their back, where the pain holds, three marked lines of an inch, and in each line five or more cauterizations according to the strength and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the cauterization be made according to the cauterizer which is called "poins"; and if you see, make two or three cauterizations at the clavicle joint according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a stiff neck when they lift themselves up, and fear; and you find it in the upper spine of the back and in the appearance which comes on the other spines.
When you see this and you want to cure it, if you cauterize with the cautery of that according to this method.
If you cauterize each part of the spine equally. And if you want to cauterize around the spine with a poignant cautery .ij. lines or .iij., and let the points be close to one another. After curing the limb so that it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cautery in a twisted manner which is in a spasm of nerve.
from the pain of the joints
When pain of the joints comes from moistures that are spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes on foot, which the physician properly calls "podagra", and when it is from cold cause and treatments with medicines cannot cure it, if it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the mount of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-like according to this method.
And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make a cautery at every point they call "point". And if the pains come just to the knees and other joints, and this often happens, then make a cautery on each knee, three or four cauteries for each part, all the way up to the olive tree; and if you have more mastery, do more, but don't hold your hand firmer than necessary until the species of the heart is ready.
And if the pains descend just to the knees and back, then administer the cautery as we said in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the finger .ij. lines; and if there remains a point of pain in the two, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come just to the sides or just to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and make good government for the patient and prepare medicines. For if you make good government and you purge the phlegm, it will be healthy with the help of God.
of the rupture of the spleen
When the rupture comes from anger, and the blood descends to the intestines and it's new, then you should understand that when you want to cure the wound, you must not neglect that day; and he uses things that loosen the belly, so that the fiens descend from his belly; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm as long as the intestine is repaired, and put it in your two hands, and sign underneath the rupture on the bone of the finger, and at all a sign that would be similar to half a circle above the body; then apply the cautery in the form:
Here is the translation:
And you know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operations are worthless. And it is necessary that the cauteries for children be subtle according to the measure of their age, and for great people also great according to their measure; afterwards twelve days cure the wound of the burnt area so that the scabbing is removed; afterwards cure other wounds so that they are healthy, and anoint the patient forty days on his back so that the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that their nourishments be relaxed for a long time, so that the boil does not burst when he gets up to go to chambers.
And afterwards forty days, when he wants to get up, have a well-made bed prepared for him, and the same for forty other days; and let him have good rest, so that he exercises little and guards against too great repletion of drinking and eating, and of too high pride; and when he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healthy. And I shall describe afterwards the treatment of surgical wounds in his chapter. of the rupture of the belly
When wounds come to other parts and are acquainted, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make them ready for fire cautery of two or three kinds according to their quantity, and be careful with the third kind of cautery; afterwards cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at the angles of the cautery in this form.
but first mark the limits of the wound and make a line according to its width above the wound, and another below, and hold your hand in all the cauterized areas. But the first cauterizations are lighter and more moderate.
from ancient pain in any member (or limb) When pain comes to any member (or limb), or from a fall or a blow, and that pain lasts long, and the cure of medicine does not work, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and let the cauteries be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and location of torcions and of its pain. If it is healthy from the first cautery, it is good; if not, recommend another cautery on top of that, for it is customary that you make the cauteries as long as the patient is healthy, because it is necessary that you do the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
of sickness
The sick are often aided by cautery with great help, and especially the illness that comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy. When you see the cautery, take heed that the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor delay, and you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the sick, then make cauteries on the head: one on the forehead near the nose, and another towards the front at the end of the eyebrows; and one on the horns, and one behind on the temple; and hold your hand so that the cautery reaches just to the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the gross humors can come out; and cautery on the mouse according to what is before.
And if the sickness is scattered throughout; and it appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you make cauteries with these cauteries that we have said on the head, and one cautery in the nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and four cauteries on the spine of the back, and one on the chest and another on the side, and two on the shoulders; and two on the hips, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the veins that are on the rear calcifying, lest you burn them; and never make a cautery on the bone of the finger, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
And know that the more you make of cautery, the more it helps, and it profits; and know that the sick do not feel any pain from the cautery as long as they are healthy, because the body is already totally corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the fevers. After healing the wound with flour and honey, and other cures, so that it may be sound.
of inflammation
When inflammation occurs in a limb and is treated with medicines and oils and emplasters, but it is not healthy, then one makes cauteries on the limb according to its size and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery be a little inside the skin of the heart; then cure the swelling until it is healthy. And sometimes one makes a cautery on the hand and foot and back, at the issue of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if the inflammation is eliminated; and never bother with it if it is not knowledgeable about the limbs and issues of moving nerves in the body.
of abscesses
When the disease called "abscesses" is inflamed, and the engines of medicine are of no value, then one cauteries with a cautery a little deep, according to the quantity of the skin of the heart, until the whiteness is eliminated, and its color is changed; then cure with flour of fenugreek and of lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of almonds, each a part; and mix all together, and bind with a dressing, and apply to the limb until it is healthy.
The treatment of cancer by cautery.
When cancer begins to appear, and you see it stopping, if you cauterize around the circle that seems to be around the whole of the cancer. And always the wise men say that one should make a cautery in the middle of the cancer; but this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen several times; and a more correct thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cases of cauteries.
of the inflammation that cannot heal
When some people have a disease called "adubelati", and it delays healing or because of the superfluity that it makes or because of the weakness of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or because of the tension; and you see hastening to heal: then you cauterize around many small cauteries in pricking; afterwards you leave them thus. For it hastens to heal.
And if you perceive the entire fire cautery, heat the cautery to the form it is.
And put your hand in the middle of this disease which is called "adubelati" so that the cautery has perceived the heart, and it is such that the cautery is felt by the patient in a manner that the course of the purulence is alleviated. After the treatment so that it may be perfectly healthy.
The treatment with fire through iron
Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", and it's nothing but a mangling of the members, for it eats away the members just like fire devours dry wood. If you see this disease in someone who can suffer from cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries gently and strongly, according to what is suitable for the patient or the disease; after cauterying all parts so that you remove all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed. And then let it be for two days, and put cauteries on the limbs suffering from fire with oil so that the burning from the fire is removed, and all corruption. After the treatment, engender scars.  And if you see after two days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's good; and if not, then restart the cautery on what remains of the corrupted limbs. And this mangling has never been cured by medicine except with the fire cautery; but nonetheless fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment of medicine in the division: take as much as you need to master it.
of the pores that come to the feet
Often it happens that the feet are afflicted by a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a great faulty thing that whitens the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are in two ways. It is to know fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is when you heat a cautery iron like a pen of a vault, and make it of good iron at the measure that it can pierce the nail from all parts, and that it has subtle margins; afterwards put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and let it thus for three days until it begins to rot; then make a poultice of crushed savages boiled with oil, and leave the poultice on throughout the night, and the nail will fall out and be disrooted from its roots. Then cure the foot of ointment by anointing so much that it is healthy.
And if they are converted by faulty body, and often it happens in the hands and feet, then you must apply hot water cautery; and it is in this manner: take a cane of iron or a pen of a vault, and put it on the nail and the surrounding area, that is to say pores and warts; and put the cane so that it pierces all around, then put a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand in turning so that the margin of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and then finds the hot water deeply until the root; and let the patient suffer a little the biting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will disroot everything from its roots. Thus do one after another, until you clear those that are in the body, then cure the ointments that engender char.
the cure of trembling
When some tremble with cold or nerves, or quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you do three fire cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one fire cautery between each vertebra; and one fire cautery or foot, and one on the stomach for olive cautery; if they let the trembling, and hasten the healing of the cold disease.
of painful pustules
Not a single time do they appear by themselves in the body without painful pustules, which come from gross corrupt matters. It is necessary at first when they appear that one does fire cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle fire cautery of fir of myrtle, where the point is taken into fire, or root of aristologist long, or lentricular cautery. And not a single time do they cauterize from the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow worse afterwards, but are dislodged the superfluities which come from them, and are healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Here is the translation:
And whenever it happens to nobody, if you hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it steady as much as the blood is appeased beneath your finger, and no more comes out; then apply fire cautery, olive oil, more or less small and large as it becomes all red; then take .i., great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is routed, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery steady until the blood is reestablished.
And if it happens to burst forth when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is stanched; and beware that you do not irritate the nerve that is nearby, and that another malice does not come upon the patient; and know that when blood does not flow from the artery, it cannot be well stanched, especially when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the three methods that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines applied which have power to stanch blood; and so be bound and held firmly afterwards.
Whoever administers the stanching of the blood in a narrow place, either by wrapping tightly with cloths or by putting things firmly on, or similar things, does not profit unless it is done promptly.
And if it happens to none and he does not have a better medicine present, then one must put their finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and bend well so that it is reset above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but move the soft part of the arm often so that it be very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and reset; and make inquiries beforehand about those who need cauteries and medicines.
As we have said in the first chapter, all diseases require fire cautery or medicine burning, and the instruments and causes and the forms of cauteries; and I placed that chapter among the chief just below, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method because it is easier to find what one wants.
And thus I begin it, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one on cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for cures. If they come from those who hurt themselves with their disease so that they die quickly from the worsening of their illness, and from the greatness of their malice; and from this one should have fear. And of these there is one who gives you his sense and says: "wait, I am cured"; and the disease is despised. It does not become that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of what you are certain of, and what you can take and lose; and use prediction and indication in the cures of your diseases where salvation may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good renown, and glory, and long-lasting memory.
Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and direction, and may you be willing to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Here is the translation:
a full head of water
It is known that this disease often comes from the wet nurse to the infant, and when the nurse holds the child's head too tightly; and sometimes it happens because of a wrong posture that one does not know.
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen hasten to death; and for this reason it seems to me that it is better to abandon the work in certain treatments.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head grew so much every day that it could not be supported; and the moisture was so great that it became mortal, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone under the siphac, between the heart and the bone; and the treatment is such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and it should be as long as we need, so that the moisture flows; and see here the form of the spatula:
If moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, make four incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the signs that you observe the commissures of the chief overtly from each part, and the water flows out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not respond to you: then it is necessary to make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, remove all the moisture outside. After that, hold the incisions with drapels and powders, and apply wine and oil, and let it be until the fifth day; then disperse, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and let the head be elevated, and give the patient dry food in moderation, as long as the member is comforted and healthy.
And another way of incision is that you examine where the abscess opens up, and assemble the water flow; for it is never before, never behind, never to the right, and never to the left.
Here is the translation:
of rheum
When there is a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or in the breast, and the disease is ancient, and the medical treatment does not benefit at all, then the last resort cure is the cautery with fire that one uses to cauterize the .ij. arteries.
It is necessary, then, to cauterize the veins, so that the patient makes his head fall back; after rubbing the skin with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then stretching out the patient's neck under the entire cloth; then look where the vein beats, and the eyes of one and the other are behind the ears, and are slightly bent back; then mark the eyes of the notch, then cauterize one and the other with a sharp pointed instrument of .ij. inches, until the vein is cut just to the bone, and that is done through the width of the head.
And if you see, insert the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cauterize above, cutting just as .ij. fingers deep across.
And when the vein is cut, then the blood constantly flows out above.
And if the artery does not open to feel, then you must measure the quantity of the space of two fingers, then sign from the notch and make just up to the bone; and it is necessary to put out so much blood that it is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains upon the bone point of the siphac, if you cut away apostemes that do not come, then hold the wound and bind it, and the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
of the migrating (or wandering)
When the migrating pain comes, and catarrh agitates, due to the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is treated by ways of cures of medicine and all that does not profit him, if we extract the arteries from the temples and the cauteries, as we have recounted.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs on their temples grow back, and attends to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well with its beating, and is poorly received by those who are too cold; and if it is received, then they strain their neck from certain drapery, then rub the place of a rough cloth, and raise the place of warm water as much as the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula in the form of:
Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then lift it up with pincers, and separate well the tissues that are beneath each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it to the point of the uncinate, then cover that part according to the quantity of the joints. For if it is not covered, then do not touch the wound at all.
And draw out blood from the 6 veins, just up to the 3rd; and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you bind it with a double thread of strong silk, which will not allow it to move before the closure of the wound, and allows the flow of blood; then cover the superfluous tissue that is between the 6 ligatures at that hour, and then, if you see, so cauterize with a cautery cutellaire up to the bone as much as the joints are covered; and this is the mother work, if the patient has no fever and it is of warm complexion.
For the fire cautery is aid to finish the moisture: because it is of great aid against moisture. Where it is necessary to extract the arteries that one fills the vein with much cotton and places well-made tents; and when you remove them, if they are cured by dry medicines that make the flesh grow, and of tents, until it is healthy; and if without cutting into the artery as soon as you operate, if you hasten to cover with cautery, or you fill the vein with vitriol and hold it in your hand so the blood is stanched; and if you do not have this present, if you put on the vein your finger so the blood congeals, and raise the vein of cold water until the blood stops, and be steady as it is necessary; and what is more moderate and lighter in extracting the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this trenchant cautery of .ij. parts, but the trenchant should be well spaced to avoid burning for too long a time. For when the instruments are too hot, they hold less their warmth. And it should have between the .ij. small knives .i. a large space, and then when you have signed on the edges of the .ij. veins, and you place the iron rod burning so much that it comes just to the bone, and cover the vein in .ij. veins; and be separated between the .ij. parts because it is not suitable for this cautery from top to bottom; and this is the form of the cautery:
of the tears
When the tears of the eyes are flowing from veins that are on the top of the forehead, and it does not benefit from a medical treatment that one makes, and you see the face of the patient becoming red, and feel at the front of the walk as if of frenzy; and if they are tense and moist so that the hair of the papers is fallen, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the heat of the tears, it has need of this treatment.
And they called it an "old contused cure", and it is that you make a row for the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then you do three equal incisions on the forehead according to its length; and let one of the incisions be as three digits going down into the forehead almost to the nose, and the others three digits alongside the edges above the papers, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are alongside the edges above the papers; and remove your hand from the continuation of the jawbones, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers at the joint.
Of the incision that is to be made at the temple just up to the second incision; and scrape all the cartilage that is between the two fissures up to the entire surface that is on the bone, then make another part of the mean incision just up to the other second, and then extract this spatula-like thing.
if you put in the first fissure the instrument that is called "scalpel", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is dull, not very sharp, and this is its form: And place the cutting edge towards the hard cartilage at the bone, and the dull edge towards the bone, and put it in as far as it reaches the mean fissure. And cut through all the veins that descend from the head to the eyes as much as the incision is continued up to what opens into the bone, and then make another part of the mean incision up to the other defect; and then extract the blood equally, and press on the bone for the blood taken; then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put on moist drapery with wine and oil and vinegar, and guard that abscesses do not come; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and I will anoint great plantain water, then cure with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures with which one cures wounds, until it is healthy.
of the evacuation of the eyes
When a vein is accustomed to flow with difficulty, and you see the eyes sunken and small, and the vision is cloudy, and the papers are burned; and the hair falls out, and where the head is in pain from an acute disease, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these signs that those matters and this catharsis do not come forth except from many veins, and the cure is more difficult than it is, if it is this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one two fingers wide. And start from the temple on the left to the temple on the right, and make the incision just up to the bone; and hold your hand near the temples that move to the vein; and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then wipe between the lips of the incision and put in much cotton, and hold it in place with linen thread; then lay moist drapplings on vinegar and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is opened, you must rub the bone as long as it begins to grow, then treat with exciting things that make it grow.
In this manner: take three parties of flour of wheat, and of colocynth three parties, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to excite growth throughout.
of the swelling of the ears
Everything that falls into the ears is one of these things: either grains, or beast, or mine stone or similar thing as iron; or seed, as if jasmine, beans, peas; or flowing thing as water and oil and similar things.
When it falls into the ear stone or another kind of thing that does not stick to the ear, it does not grow in the ear, if you put the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, if you distill a drop of violet oil or oil of sesame, then you perform extraction; and make a poultice of condiments, and stop up the nostrils when the poultices come, and put pieces of cloth or wool over the ear; and hold the ear above. Many times it comes out by this cure; and if it does not come out, you perform extraction with subtle pincers, from which the form is:
If it comes out with the pincers, it's good; if not, you perform extraction with a subtle hook of small double curvature; and if it doesn't come out by this, you make a cane of iron and insert the head of the cane into the ear hole strongly, and stop up what is around the cane with wax so that the veins cannot enter with the cane; then you pull it out in the form, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it doesn't come out in this manner, you take glue from which you take the bones, and put some instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and put a piece of cotton inside; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever thing it may be, and pull it out. And if she does not succeed in all these things that we have said, hasten to open the ear thus that the abscess bursts, and spasm; and the manner of the opening is that you first make the patient healthy from the cephalic disease, and extract blood according to the measure of its strength, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends on fat or flesh; and let the incision be like a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck hastily into your mouth; and cure until they are healthy. And if it is a grain that is inside and it inflates, administer an extraction; and if it cannot exit, administer a spatula with a subtle touch according to this form:
and administer an incision of that grain. But do not do it when you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, so much that you have made many pieces; then extract with subtle pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction may be alleviated.
Here is the translation:
In the extraction of the beast, if it is small-bodied, like a thorn and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large-bodied so that one can feel it, then proceed with the gentle extraction of pincers; and it is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where you treat distillations, and the cure does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you examine the ear in sunlight: if no worms appear, then remove them with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, take the candle of what is their form.
And it is narrowed below and widened above. And insert the most subtle instrument into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck out all the wax; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not come out, stop up the candle with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not come out as we have said, proceed with distillations that the ancients have experienced in the extraction of worms, and you will find them where you treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, it is their form as you see.
And it is of silver or copper narrowed below at a small hole, and above opened for distillation; and to press within the distillation with an instrument of well-made copper, and if you see take the scraping and enveloped around the point with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the candle, and the candle is in the ear; then insert into the scraping all the cotton, and press your hand moderately so that the oil is distilled or extracted from the ear; and the patient feels it within, and it is the distillations which are warmed by fire, so that they are distilled in the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
of the swelling of the ears
No child is born with no holes in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through swelling of a wound, or when a piece of flesh is born inside the ear, and these swellings come many times in front of the ear, if one cannot see it; and many times it happens that the hole becomes small, and one sees it well.
That which comes in front, if one cannot see it, is of grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in this one sees that you must put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see the apparent opilation, then the work has achieved all this spatium of which it is the form.
And let it be smooth and even in front and behind all plain, so that it does not obstruct the ear; if the opilation is of flesh born or growth of the ear, then you hold as pincers subtly, and lift gently, until this growth is completely removed.
And if the opilations are deeply embedded in the ear, take a subtle and light razor and gently heat it by fire, then place it at the root of the ear. If you feel the opilation that the patient feels great grief in hearing, perceive lightly, and beware not to hurt the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the size of the hole, and apply the Egyptian ointment in the affected area.
Do not leave it for a day until the wound is dried, or take a tent and apply rose water ointment, and sprinkle vitriol powder; and if you see the ear inflamed, it is necessary that you remove the tent and put another ointmented tent made of rose oil and wax, so that the inflammation is removed; then cure until it is healthy.
And if a flow of blood comes, soak an sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the flow of blood which are treating with distillations.
of the flesh of the papyra (paper-like skin)
Here is the translation:
And if they are without decay, the fire cautery is subtle and the cautery practitioner, after incision, values highly; and many times they repair, as nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not grow back.
of the scab
Many times things that seem like scabs in their form and hardness come from the eyes, and because of this, this disease is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of gross moisture above and below; the workings are such: take care that the grandine moves from one part to another, and it's an easy thing to know; make the large opening, then lightly scrape each part, and take it with pincers, and cover. if you cannot cover without piercing a little the skin, do not hurt the patient at all; and if the fissure is large, assemble it with a suture, and cure until it's healthy; and if it's small, don't make any force, for the joints will soon restore and heal.
And if the grandine descends from the inside of the ear towards the upper part, invert the skin, and grasp the grandine with pincers, and cover and press from one part to another; and if the skin is separated by incision, it does not hurt; and when the grandine is covered, leave the saline water in the oil, and cure the place of what heals the patient's injury as much as possible.
of the fat of the eyes
There is a fatness that is engendered in the membranes of the eyelids above, and this affects more the eyes of young children, and greatly troubles their eyes, and they come to have morning catarrh, and cannot gaze at the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes; and therefore they lie down on their faces again, and sleep there, and their eyelids beneath their eyebrows are moist that the fatness and appearance are covered by the exinach that appears in the eye. And when you press your fingers against it and feel the fatness entering within.
And the manner of the surgery is that the patient places their head in your hands; and then take a cloth of linen, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that each part contains of fatness, then place it on them; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the fatness is gathered within the circle; then make a small incision in the moisture with a sharp scalpel, and let it not be larger than the wound made for a vein opening; and make the skin deep enough until you reach the fatness; and in many dispositions, fatness comes out of the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then extract from there a piece of cloth, charpit between your fingers at the defect, and turn your hand to the right and to the left so that it is spread out; and be careful not to touch the incision, lest you reach the entire scalpel just up to the eye, lest you bloody it.
And if the patient's skin does not open at the beginning of the wound, increase the wound slightly so it opens; then extract as we have said, then wrap in cloths and water, and put on the limb, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who break the skin and put on it to corrupt the moisture that is retained. Then treat until it is healthy. And if a hot abscess comes to the limb, then treat with soothing ointments until it is healthy.
of the hairs of the papers
When hairs of papers are born awkwardly other than naturally, and are enveloped, they harm the eyes, and bring about kinds of diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albumen, so much that it is due to the destruction of the eyes; and there is a cure in .iii. ways: either by fire cautery, or by medicine according to what is before or chapter of cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by cauterizing, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the patient's head in your healthy hand, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, thrust a needle through all of it; and let it be beneath the margin of the paper where the hairs grow from those hairs, and pull the thread above all of the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part beneath the paper, beneath the aligned hairs, all of the spatula coping, from the great mirror up to the small; then extract the thread, and put beneath the paper a small piece of cotton and drapery, then sign on the paper a figure of an inch, if like the leaf of myrtle, and it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevated on the paper which is divided into sections.
And if you have a task that requires coping with a great quantity of paper according to how much the paper is moistened; then make all of the spatula on the lines that you have signed, and start from the great mirror up to small; and let one of the fissures be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then thrust the hook into one of the angles of the circle, and scrape everything; then assemble the lips to a seam with a needle thread of subtle wool, and suck out blood, and make flow the superfluity of threads on all of the eyebrows to glue things together, if you see fit; and if not, do not have care, then leave the seam and threads up to three days or four; then cure the wound without a seam of dry and constricting things, for the paper revives suddenly at the wound and its assembly, but the seam is mortal (as the ancients said), and it is work without fear.
and if there is another manner: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is also like the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, to three inches of separation according to the form that is here:
Then apply to those who have small equal forces in harmony with the form that is here:
And if you cannot hold the tourniquet, and the thing is not equal, take a needle or thread, and insert it into the figure; and insert another thread from the large artery, and the second thread from the small one, and assemble them between your two threads equally; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the lips of the wound by suture, and treat until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, calm it with cerote and similar soothing ointments.
and it often happens that the hairs of the parchment are converted: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the suture on one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the parchment and make it thin according to what I have said, and then make artificial caines by art, and subtle threads as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula is; and take .ij. heads of .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above what appears on the surface of the eye's parchment, and stretch the .ij. caines of the .ij. parties forcibly; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin which will be stretched more and more and will putrefy, until it falls off by itself.
If it delays, if the treatment takes a lot of strength, then cure until it is healthy; and when the wound is sewn, and if the skin is lifted, and they will no longer puncture the hairs; and this is the form of .ij. canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The operations are such that you take a subtle needle, and thread .i. fine and subtle silk thread; then assemble the heads and tie one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then arrange in the hunt .i. another subtle silk thread briefly, and tie the two ends of the thread; then put the patient's head in your healthy hand; and let it dry in the sun so that the operation is clear, for this is a subtle and minor operation, then put the needle at the root of the hair implanted, and make it pierce through the skin hastily until you draw it above the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the hunt, and put into the hunt that hair, if there are .i. or .ij. or .iij. or more; then pull out your hand as much as the hairs come forth at the root of the hair implanted with the natural hair.
And if the hunt is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then draw the hunt to the bottom of all the thread that you had arranged, so that the hunt comes forth through the hole above and that you see it by the vision of the eye; then if you draw the hunt and the thread, and close the eye and let it stay closed .ij. hours or .iij., until the hair is rooted in its place and grows the flesh on top; and if the hairs are small, then accompany .i. long hair of natural whiskers, and raise it with that which you leave, so that it is elongated and then release it.
of the purification of the eye
When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the purification of the eye comes into the eye, it has two manners: one natural and the other unnatural. And it occurs suddenly from a wound, or from a cut, or from cauterization, and from similar things.
And the manner of working on it is that you split open the sutures, and separate the eyelids from it, and put in threads of linen, and lace them so they are healthy; and it is not suitable to use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before; but working with mollifying things, such as fenugreek; and rose water or attar and linseed oil being cooled, and ointments of dyapulon founded on none of the eyes, and enveloping a cloth, is the treatment for it.
And the treasure of this treatment is that you take heed not to let it settle back into its former shape; and these workings that we have spoken of are only adjournments of this disease, so it does not relapse into its former shape.
of the flesh that comes in the eye
This disease that is beneath which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wound and fissure and cautery and similar things; and the way of operating on it is that you take a needle, in which there are two threads, and prick the flesh, and make the thread pass from the left arm to the right, so that the threads meet at the head of the flesh; then place the flesh above the entire needle, and cover with a spatula large.
And if the figure of the papyrus returns according to what is needed, it's good; if not, take a razor and put it in the fissure, and turn the papyrus, and make two fissures or cuts within the papyrus; and let the heads of the two fissures be at the angles of the incision that you have covered, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is just like the figure of a letter that has no "j" grieche; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity whose edges are agitated beneath, from what follows the papyrus, then add the two separated parts, and sew with a thread of wool; then use the cure of what we have said about mollifying medicines, and tents, until it is healthy.
And if the disease comes from fissure or cutting or cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain fissure beneath the hairs of the papyrus, and according to what is before; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to know how to make the figure return to its natural form; and the same patients, according to what they need of operation and of strengthening in more disposals.
because of the burning of the parchment
When this burning has affected men in such a way that the parchment above is burnt with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to apply the point of a razor beneath the parchment, and lift it high; and hold as pincers, until you grasp what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient cannot suffer from the spatula being too sharp or scratching the oil; and make your incision, where you carefully remove the assembled tissue, gently, so that the parchment regains its natural form; and it is entirely healthy, and never again becomes inflamed or irritated, and raises a gentle and soothing warmth, and of collyrium; then place between the parchment and the oil a layer of linen, and put on the oil a soft and abundant dressing; and after three days use a soothing collyrium and similar things until it is healthy.
of the corner of the eye
Know that the corner of the eye is in two ways: it is nervous and appears like a hard, dry crust, and another which is not nervous, but appears as a white, congealed moisture, which when touched with iron and pressed with pincers, cannot be moved; and one and the other appearance begins to turn towards the great artery, and grows little by little until it covers all sight and all light and movement of the eye.
And the manner of incision is that the patient puts their head in a healthy position, then they open their eyes; and he takes the skin with his hand, then curves the finger like small pincers, and holds it above; then take a needle, and I put horsehair or cow hair or beef thread on it, strong and firm; and double the point of the needle a little and fix it in the finger, and pass it through the entire needle, and hold the finger with a thread and hold it above, and remove all the hair from the side of the finger which touches the skin and the vein just to the head, then cut the remaining part at the root of the artery, subtle and with small forces, and let the natural skin or artery, so that by incision does not disturb the course of the veins accustomed; and never does the finger get stuck on the nail solely, and on the thread, as we have said; then remove all the skin subtly, which is the form:
And take care that the artery does not touch the raw skin and break it, and that the vein is not perceived; and after the incision, pour a little warm broth into the oil, and make a collar of litargyrum, and leave it until the next day; then cure what needs to be cured as much as it can be healthy.
And if the finger is not nervous, and you cannot push the needle, and the veins cannot enter, many times this type of finger is cured with medicines; and it grows as I have described in the division, and if you see the cover, then open the oil from the patient, and take the subtle artery slightly according to this form:
And raise the finger subtly, and if you see that it diminishes at all and the reason presses on, then distill from your mouth into the collier made of litargy and two red collars and brocade, and stop the eye just until the next day; then restart the other treatment according to this same work, as long as it is completely exhausted.
If nothing is contrary to the eye, then as an aposteme heats up, then milk it, and first cure the hot aposteme until it is healthy, then restart the treatment as before, until it is healthy.
And if the appearance of the flesh shows great harm in the eye during the night, then suspend it on the ninth [note: probably a mistake, should be "oncle" meaning uncle or ninth is not clear], and cut off a part but not entirely, so that the flow of tears does not come; then distill into the red collier made of litargy.
of the flesh that grows on the eyelid
Here is the translation:
And when the incision is complete and all flesh is removed, if you apply the oil of broiet or distilled red coral and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the eye a cotton pad with water from an egg, so it may be assured against hot abscess; and if nothing remains, and the wound does not mount, and you doubt hot abscess, leave the eye and treat the abscess with soothing things for hot abscess; then return to your work as long as it is healthy, and thus make a good scar in the eye by this similarity.
But always it is necessary that you adjust the treatment according to the natural weakness of each eye; and the accidental way, in work with iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
from the veins of the eyes
These are red veins that are covered on the eye, and take away its work and blind it completely for two years. It is necessary therefore at first that you examine the eye, in which they are, if they are strong, and there is no other disease besides lou sebel; then you bind it in this manner: command the patient to put their head on your healthy one, then suspend those veins all around according to its wisdom, and let the subtle double veins be according to this form:
And let there be an eleven-inch incision by degrees in this form:
then you coil the subtle forces of those veins skillfully, and suck out the blood hour after hour, until you see that you remove those veins from the eye; and beware that you do not block the eye at the points of the spatula, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not grasp more than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what is morbidly swollen.
And if you cannot coil all that in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye with things that ease the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is eased and is free from hot abscesses, then resume according to this method which is presented before, so that it may be healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
of the fistula of the eye
Here is the translation:
And when the bone is uncovered, you will see the decay and blackness, if it returns to its entire instrument of which it is the form; and it is called "asper chief", and it was made from iron into a .i. chief reont, and it should be pointed like a lime as it is in the present form:
And put on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two [hands], and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption is removed; and do this several times, then restore the place with medicines having excitative properties.
If the joints are swollen, and there is pain, and the body of the arm is swollen, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not improve and is not abscessed, and bad accidents come, know that it is healthy; if not, if there is another engine than to bring back the fistula to the pierced nostril according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time by iron, and by medicines aqueous, and when it is uncovered take .i. forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at .iij. angles, and let the fust be attenuated just up to the chief as you see here:
Then put it on the bone of the armier, and slide your hand from the oil .i. little, then turn to pierce the bone entirely so that it feels the pain through which the veins come in this way if he holds his hand under his nostril; and then restore the place with dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the pain is felt and endures the joints, so one sees the matter at the nostril; thus it is a lighter thing for the patient.
from the exit of the eye
When the eyes are open everywhere, and there is no disturbance in the nose, nor diminishment, then it is necessary to lift the patient; then the healthy one, then apply poultices or ointments without piercing to suck, then put on the eye .i. make a mixture of vinegar and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then hold the eye steady, and bind with bandages and drapels; and the way of the drapels is that you take very soft ones, and double each in three, and then place one on top of another according to the quantity the eyes need; then hold it firmly with a strong bandage, and reapply the poultices to suck without piercing; then remove the poultices and let the eye be steady day and night, and if it becomes weak, then it is necessary to strengthen it more; then remove the binding after a day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, that's good; if not; then reapply the bandage and drapels and the poultices until it is healthy.
because of the tearing of a woven fabric
When disruptions come in the woven fabric, then open, and comes from papers as if .i. grains of resins, and it is astonishing to see; then if you see the weaving, the works are such that you put a needle in the root of the part below up to the one above, then put another needle where there is .i. double thread of the part of the armier; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cover the eye with double thread and tie a part of the weave around, and hold it well, then remove the needle and put on the eye again moistened with abundant use; and let it be until the threads are joined with the weave, then heal the eye with comforting things as long as the wound is healthy; and no time the wound is held back by the weave each part of a circle of drap, as long as it is healthy.
And if the eyes take on a great appearance, if they perceive in the subtle spatula which comes from the front of the eye, and corrects the moist albuginea and descends into the eyes, and inserts itself thus; then it will be straight until it is healthy.
from the hollow of the eye
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but a hollow in the eye, appearing to be descending and not being descended; and the manner of its appearance is that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat and straight, then take the head between your hands from two parts, and move it so that you see the hollow coming above your eyes; then it will be fixed, and does not descend or become disordered, and you see the patient's things as they should be; and if it does not descend thus, know that it is descending, and if the descents of the hollow are not arranged as we have said. Make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and place it on the cornea .i. a little through the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown, until the hollow is; and when it is thus, distill in the eye warm honey mixed with milk, or warm fenugreic boiled with milk, then be cured by another cure until it is healthy.
from the corners of the eye
Here is the translation:
After rest .I. a little, and if the water rises the second way, put the fire with the instrument, and when it is thus fixed and does not rise, then extract slightly in turning your hand slowly; and then put back into water a little of the gemstone, and leave this oil within. Then put by default the oil is stirred or mixed with oil rose and abundance of egg, and bind with the healthy oil.  We, and those who are of our time, put thus common broiet with abundance of egg.
And if the almond cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which is the form.
And pierce then the conjunctiva subtly, and do not go too deep in the fontanelle, but make it a subtle layer, then put the almond, as we have said; and at the completion of the work appearing to the patient who is sleeping on his back in a dark place; and be aware of all movements, and take light food, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be laid out according to his disposition until the third day; then dislodge him from that dark house, and test his vision, and make him see certain things, and then put him back in place until the seventh day; and it is necessary that you do not do this during the time of treatment or after incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate this, for this water mounts hastily.
The aposteme wounds come, that you dislodge the eye before the seventh day, and address the one who soothes the aposteme; and when it is appeased, then dislodge the vision and put on his face a little golden ring to cover for any day, and be again in that dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and settle into its case; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
And one came to us who was from the land of Yrach, who told us that in his country they made an almond piercer, to which one sucked the water, but I never saw any in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the similarities of the forms of amputation, because those who do not know them go astray; and they should be properly prepared.
And the head of the bone in this subtle precision, and the last one at three angles aigu.
of the flesh over the nose
Never born or nose scars diverse, because there are some that seem scorpions at the foot of the legs; and if there is such a color as fox-colored flesh, and if it has bone-colored flesh. In those cases of these scars which are soft, and not enshrined, you should make the patient sit between your hands against the sunlight; and open their nostrils, and apply the onion to those scars, and burn them with fire; then hold that spatula subtly gutted on one side, so that you know that that scar is completely removed.
And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, open everything, i.e., the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without mounting above, or abscess appears, drain it as needed; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten to cauterize until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is burned, then throw away or anoint with oil or vinegar.
If the nose is closed, and moisture comes up to the palate, it shows that it is healthy; and if moisture does not penetrate as needed, it shows that there is a new flesh in the bone above, which the instruments cannot reach: then it is necessary to use .i. a thread of linen, somewhat thick, and be careful with our hands, and have an interval of about a span .i. a thumb or less; and put the patient's head on the thread in their nostril as they can, and draw it out by smelling it so that it comes through the nostrils into the mouth; and many times children do this as a game, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it; then hold the head coming through the nostril with one hand, and the other head coming through the mouth with the other hand, and guide one after the other while smelling us who are on the thread. Do this until you see that the nose has corroded that flesh, then draw out the thread, suck out the blood, and anoint the thread with Egyptian ointment, and reset it in the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh; and then put a tube of poultice in the nose for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need for medicines afterwards, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, by which one distills the oils and medicines into the nose.
And let it be of silver or copper, resembling a covered lamp, like a tube, and the conduits are thus; and if you see, make a closed tube, and let the instruments be plain for purging the head; and have .i. a handle on the head to hold it while one heats the oil or any liquid.
from the flesh above the nose
Many times a disease occurs on the skin above the nose which is called "telul", and grows and becomes large soon, so it is visible to behold; and for this reason you must take measures at the beginning, and remove everything far, then put above the skin the cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay in applying until it be large, take heed if it is hard, of fixed color, of poor sensation: if you do not touch with iron because it is an enchanted abscess, for when one applies it many times, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of fixed color, and you see that one can completely remove, then beware of the patient and remove their fear, and cure the skin of dry and withering things.
when the nose is affected and ulcerated
You know that when continuous suppurations come in one of these cartilaginous wounds, it profits little, for there are none in some homes. Then you must take care so that this does not happen to anyone, if you see that the wound is fresh and full of blood; and then you join the .ij. leaves to a dressing, then cure until it be healthy; and if the leaves are already separated from one part and another, you must scrape all parts of their root until they heal, then assemble the .ij. leaves into a dressing, and remove, and sprinkle with powder made from dragon's blood, and incense burnt; and put on the powders a piece of strong or other plaster, and let it stick by itself, then cure with ointment until it be healthy.
The method of the cost is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the cost of the belly; or by thread, as I have made you know.
of abscesses of the lips
At the hands of men who have dense abscesses on their lips, similar to grains of vetch, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut into each knot, and take them with pincers and cut in each part; then apply the oil after the incision of vitriol burnt, so that the wound may be stained; and then apply the oil of iris, and treat the wound with dry things until it is healthy.
of the decay of the gums
Many times the gums are inflamed where they are attached, which the ancients called "albulus"; if it is necessary that you support them with bandages, and apply a remedy to their root, and let the blood or sap flow; then put on the vitriol broth, or other powders that restrain and dry; and if that gum returns after the incision, and many times happens, if you apply the remedy a second time, and cauterize: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for coping.
Of the abscesses
Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, deep in the mouth between the gums, scabs that are black and bitter and green, as long as the corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth are putrid; if it is necessary that you take the patient's head between your hands, and their jaw should be steady, and remove the teeth or scabs that appear, so that nothing remains; and thus make a remedy for blackness and greenness and jaundice and other taints, so that they are cured; and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good; if not, then restart on the second day and the third, until you have everything removed; and know that teeth have need of various forms of instruments for extraction, according to what the work demonstrates, because the roots that one extracts from the teeth have other forms than those that one extracts between the teeth; and these forms and others should be well-equipped with you.
It is necessary when you treat a tooth for its pain that you delay doing so for as long as you can, because it should not be done hastily; for it is a very delicate substance up to the point where one has no excuse for removing it. Then when the patient is constrained by two tiring efforts, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth that hurts. Often the pain deceives the patient, and thinks it is a healthy tooth, and makes the good tooth hurt; and meanwhile the pain does not depart from the bad one, as long as the evil strain lasts, because we have already wanted to do this for those who are well; and when you are quite certain of the tooth that hurts, then it is necessary that you excavate around the tooth on all sides with a strong spatula to ward off the gum from every part; then you put it in your fingers or subtle pincers at first slowly and slowly, so that it be well loosened, then you firmly grasp the pincers; and let the head of the patient be in your lap between your knees, and hold it well so it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and gently push it into each part lightly, and remove it as you did previously. And if the teeth are decayed and loose, it is necessary that you fill them with plugs, where the holes are; and if you extract subtly with pincers, so that it does not break while extracting; and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And you do well to beware that you do not break it, and leave a part behind, and return the pain to the patient through the malice of the root, causing greater pains than the first. And beware that you do not act like ignorant surgeons, who by their haste and hardness often break the instrument, and do not remember what we have recounted; but they often come to the occasion of this great disease through the roots that they leave behind, or through the instrument that they break, as we have often wanted; and when the tooth is decayed, wash it with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood comes out, which often happens, apply the wine of vitriol broth; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
Here is the translation:
And let them be of large limbs so they do not bend in the traction, and let them be of iron well-made, and let them be toothed to hold firmly.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains in the traction, then it is necessary that you place on the cotton wool moistened with borax. i.e. one day or two., until the limbs are ameliorated, then he puts on the pincers which are called "algefri", from which the head seems to be a beak of a sign; and let them be made thus like a file and that is their form:
And if the roots do not want to issue from all these pincers, then it is necessary that you discover the flesh entirely surrounding the root, and he puts on the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a palate scraper, from which this is their form:
And it should be strong and large so that it does not break, and if the root jumps through this, it is good; if not, then you help with all the instruments, from which the forms come hereafter:
And if one helps with this instrument that has several grooves, from which the form is:
and other iron instruments that are in front of the dens' ratio, and of this instrument that resembles large pincers, from which the form is:
And it should be these instruments strong so that they cannot break, and know that many of the dens' instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtly find by themselves their own instrument, according to what their works and the disease demonstrate, for there are certain diseases where the ancients did not teach at all about the diversity of instruments; and it breaks no cartilage or bone, or it corrupts, if one searches for these instruments that it needs, which I have told you, and helps with gestures, from which the form is: And be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, so it does not slip away, but can hold and support; and then restore the limb with suitable medicines, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then take all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not in accordance with the natural body, and its shape is ugly, especially in young women, if it needs to be known that the teeth are not after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot straighten or file: then take the root; and if it is attached with the tooth, take this instrument which has a similar shape, and is like a small iron hook bent into a point:
And the coping is little by little in the morning hours for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file with a similar file as its shape:
and it is also like the file of which one makes the needles; and in filing the tooth little by little in the morning hours lightly, so that it does not move until it settles; then the plane at the end has no roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, if it needs to be filed to be even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
when the tooth aches
when the front tooth aches, whether by percussion or by decay, and the patient cannot press on it because it hurts, and you have cured them with constricting medicines, but it does not work; if they need to be restrained by a thread of gold, for silver threads turn green and rotten, but gold ones do not move at all; and let the moderate-sized thread not be too big nor too small, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you want to adjust the teeth, take the thread and double it between the sound teeth, then put the heads between the bad teeth, even if there are one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then start covering up to the part where you began, and hold your hand subtly and steadily, so they do not move at all; and let your binding be at the root of the tooth so it does not escape. Then cut the heads of the thread with a tool, and assemble them, and put them between the sound tooth, and set it so it does not touch the tongue; and then leave it thus tightly as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone, or the gold thread breaks, hold it with another thread; if it stays in place and serves thus all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of adjusting the sound teeth and the bad ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, put it back in its place, bit by bit, as we have said; and do not intervene with those who are not skilled and suffer, and never make the shape of a tooth like an ivory tusk, and put it in the place where the defect is, and hold it in place as we have said, and let it stay and serve thus for a long time.
of copper the thread of the tongue
It never happens that the threads which come from under the tongue or naturally, are not born thus; or by accident of a wounded wound; and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold their head in your healthy one, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous thread as large, so that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is hardness or numbness, and it is suddenly wounded, if you apply the uncinate and cut the large ligament; and beware that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which is underneath; and when you have done, lift the water of rose and of hazel, or cold water, then put under the tongue a linen cloth; and tie the patient each night, so they cannot sleep. And if bad blood comes out, apply vitriol ointment on the spot; and if the wound does not heal, cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for this; then cure with another cure until it is healthy.
and if you see that the color is dark or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a cancer; and if it declines to a bluish color, and there is moisture, apply the onychine, and make a subtle spatula-like instrument, and deliver one part and another; and if the wound does not heal with your operation, apply vitriol ointment until it is stained, then return to your operation until you treat everything completely; then lift the water of hazel and of seed, and cure with other cures until it is healthy.
of the abscesses of the throat
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, take a candle with tongs, because it is its form:
And be cutting from one part and naming from another part; and when you have taken hold of one of the embers, take hold of the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, hot and gentle, and if there is evacuation of blood, gargle the patient with warm water, or apply crushed green apples that are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is staunched; then cure until it is healthy; and no other abscesses arise in the throat except those .ij. embers, if you take hold of them thus as the .ij. embers heal.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was located deep in the throat, which is to say .i. small abscess; and it had almost completely closed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus for .i. hour or .ij.. And the abscess had grown so much that it had pushed .ij. roots through the .ij. passages of the nose. I hastened to treat her then, and made an incision in one .i. ounce, then made a large opening, and a great deal of pus flowed out; then I made another incision in the other passage of the nose, and opened the mouth and pressed on the tongue; afterwards I made an incision into these abscesses, and cut away a part, and only a little blood flowed out; and thus the passages of the throat were cleared for the woman, and she began to drink warm wine, and did not cease to cut away at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew back again, and refilled the void I had made, so much that it became very large; then I cauterized it deep in the throat: thus it remained without growing worse; and I departed from those parts, and only God knows what happened to her after me.
of the grape
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
This cure is safer than incision, not like cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put it in the air, and make it bubble; and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and let it have an instrument that filters according to this manner: And let it be of silver or copper, and let one of the small heads be inserted into the mouth of the patient as long as the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, until the eye is mortified; afterwards, frequently repeat this, until the eye dries out, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the onset of hot abscess, for many things occur; and do not do this unless at the decline of hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put in the head a small hook of egg white, so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot; for the small hook of egg white does not let the vapor bother the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether salutary.
Many times it happens at the throat or spine of a fish, or some other thing; thus you must try what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you may see the thing; and what does not appear and is returned to the throat, you must make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by chance the thing will be expelled by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and tie it to the sponge with a thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will be recognized, and then you will pull it out again; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take an instrument of pliers according to this form:
And let the curved instruments be at the top of the head so that they can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high up; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest it all becomes useless, nor does it close inside; and it is of no value that the patient inserts the instrument, because it is inserted or the thing is upside down; if it is inserted below, where it draws everything equally along the entire instrument, as long as it is equal.
of the sensitivity of the throat
No medicine can cure the sensitivity, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when it does not profit, then gaze into the throat of the patient in the sunlight, then press the tongue against the instrument that I told you. And if you see the sensitivity, draw it out with a small hook, or subtle forceps worth that. And if it is of no value, take a curved hook, and insert it into the patient's throat, then hook or curve of the hook in iron, and make it so often. And if the patient is seized by water every day, then take full sight of cold water, and open the mouth, and swallow as much as they can, and move their hand often; and if you feel the sensitivity feels the cold, then vomit.
And if it does not vomit as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asphaltide, at the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, for it will clear the sensitivity. And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are visible coals, and let it be covered by a perforated cloth in the middle, and in this perforation let there be the head of the instrument; then pour out the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane into their mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but reaches just to the sensitivity; and the sensitivity will clear now, and if it does not vomit, then recommence the fumigation many times; and suffer the patient thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink water; and then the patient will be cured by this government.
And the shape of the instrument to which one treats the blood, if it is, when one can see it, resembles a curved tenaille entering the neck; and it has the appearance of a beak, and it has roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot leave; and see there the shape:
the surgeons of abscesses
Many types of abscesses are, according to what the remembrance comes here after one and another in this book, and they diverge in perforation and in cutting; and it is in twelve manners where one is in its own resemblance, and from what it holds moisture. And the second manner is through the eyes or they are on the body. For the abscesses of the chief are other than those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the flesh are other than those that come to joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce, as long as the swelling is mild according to its accomplishment; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are crude, and do not die according to their accomplishment, like abscesses that are of the joints. For when abscesses come from the joints, and one leaves them so long as they are porous within, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, because it is a cause of contraction in that member. Or the abscess is of the principal member, and you delay the perforation until it is mild, it will harm the principal member; or it is of the foundation, you pierce it thus so it is mild; and it is not necessary to pierce crude abscesses without complete digestion, unless that which is of the foundation, lest it should rot within, and become fistulous, and cannot be healed in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the signs of perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to completion, and it is when the pain is alleviated, and the departures from fever, and the lessening of the pain and of the redness, and the soft debating and of the agreement of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation or more depending on the location of the abscess, and where it appears most; and let the perforation be from the long of the body, and if the abscesses are in hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and all equal whether there is no pus.
In these cases, according to the member. And when abscesses are in the flesh of the body, it is worth more that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce before this, if the body is filled with much bad matter; and by chance they harden the veins and the depths of it. And if there are abscesses that are pierced according to the size of the body, according to the members that have need of them.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And it is necessary to cauterize completely in the treatment of abscesses: for you have said how one must proceed beforehand in the treatment of abscesses, and see here this chapter.
of sores
Where the masters of chief wounds come from small abscesses, and are ways for us that are in tiles, just like the joiner of a gauze, and much in it has similarities. There is fat and suchlike where there is moisture as in poultices; and if there is such which are hard and piercing to the cutter, and there is no doubt if the artery does not act contrary. And the works of the cutting are that you prove all .i. instruments which are called "entromissoires", from which the form comes hereafter, what thing it contains. For if it contains moisture, if you make a poultice above the wound. And when the moisture is voided, if you scrape without leaving the skin which contains that moisture, for it returns immediately when you leave nothing; then apply cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; otherwise, in water and in vinegar, and apply to the wound, and let it until the next day; and this corrects what is delayed of the night. And then reapply the cotton, just as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not delay of the night; then cure the wound of ointment in a suitable way, so that it be healthy. And if the abscess contains .i. fat, if you cut according to this form, from the wound; and you throw away the outer layers, and scrape all parts, and put all your care into piercing for the skin where it lies; and if the artery acts contrary, if you do what I have told you after. And so do with the abscess if it is piercing, and of the cutter and of curing just as I have told you.
And the cutting on the piercing abscess and moisture is lighter, for they are of little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or wounds where there is no moisture, and of these .i. abscesses that I cut or wounded an old woman; and found the abscess just like a pierced stone, rough and whitish, and could not break it; and if one had made a poultice, one would have done as well to wound as to pierce. In other abscesses coming from wounds, for those that come from children and roots of ears, the treatment should be delayed at least three days, depending on the evacuation of the bowel; and the cures are necessary as it is convenient.
of the scalps
Many times an abscess occurs at the neck, and beneath the armpits, and in the groins, and sometimes it comes to another part of the body, and they are numerous, and are entangled with one another. And each scalp is properly within its side, just like the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities of these scalps are many. There are those that contain moisture, and if there are malign ones that do not wish to obey health. In this case where you see good disposition on the touchier, and it seems similar in color to the body, and changes from each part and is not airy as near the neck nor at the artery, nor at the conduit; it is not deep; so it must be cut above, and the skin of each part, and the .ij. lips of the heart are like onions, if you have mastery, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and take a little and a little, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve nor the vein, and do not let it be too shallow, lest you cut what you should not.
And if you cut into a vein or an artery, and it does not allow you to operate, then put on the wound a vitriolic plaster, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound; and let it be until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to heal. And when the blood is staunched, return to your work, until you accomplish it; then ask if there remain any small scalps, if they are cut and mended. And if there is a large vein in the root of the scalp, it does not matter that you cut into that scalp at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall by itself without harm; then fill the wound with much cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
And if you cut out the entire scalp, it is necessary that you assemble the .ij. lips of the wound, and sew them now, so that there remains no excess flesh due to the greatness of the scalp. It is necessary that you understand how to cut into its root, and draw forth, and sew as we have said. Those scalps that hold excess flesh, pierce it where it appears dead; and pierce thus like before mentioned, depending, then amenistrating with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well mended, cure it with ointment in a jar, until it is healthy.
of bruising
The old men spoke and talked of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their words.
For those who have bruising, it is necessary that the cutting of the throat which is called "epiglote" be avoided; and one should not help by this, because all the veins and the purging of the patient are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the mandrels. When the disease is in the channel of the purging, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to avoid the destruction that comes from the strangulation.
It is necessary, therefore, when we want to puncture the epiglottis, that we puncture it between two or three circles or with a small puncture of the traverse, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the puncture of the syphac, not in the cartilage;
and if it is convenient to section the epiglottis so that there is no cartilage point, and the vessels are far from inquiry.
And if the masters are fearful, it is necessary that they stretch the skin of the throat to the entire oncin, then puncture the heart as far as it reaches the trachea; and evacuate the blood vessels, if you see nothing, and then cut into the syphac, as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the section of the flesh of the trachea which breaks forth through the broken place, and by the loss of voice.
and let the open wound heal a piece.
And when the hour has passed where one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with a good heart, and sew entirely without sense of cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healthy.
One must not do this just as long as the throat is completely stuffed, and the patient is judged to death, and the default gives up the wing. Then one must cut on the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
and therefore we instruct the old one to let the open wound be as large as possible so that the evil of the disease passes, and it has passed in three days or four days. And then they instruct to cauterize the wound and treat, until it is cured.
and I will tell you what I have seen. I saw that a young woman took a knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the tendons of her arm.
and I was called by the healer, and I found him nearly dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and knew well that it had not been properly covered, neither vein nor artery, and the veins were issuing forth through the wound.
I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and cured it until it was healthy.
and I had nothing against the young woman for she was rough from voice, and returned afterwards to her condition;
because I know that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the color of a jaundice, and it is very common in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental; or natural does not have any obstruction.
And the accident is of two kinds, one is similar to a abscess that grows in us, and the other kind is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery. and there is fear, and it does not seem to operate on fierce fires except in the one that is small, and it tries and searches throughout the entire intromission. if you find them thus as an abscess grows, and it does not penetrate at any vein, if it bursts, if we burst them like we do, and it draws to its entire cofa, if there is a point. and search thoroughly everywhere, and heal it as it seems, so that it may be perfectly healthy.
of us
There are many ways of us, which I will describe all the similarities.
and therefore it is suitable that I should say all the differences that exist between them and us.
I say that the patient is hot and feverish, as long as the inflammation has passed, and it is accomplished by the putrefaction; then the fever and heat rest.
With the ninth node, it has neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains the juice of the fig, which is its own sap and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a bud, and becomes large.
and they are according to the similarities, whether dry, or moist, and many colors are like I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the ninth node, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to what its form will be or chapter which follows.
And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of the nails is that you take or make more moist the vein that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, so that you know that the instruments have perceived the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the entromissoire, and take care in this, so it knows how to force.
If the moist corpus runs short, which has its color, thus they do as I have said about other abscesses;
and after the entromissoire no moisture comes, it knows it is fat, thus they do then in a cross, and take it as pincers, and gently scrape off each part and turn the cotte where you think it is healthy with the nouement;
and if you cannot treat it healthily, then treat it by pieces so that nothing remains.
For if he remains nothing, thus returns to us many times;
and if he remains a little, and the wound does not grieve him, thus apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and hold the wound steady, and put above soothing warm abscess treatments, and heal other wounds as long as he is healthy;
and if it is great to us, thus cut the edges of the wound, and heal those that are injuring flesh.
and if the vein is swollen against the contrary or otherwise, thus apply to it a mixture of vitriol and broiet, and let it stay two or three days, as long as the wound festers, and restore the ebullition of blood; then return to the copper that which was removed from the nut.
Here is the translation:
and they are like the needles with which one cuts the sores, and are of citrin material, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are worth more, being more experienced at piercing the fistula's curves;
and they are of three kinds: large, middle-sized, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
The forms of the scissors are very similar, as you see here: large, middle-sized, and small; and if there are scissors that have three curves of three kinds also;
and if there are scissors that have three curves, and they are also of three kinds; and if there are scissors that have two curves, and some with only one curve, and they are of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these is so sharp that they cut, and there are those who do not cut more than one part, from which the nails are scratched, because one does not touch the vein or nerve.
and of these introducers are the elevated limbs placed in harnesses, so that the patient does not perceive it at the opening of the abscesses.
and they are of three manners: large, small, and moderate, as you see.
and one does not use more than the flesh of a carnage, such as legs, and arms, and limbs, and similar things.
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, similar to scissors for fisticules, according to this form, where one stains blood:
and put it nowhere near the place that joins the veins, and the arteries, and nowhere near according to this great form:
Nowhere near do the breasts of certain men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so that they seem like breasts of women;
and they become weary and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, if it is suitable to treat them according to this form of this line, right up to G. then scrape off the fat, and apply the plaster of medicine in a warm bath, then assemble the two lips of the wound to suture, and treat until it is healthy;
and he massages the injured shoulder low down, and it is ameliorated by its greatness just like it happens with women, if they make an ".ij." in the ribs above, through similar fissures; because one is held to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the largest line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.; then scrape off the skin that is between the .ij. lips, and remove the fat, and amend what we have said about stitches and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, so that it may be healthy;
and if it is not healthy, or the incision has not been fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil; and let it grow as much as it eats the remainder and the fat, then heal it until it is healthy.
of the abscesses of the seats
These abscesses that come from beneath the seats are kinds of hard scrofulous tumors which have ribs, and there is only moisture that they contain.
Those therefore that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g: And when all the pus in the abscess is evacuated, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply an ointment to bring healing to those who are wounded.
And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, do it as we have said in cases of scrofula, and if the wound becomes swollen, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it becomes swollen, then often abscesses come, and similarly it happens to the inflamed and abscessed vein.
and if one recognizes them thus, as it is because of the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep-rooted. and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel estrangement; and when it is for the vein, it seems to be distant appearances;
and it is foolish to cut into this abscess, and similarly when it is under the bones and in the corners and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is necessary then to choose the iron treatment, and the one who is at the head of the treatment must also choose, and in the one who is inflamed with arterial fever, it is done above the skin of the loin.
It is necessary then to choose the iron treatment, and the one who is at the head of the treatment must also choose, and in the one who is inflamed with arterial fever, it is done above the skin of the loin. then open the incision at the onions, and beautifully detach the artery from the tiles, until it is discovered.
Then push the needle underneath, and make it pierce just to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
then prick the vein that is between the two ligatures of an intramuscular (vein) as long as the blood flows out of it, and so be free from the abscess;
then apply a treatment that will cause the wound to suppurate, until the ligature falls off; then treat the affected area with ointment, until it is healthy;
and if the abscess is on the size of the vein, it is necessary that you hold with your hand what you can of the abscess to the whole skin, then insert the needle beneath the skin that you hold with your hand, and make it pierce, and it has a double thread, if you draw it from the other side; then touch the abscess, as I have told you, or bind it with one of these parts as one ties a knot with double thread;
and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, then insert another needle under all the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in three layers;
Then cauterize the abscess until the excess matter flows out, then cauterize the surplus that remains and let what is bound together remain.
Then put on a dressing of millet in wine and oil, then apply treatments of tents and ointments until he is healthy.
of the abscesses of the nostrils
Also, how abscesses come into the artery and vein, they come into the nostrils when they are inflamed, or from too much hard work, and similar things.
And it happens more often in the joints and the two toes or where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color resembles the color of the flesh, and it is in many dispositions without pain;
and when it is strained forcibly, the patient feels pain, and it is not deeply in the body, but beneath the skin;
and it must be well examined from all parts, and does not go either forward or backward, neither beneath nor above, and he who is in the joints does not wish to be treated with iron: perhaps there will be a contraction;
and he who is at the head or forehead, makes the skin stretch to the spatula. If the abscess is small, you hold it with thumb and finger, and cut at its root;
and if it is large, you support it with a clamp, and scrape, then bone and assemble the wound to the suture, and cure until it is healthy.
of large hanging swellings No time has it in the stomach and not another part of the body, and it is an illness that is called "fungus" because of its resemblance to them, and it is a subtle root, and large lumps; and there are small and very large ones.
And I saw a man who had .ij. in his belly which was more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and it was white, and had little roots, and was cut open, and corroded again with moisture.
I cut them and found in one 16 ounces weighing, and in the other 6 ounces, and the work in the incision is such that you examine if the patient's moisture is moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist with subtle roots;
if you cut into the spatula widely, and be in your presence with the fire cautery. For when cutting often comes too great a flow of blood, and if you do not take care, then hurry to give the cautery.
and if you see the patient fainting and fearful of the incision with the iron, then take a well-made thread of wool, and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for 8 days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease from restraining the flow of splints as long as it covers the joint; and work through it without strain; and if the roots are thick, so fear not to cut in the middle for the belly, but you can well cover half of it.
then cauterize so it does not become inflamed; then heal the wound, and beware that you do not cover the ulcer that is of false color and of poor sensation and of lazy regard.
For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted chancre hereafter.
when the swelling is ripe
If the appearance of the swelling comes from cautery of a wound or a crack in the skin, and it is on the belly and in some of the intestines, just as it has in other routes, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is in front, or of windiness;
and if it is by the route of the skin and by the exit of the belly, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various exits. And if it is by the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses with their fingers if it resonates, and then returns, and sometimes it is constricted, and increases greatly at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press with your hand, it does not constrain; and if it is by blood, it opens through these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity.
and if it is for windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the operations are that you examine whether the appearance is due to blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. It is necessary that you abandon the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in this chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his belly, and be straightened out entirely, then sign from below around the navel; then instruct him to sit comfortably between your hands, Then go beneath the level that you have marked at all the spine. Then stop at half of the abscess above all the large ulcer.
Then open half of the abscess extended above the ligature, and thrust your finger inside, and explore the intestine. If you have taken a prisoner of the liaison, if it dislocates, and puts the intestine behind the belly's defect;
and if you take the bowel, if it takes to the navel, and covers the excess flow;
and if the artery makes it contrary, or the vein, if you go deeply inside, then return to your work and take nine needles, and put nine forces filaments, and put the nine needles inside what you have done in a cross that you make pierce;
then extract the abscess in three layers above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the belly absorb as much as it can, and separate the dead flesh by itself; where you hold the scalp when it is subtly affected and porous, then cure what needs to be cured, and shave around the abscess as we have said;
where you hold the scalp when it is subtly affected and porous, then cure what needs to be cured, and shave around the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the limb of what needs to be cured, and sew up the limb.
because of an ulcer
We have spoken in the division about the symptoms of ulcers, and how one should operate with medicines, and how one should avoid the treatment of iron; and we say that an ulcer is in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when an ulcer is in the limb or where it can be scraped away like an ulcer which is in the muscles, and in similar limbs, and it must be completely removed when it is in the beginning; and when it is large and old, it does not matter if you approach it, for I do not know how to heal it; nor did anyone ever heal one before me.
And the treatments, when it is in place or can be treated, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile; then make him healthier if he shows obvious repletion, then prepare the patient for the treatment; then cut away your ulcers or tumors, and shave all parts, and scrape off all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood flow freely, and press well on the area with your hand or anything, and see that the flowing of blood does not contradict the incision of the artery or vein, if you cauterize so that the blood is stanched; then treat with another treatment until he is healthy.
of dropsy We have already said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of the water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and that which is treated with iron: it is clearly stated; and one must not touch iron in these similarities: it is to know, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a deadly thing; therefore when you treat this similarity of dropsy called "eclites" with medicines, and the treatment does not benefit, if you see the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as pain in the belly and similar things; if you do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient has strong virtue, and he has no other disease but dropsy only, and it is not too young nor too old, then you must work thus: Here is the translation:
then look if the hydropisy is turned towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you make an incision above the navel .iii. two fingers directly above the navel; and if the hydropisy is due to liver disease, then make the incision on the left side of the navel .iii. two fingers; and if it's for the spleen, then make it on the right, and it is not necessary that the patient's gaze falls upon the incision lest the superfluous ones do not flow towards the weak spot;
Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and cut, and lift your hand to the entire spatium between the skin and the syfac as if scraping out a quantity of an inch or a finger's width; then pierce the syfac until the spatium comes into view, and that is the width of the aqua, then draw the thread, and it is the form of this instrument which is: And it resembles a subtle silver tube, and is made of lighter archaic materials, and has a small perforation at its tip; and on one side, two perforations; and three on another side, and one on the other; and the head is shaped like a pen, and that is the form of the incision which the writers shape their pen.
at the top above is the scalpel, so that when the instrument comes to the aqua, then descend now on the instrument; take away the donkey's load, or about half or a third part, for if you remove more than it needs at that hour, perhaps the patient might die from the resolution of his spirit of arms, or he becomes pale, or approaches death.
but take away according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses; then draw the instrument and hold back the aqua, and it is held back now by the cord that stops up the perforation which is on the syfac, as I have spoken, so you pierce in this manner; then reintroduce the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw from the aqua a small quantity.
Here is the translation:
from the stopping of the rod No child is born with punctures in the rod, or the puncture is small, or it is not in its place. If you want to pierce it at all, it must be very subtle according to this form: then put a very subtle thorn of a thistle, and bind it thus for 2 or 3 days, and when he wants to urinate, if the opening is closed, and he urinates, and then puts it back; and by chance it does not close, for the urine that comes out does not allow it to close. Those whose puncture is small, it is medicated with a thorn of a thistle, as we have said, and it will enlarge. Those who do not have the puncture in its place are afflicted, for no one is born with the puncture at the head of the rod, because they cannot urinate before they lift their rod high; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the marrow, and it is a bad disease.
And the manner of the surgery is that the patients lie on their back, then the head of the rod and the cope are as big as a pen, if the puncture is in the middle, as it wants; and beware of the efflux of blood which comes many times, and if it happens, then stop the flow of blood which flows, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
the pimples of the penis Many times cysts come on the penis, and it is a foul appearance; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; if it is necessary that you take them with subtle onion juice, and clean and wipe all, then apply cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then treat with diafinicon ointment until it is healthy. And if the cyst is malignant, of putrid color and festering, it is necessary that you apply cauterization. When you have cleaned it, and the cyst is on the surface of the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the cyst that is inside first; and when it is softened, then treat what is outside. For when you treat them together, it is not assured that the area of the penis will not be perceived, and blackness and corruption come to his penis or in the groin; it is necessary to cut away all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour which has been made with scorched pomegranate seeds and veins, then treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
And if the flow of blood comes, it is necessary to apply lunar cauterization in this form: The cauterizations aid in these dispositions together: it is to know, at the flow of blood, and against corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you insert or guide a lead pipe into the penis, and urinate through it; and when the skin is worn away at the head of the penis which has been circumcised, or it has been wounded by an abscess, or it has been wounded by a plague, it is necessary then that you scrape with a sharpened instrument, so that the ligaments are loosened, and the area of the penis is delivered from all parts.
and if it is a grievous thing to devise this, then it is necessary that you scrub the spine with a .i. spatula in the manner of a small stick from the top of the rod and the skin; then separate boldly between .ij., and I put .i. subtle drapery of linen moilliet on a cold aqueous, so that it does not become stiff again.
of the circumcision
Circumcision is not one of the minor injuries; however, when we perform this work with our voluntary effort, and properly in children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for salvation.
I say that the ancient ones did not circumcise their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have wanted the greatest part of the masters and surgeons who made circumcision around the thigh, and with forces, and in all novelty; if they hastened the courses because there are two tiles, and by chance if one covers this on top and delays that below.
Or they recover the cooper, and the pain is double, and in the purification which is two fingers from the unsure point of the limb; and in the purification of the ankle by chance the iron escapes, and corrodes the vein, and many times it does not need purification and I have wanted.
From the purification which is done with forces at all the thread of the wire I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, it cuts equally in all soul tenses; but that the thread should be well stretched around the skin; and so is the manner of the first operation if it is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not make him do more than tying the thread around the rod as gently, and then you make it relax in all the ways that you can. Then the fire is straight between your hands, and hold the forces between your hands or below your feet so the infants do not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or stir, and pull it high until the head of the rod is in place; then anoint well with the ordure that is assembled, then tie the rod signified by a double thread, then tie below another thread; and hold as you should do by the second threading to the pouch and to the index finger, and cope between the threads, then lift the stir above hastily and pull the head of the rod.
Then the fire is straight between your hands, and hold the forces between your hands or below your feet so the infants do not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or stir, and pull it high until the head of the rod is in place; then anoint well with the ordure that is assembled, then tie the rod signified by a double thread, then tie below another thread; and hold as you should do by the second threading to the pouch and to the index finger, and cope between the threads, then lift the stir above hastily and pull the head of the rod. Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the mothers; and put powder on top and on the powder a drapil of glue made from a measure of cooked egg white tempered with rose water, mixed with oil of roses, good and fresh, and leave it on until another day, and cure with another cure as long as it is healthy.
The form of the forces at the mundification is this: the two heads should be turned and should be cutting, and the heads should be as large as the equally measured mains.
The error of the mundification is when the heart deep inside is cut into; then it is necessary that you stretch it to your finger, so that the abscess forms equally, and the bandage similarly, and if you cannot hold with your finger, take the tendons and then the bandage.
And if it surpasses three days, and what is underneath the rod is swollen, let it be until the abscess pain is appeased, and gently scrape off; then bandage as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, that will not harm it at all.
Heal then the wound of sudden injuries with powder, which we have said or treated with powders, and if you bandage too tightly outside the measure, and it goes to the surface, it will not harm; heal then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
retention of urine
The retention of urine is from obstruction of the stone, or of congealed blood, or of a blow, or of a new wound, or of similar things, which we have said in the division.
and if the urine is not flowing, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is above or in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees; and they should place their feet on their back, and stretch out their belly from the upper part of the back, and hold the patient steady as much as they can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted by the expression of the stone above, because the urine is not flowing;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary for you to administer extraction with all the instruments that are called "syringe", of which this is the form: and it should be made of subtle silver, light and veined, like a bird's feather; and it should be the length of a palm and a half, and it should be subtle at the tip.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it at the tip of a flax or cotton, and insert the tip of the thread into the syringe; and stop up the superfluity of the flax and tie it just at the tip of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or burre and album of egg, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the rod of moist olive oil and of oil of olives and of aqua teda.
Then more lightly place the syringe in the rod, as far as it reaches the root of the rod, then double the rod above towards the bud; then push the syringe forward until the vein, and feel the patient come up to the clear thing, and this is not done according to this order because the conduct or it was twisted; then stretch the thread little by little along the entire length, and the urine follows the length, then extract forcefully, and make the urine flow.
and reintroduce the syringe until the vein is empty, and relieve the patient.
of the diseases of the vein
When scorching or blood comes into the vein, where putridity is assembled, and you have seen distilled waters and medicines, if made on all the instrument called "clyster", and this is its form:
Here is the translation:
and when you see your medicines in the bladder, put the head of the cautery in the moisture, and pull out the pulling which is inside; if you pull the moisture to the cautery, and then strongly pull back the pulling inside; if the moisture enters inside, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and it is the subtle form of the cluster that one uses to clusterize the bladder: if it is thus;
And it is of silver or of steel, and the head is higher; and below the .i. breast or the loins are injured; then take a bladder of a sheep and put the moisture that you saw clusterize the bladder, then tie it between the .ij. breasts in the form of a double twisted thread, and heat .i. piece of that moisture on the fire; then put the head of the cluster in the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder until all the moisture comes out, so that the patient feels that this moisture has just come to the bladder;
and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make .i. circle, and pierce it roundly all around; then put .i. strong thread through these holes, and assemble the circle as one assembles .i. deal, and put inside what you saw of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, to press with your hand so that the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already said in the division the ways of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone in the kidney as it rains, and all the signs, and in which stone one must operate with a cut; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is in the bladder often affects children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder with subtle subtlety; and it openly hurts, and gravely afflicts the patient's penis, and they often faint, and then become paralyzed; and many of these jumps are the foundations; and it's easy to cure children until they are three years old, and it's very grievous in old men, and it's as if it were a middle age, for those who are between youth and old age; and it's easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to clean the patient thoroughly by cleansing, in order to expel all the filth that is in the intestines. For it often hinders the quest to remove the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and lift them up and move to the bottom, so that the foot descends to the front of the bladder, and does not rise above the waist at all; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands are below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely declining downward; then touch and feel from there.
If you feel the stone in the bladder, hurry now to cut into the stone. And if it does not touch all around, bend your index finger of the left hand, if the patient is old, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and accomplished; and push into its foundation, and feel the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, place it at the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger, and cut into the depth where you see to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand above the loins, and with his left hand hold the skin that is below the loins in the part where the cutting is done; then he places the spatula-shaped instrument, of which this is the form:
And make a passage between what is between the loins and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left nave; and be straight above the stone, and your two fingers are together at the foundation, and be the cutting through the traversing so that it is large by default, and inside is narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too great.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
and when you have completed your work, apply the plaster of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put on a dressing soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then remove the patient from his bed, and do not disturb the bandage just until the third day.
And when you remove it, stir well the oil and water, then apply the ointment of diafinicon and ointment of basilicon, until he is healthy.
And if abscesses and corroding come in the wound, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this means that without discharge with the urine: then put your finger in the wound, and extract the corrupt blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and make it rotten.
then lift the wound with water and honey and silk, and aid him in all the ways that you know, until he is healthy; and it is necessary that all the wounds that you cure, that you bind the joints, and assemble the medicines on the limb.
And if the kidney is small, and it is conducted by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot issue; so the treatment of this thing that I say thus, that you cut many times, is to excuse the cutting per this treatment. I have already proven it thus.
Here is the translation:
Then take the fil and lay it beneath the verge against the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the forefinger lightly into the verge until it reaches the stone; and turn the forefinger in your hand in the stone slowly, so you can feel the stone from another part; if the urine comes immediately, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is within the verge. If it breaks thus, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
and if you cannot do this due to any obstacle that hinders it, then place the fil beneath the stone and another above, then make the verge between the stone and the joints, then extract the stone, and release the bond, and clean the congealed blood which is in the wound; and cure until it be sound.
of the stone of women
Little does it happen that the stone is in the womb of women, and if it happens at any time, then the cure is grievous, and is defended by three things: one is that by chance the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows herself well, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more embedded than the stone of the man, because it requires deeper cutting, and great fear has to be had.
And if you need to remove it from there, then it is necessary that you take a wise woman knowing well, and prick the true vein on, and if you do not find it, then ask for a subtle caste of mirror; and it presents a wise life among women, where a woman who knows part of the art, and instructs her to do what you command regarding the inquiry of the stone.
and look well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to make her thrust her finger or foundation and extract the stone; and if she finds it, then constrain it beneath her finger, and recommend that she thrusts her finger or with the patient, and presses her left hand firmly on the bladder in a circular motion.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it slowly from the entrance of the bladder to beneath, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft part of the con, where it is most apparent, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above the stone or beneath, and let the cutting be the first small one.
Then put the iron in the waist, so you feel the stone if it grows on the wound as much as the stone can come out forcibly, and know that there are many kinds of stones: it is to know, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those which have roots. If you know the similarities to recognize the issue.
And if you feel it weakening, put the vitriol ointment on the spot, and hold it for an hour until the wound is stained; then return to your work, so that the stone can come out forcibly, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the stone as men will help you in your operation.
And if you feel it weakening, and it is of the artery that is cut, put the powder on the spot and strain with tente and bendelz, and do not recommence this, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it, lest by chance the patient may die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the spots are purified, then return to your work, so that the stone can come out forcibly.
of fleshy hernia
A watery hernia is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white syfac, which is beneath the skin of the intestines, which contains the egg; and it is called "syfac", and sometimes is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and this is the skin of the intestine between the white syfac that we have said; and they do not have a small non.
And the generation of this hernia is from the weakness that comes to the intestines, and it spreads out that matter.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the intestines, and this moisture has many colors: either it is a declining yellow, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and that happens more.
and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is white and smooth as we have said, so are the abscesses red, like the figure of an egg, and do not open the joints, because there is moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in its own fabric, so are the abscesses red with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white smoothness, so it feels very well; then when you want to know the color of the moisture, you should examine all the internal parts carefully, for that is how the shape appears before. According to what comes after the examination, judge from what is inside.
According to what comes after the examination, judge from what is inside. And when we cure by iron, it is necessary that the patient be strengthened according to his power and the replenishment of his body; then he should sweat on his back, on a somewhat elevated thing, and put many towels under him.
then he should sit on his left, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the ribs of the heart near the sides.
then take the spatula-like instrument, and cut the skin of the sides within the length just up to the navel, and let the incision be entirely straight in cutting the skin of the sides up to the white spot, and scrape subtly according to his power.
then pierce the white spot plain of water at a large perforation, and extract all the water, and then put in your fingers, and extend the white spot above; and do not touch the heart of the sides, but let the white spot be the only thing that is extracted; cut out completely or in pieces the ribcage of him subtly, so that if you do not cut it well skillfully, the water will return.
and if the vein is inflamed because of excessive heat, set it back in its place when you have completed the work on the affected area; then assemble the .ij. leaves from the heart of the joints into a dressing, then treat it like other wounds, until it is healthy.
And if you find the vein corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you lift the vessels that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood; then touch the joint to all the suspended parts, and extract the vein, and cure it as we have said.
And if it is assembled in two parties together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part as you did the first equality, then suck out the blood, and put into the wound a mild ointment made with oil rose.
and put on another mild ointment made with wine and oil, and put on the two compresses, and put double-layered bandages on top, and bind it all together with a lien that is according to this form.
Then take two bandages, and fill them with lint according to this resemblance and sew them together at the neck of the arms, and one of the heads takes hold at the base just up to the back, and the other at the part of the thumb; and another head takes hold on the two angles, and so the entire restraint is assembled in the loop of the arm.
and at no time is medicine made from this branch of cautery in the shape of an iron rod, and it is that you take a subtle cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the compresses, and be careful as we have said, so that the white sap which contains the agua is uncovered.
If you take fire cautery according to this method, and pierce the skin with eleven points, and scrape it with this subtle burning cautery.
And burn the skin in all ways that you can, so that you clear everything; and beware that the fires do not touch the egg whites; and know that this work is more salutary; and beware of the decay of blood, and worse than the operations of cutting.
and if nothing makes you contrario, or abscesses burst or decays of blood or other thing, so cure what makes you contrario, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to attend to this operation due to its horribleness, so perform perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that the water is there.
Here is the translation:
Then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let it be for a while to correct the remaining defect of the water, then cure until the wound is healthy.
and let the white cloth not allow the water to exit through the mouth of the wound, if it is necessary that you insert a tube or instrument by which one draws out the water of hydrops, because its shape is thus before; and enlarges .i. a little the wound, and knows that the water returns, and is assembled after 22 months or nearly a year, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will pass their days.
of the abscess of the groin
Know that in the treatment of this disease, there is fear in more dispositions, because it seems to me that many things are worth leaving it.
and I will tell you about the work and the similarities of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come from running or riding, and also from blows; and it is often the case.
It is to know by excessive anger and anguish, which is spread through blows or percussion;
and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no lack of pain, and it is a grievous abscess.
and by chance there are painful abscesses, greenish and reddish in color, and sometimes they come from a narrowing of the artery, or from an inflammation of the vein.
When it is due to a narrowing of the artery, it is recognized by the warm disposition of the abscess, when you press on it with your fingers. and do not think that you touch it.
That which is made from an inflammation of the vein is recognized by its disposition and the expression of tenderness to the touch of the fingers.
and one can well perform the cutting on this similarity, and on the other flesh. and it is that you cut the skin of the joints, then stretch the vein upwards, and make a white scar, and release the suspension from all parts of the vein.
If the vein is already swollen with these new flesh, then it is necessary that you treat the vein, and cut it.
and if it is attached to the scar, or in that which is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you release all that tension, and cut around it again.
And if the birth of the flesh is at the back of the hand, then it is necessary to cauterize all of it, and hold the finger steady, as we have said.
And when the operations are accomplished, then apply the plaster of softening oil and rose oil, and afterwards treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
of the abscesses of the entrails
These are abscesses enveloped in an envelope-like swelling resembling a .i. pustule, with the softening of the entrails, and the patient's wound should heal quickly when it is seen;
and the treatment of this disease is well suited to be careful with, just like that beforehand.
and in every way we will direct you to work on it, according to what the ancient people did.
It is necessary that you seat the patient on a chair or stool, then place the suspended cord of the joints below your two fingers, to all the vessels that are near the penis, and touch the masters, and stretch them out forcefully;
then cut into the spatula-shaped instrument deeply through the place of the vessels, as long as they are uncovered,
and then scrape away from each part, just as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
then fix a needle where it has a double thread, and tie it to the first joint or vein that comes into view, and then tie it again to the other head; then they cut in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and in drawing out corrupting humors;
then heal the wound as others do, by putting a bandage, so that no vessel bursts and nourishes one of the intestines;
for by this there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come together, then it is necessary to treat the intestines with all the vessels; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot be helped.
about the treatment of swelling The symptoms of this disease are through the passage that comes from the swelling, or the extension on the belly in the region of the intestines, because the intestine descends from that treatment to one of the cavities;
and this treatment is from the swelling, or from the extension of it, and these two manners of many causes come from it: either from a blow, or from a jump, or from a bruise, or from the lifting of a heavy load, and similar things;
and the signs when it is from the extension of the swelling, are that it comes on slowly and gradually, in long tension, and does not come suddenly; and it is the abscesses even up to the fontanelle, because the swelling presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is from the swelling of the intestine, which causes sudden severe pain at the beginning, and there are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin nearby, and this is due to the issue with the intestine and the body's weakness against the swelling of the intestine.
And sometimes it descends with the intestines, and is retained inside, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments of fear, because they think they will escape.
And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to insert their intestine with their hand into the wound, if they can re-enter it. then be supported on his neck, between your hands, and lift the hips.
Then stretch out the cord above, and cut all the skin of the conjunctions from the loin. Then thrust deep into the loins of the wound, according to what you have mastered for opening the wound, and be such that your eyes can issue forth.
Then scrape off the dead skin which is under the skin of the joints, so that the white skin beneath becomes uncovered on all sides;
then put your finger index in the one that guides the joint, in the one that is between the white skin beneath which is under the skin of the vein, and between the second skin,
and separate what is behind the vein, and between the second skin; and then move the vein to the right hand within the curve of the joints, and hold the white skin high with your left hand, and lift the vein towards all the skin around the waist; and instruct the minister to stretch the vein high, and dislodge what is behind the ligament;
and look to your fingers if there is a point of the intestine wrapped around or white and dry, and if you find nothing, then thrust it into the belly below;
then take a needle or one having a large thread made of ten threads, and thrust it into the rear part of the dry skin, which is after the skin of the loins; after the girdle, then cut the heads that appear as threads, until there are three threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the dry skin, which we have said is beneath the skin of the loins, with a strong thread of two threads; then wrap the heads of the threads, and tie them firmly with two threads, so that none of the vessels that nourish them may enter into them, lest an abscess forms and putsrefies there; and set the bandage according to the first bandage long and equal, and after these bands let two fingers which is below the hollow of the knee the size of a finger.
and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg bears; then cut in the part which is below the skin of the knee, until the vein runs, and the bowel, as we have said before.
then anoint the softness in oil, and put it in wounds, and I anoint the bandage that we have said. And at no time is the white finger cauterized which we have said, after the incision, due to fear of deterioration of blood.
Because it happens often, and let the vein be until it heals by itself; and if it delays in healing, so be it aroused with warm water, and put on what we have said, until it heals.
then heal the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
of a fleshy hernia
In this case, I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
And the old wise men said that it is done in the manner of a snail which goes together with the vision, in such a way that you bind the veins, after shaving lightly around the joints.
then cauterize in the middle, and cure the abscess of those who have a swelling, until the veins heal; and cure it as we have said, until it is healthy.
No rupture occurs in the veins, as we have said, and opens the legs; and do not dissect any of the intestines to the intestines, and if you do, it's little, and repair all hours;
and always if it remains too long at this point, the wound or syphilis increases, until the intestine ruptures;
and this has happened through the extension of the swollen vein which is in the angles, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then softened and inflamed the veins and opened.
and the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before; and no treatment is done with iron in this manner:
and it is that the patient places himself on his back between your hands, then touches the sore vein inflamed from the large abscess according to the quantity of two ounces.
and then extracts the swollen vein that is beneath the skin which is inflamed, then takes the rod and places it on the apparent vein of the swollen vein.
and press on the front of the belly, then cut the .ij. joints appearing on the surface of the head of the vein, and cut one and the other;
then extract the head of the vein, and do not touch any part of the surface that does not extend to another thing, as I have made you know in the treatment of the ulcers of the intestines;
then heal by healing the wounds. And when you touch the veins, if it is mended and heals the wound, so that it may be healthy.
The surface is constricted, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cauteries are muted in this place, and closer to health.
from the softening of the skin of the thighs
Many times are the skins of the thighs softened in some men, because the fats that are within are mollified, and it is difficult to see; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure, to make the patient sit on his back, and cover the skin that is mollified with natural skin; then assemble the .ij. lips to a suture, and if you see, cut first the superfluousness of the mollified skin at .iij. sutures or .iiij. firmly; then cover between the sutures, and cure it like the other wounds, until it is healthy, and heals the filament.
of punishment
I know that punishments are established in our law, and therefore I preferred not to speak of them in this book; and it is necessary to discuss them only for .ij. reasons: one is that the masters respond when asked, and heal the wound; and another, because we often need help from punishments of certain beasts, such as goats and sheep and other beasts. I say therefore that punishments are made according to .ij. methods: either by attraction or by cutting. In the one that we make by attraction, we sit the beast in warm water, so that the joint becomes mollified and pendant; then take them with your hand, so that they are reset and you no longer feel them. Of the punishment of tail: it is necessary to hold the beast, and press the skin of the thighs with your left hand, then suspend it, and cover each opening with a .i. plug, when you have well explored; and leave no small piece of the subtle vein that is above the vessels; and this method of punishment is more gentle than the one made by attraction, because during attraction something often remains in the thighs, which the beast desires to luxuriate; then cure the wound until it is healthy.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
of the tentiginous (Note: Tentiginous likely means "inflamed" or "swollen", but I'll keep it as close to the original as possible)
The tentiginous is a swollen mass situated on the natural part, so ugly to behold; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that's the treatment. It is necessary that you remove the superfluousness of the tentiginous with your hand or with onions, and apply a light touch; and don't go too deep in the fontanel, lest corrupted blood flows out, then treat another tumor until it's healthy; and at another place that grows on the mouth of the thigh, and the gland, and by chance it falls off, and it's according to the resemblance of a cowe, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease". It is necessary that you treat it, as we have said about the tentiginous, and the treatment until it's healthy.
of the erratic (Note: Erratique likely means "irregular" or "wayward", but I'll keep it as close to the original as possible)
Erratic is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the pertus is small; and it's natural by birth, or accidental due to disease that comes from it; or it's because of a mass situated, or a subtle dou syfac, or an espés, and it's made deep in the thigh, or in the side, or below, or wherever; and it prevents conception, and childbirth, and by chance the flors have to be had; and the knowledge of this is through the examination of the baile. The estoupemens are closely apparent, if you want to understand. If it's a subtle dou syfac, and it's closely .ij. livres, if you hurry, and turn them around: place your .ij. indices together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs; then stretch out the .ij. livres strongly, so that the subtle dou syfac is round, and covers the estoupemens; then take a linen cloth, and anoint it with oil, and place it on the spot, and guide the woman to do this every day, so that she cannot become pregnant. And if the dou syfac is hard and espés, it's necessary to clean the spatula-like tool resembling a foille de mirte. If the estoupemens are of a new type, suspend them from the oncine and cope; and take medicines that staunch blood, such as acaice, dragon's blood, incens, assembled with an abundance of egg whites; then apply a large poultice, so that the wound cannot become pregnant; and thus it will be long-lasting, and apply a linen thread to dry it out; then cure other cures until it's healthy. And when there is a new char in the thigh, it's necessary to treat it according to this method, if it's not an aposteme enchancrez. For at an aposteme enchancreit that is in the thigh, one should not touch it with iron.
of hemorrhoids
Here is the translation:
of the abscesses of the marrow
Many types of abscesses come into the marrow, such as cancer and aposteme pierous and herpes and estiomenes and fistules and hemorrhoids and aposteme chaut, and many other illnesses that I have mentioned in the division. It is necessary therefore that I speak about the hot abscess which comes into the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that swallow bowels; and if you want to know how to work with iron, see if the abscess is agitated at the beginning of its coming, and full of choler and fever, and if it becomes red you can see. Then do not hasten to pierce, but let it ripen until the pain is appeased; and then make the patient sit on a stool, and have two small stools or he leans, and supports himself on his back and gathers his feet as far as the knee; and so are his thighs spread out, and puts his arms under his knees, and binds them well with a lien thread; then suck the bile from the right side, and I will show you the instrument by which one opens the mouth of the marrow, from which afterwards comes the form; and it is necessary that when you have seen how to handle this instrument, that you fix the rule first in order to know the profundity of the marrow, so that what enters into the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not harm the patient; and if the instruments are too large, it is necessary to cover the profundity of the marrow with drapels, so that the instruments do not grieve; and it is necessary that he puts the cornet of the instrument above, and holds the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one makes a hole in the hand mol, it is necessary to cover at the chief, spatiumile style; and when the bowel is empty, it is necessary that you put tents moistened with oil rose or oil green dry; and put the tent above the wound at the profundity of the marrow, and put beneath the marrow and beneath the knee a nettle moistened in water or malves so are cuites; then cure afterwards for two days of ointment coming to this, as long as it is sanez; and no time lift the marrow and the wound by cleaning with water and honey, and then water or roots of lily and aristologe longue so are cuites; then return to the ointment. And if the wound is repopened in the marrow, it is necessary that you take care not to cauterize with iron, but cure thus as we have said in the division.
of the swelling
Here is the translation:
If the infant comes naturally onto his head, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the virtue of it is weak, then make her sit on a chair, or hold her in place; and bring out its natural oil or fenugreek so it is cooked, and then put the bath between her two little spatula-like fingers which are the shape: and bind the second one, and touch her finger as much as the moisture that is inside is carried out; and press on the woman's belly until the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to clysterize the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and oil of sasamum; then make her take a compress and bind it tightly, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: if the infant is now outside. And if the hands are carried out forcefully, then you must gently rock them back and forth; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a stool, and lift her feet high; then remove the stool from the ground, and hold onto the woman so she does not fall over; and if the hands cannot enter, and the infant dies, then place the hands on the counter which is before placed, and extract the child, and reset it evenly.
from the delivery of the child onto its feet When the infant comes onto its feet, then it is necessary to place it high up. and then turn it little by little, so it is even;
then take the feet and stretch them little by little.
When it heals just as it should, if you instruct to take hold, and make the condyle stretch; if it heals strongly, God wills it.
And if it does not straighten as we have said, if it turns a little and a little, until it is according to the natural shape. For then it is easier.
And if it does not straighten as we have said, take a poultice of high altarage, and oil of sesamum, and melted gum, and crush all in a mortar. and apply it to the natural shape of the woman's thigh within and remove this joint. then have them sit in a warm bath up to the ribs;
and when it is softened below, have them gird with myrrh, and put it below, and leave it for an hour; then have them sit on a chair, then have them stretch out and hold their mouth and nose, and gently press their belly, for it will now be relieved. from the birth of the child upon its knees When the infant comes in this form, if he puts his hand little by little.
of the issue of the child who comes holding a large hand during it is necessary to re-engage to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman lift and go.
If she cannot walk, make her sit on a bed, and bend her legs forcibly;
then treat the muscular disorder that I have described;
and if she is not pregnant, make her sit on a chair, then study the alignment of her hand; and examine the child according to their natural shape, and make them stretch, and instruct that they take themselves in hand so that the infants are strong.
of the birth of the child on his neck, and has spread out his hands, and his face turned towards his mother's back. I think that you should take his hand, then turn it little by little, and lift it lightly.
and when it is aligned, place on the natural muscle of the thigh and oil, as we have said, then instruct him to move little by little.
and when you have done this, make him sit on the seat, and instruct him to take hold of it; and make him stretch out. of this same manner to all the following
of this same manner to all the following When it comes forth in this manner to all the following, if you cut the secondary vein at your finger, so that the moisture is emptied;
and if it falls upon his face and neck, if you cut from the bud, so that it is not retained, and kills the infant;
then throw the infant inside, so that you have placed it as it ought to be, and instruct the woman that she should not take it at any time:
of the dislocation of the twins (likely referring to a joint or a pair of bones) Know that the twins (likely referring to a joint or a pair of bones) are born many times, and none are born three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it rarely happens. They are strange things, and do not live, if they rarely survive.
I know this, which must be multiplied, and are separated by the syphac that divides them, which is tied to the belly;
and sometimes they issue forth naturally like all of us, as we have said.
And if they issue grievously, thus the cure as we have said, and let the subtle bath be made, and do it thoroughly and lightly as it does. and do it thus as it is worth to move towards health. of many children
of many children No times are formed in the marrow, i.e. one or two or three or four or five, or six, or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious wisdom.
and it is fitting that the wise one knows all this, for it seems that they have experienced similar things; thus do according to what he knows.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman with a dead fetus or belly, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are forced to perform manual extraction. it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and there is no accident or she has fear of death.
it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her legs be inclined downwards, and her thighs raised.
and the nurse holds the tender hand of the child, where it is tied to the bed so that it does not hurt during the delivery of the infant;
then rub the mouth of the mother with moist olive oil mixed with honey and fern seed and flaxseed, then anoint the fontanelle with these oils and honey; then gently apply them to the mother's thighs, then want her to hold them in place with a bandage that is suitable for that;
and take care that the infant is wrapped so that it descends upon its head; If you prick the tonsils in his eyes or on his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the throat or near the ribs,
and if the descent is on his feet, prick them or puncture and also the moist places;
and it is necessary to hold the tonsil with his right hand, and place the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and bend back all his hand lightly, and prick the tonsil in none of those places that we have said, until it comes to the void thing;
Then set against another oncin, where the third is placed in your hand, so that the extractions are even;
and then hold them evenly, moving from one side to the other, so that they can issue forth, and let the oncin be held firmly, as it is in this form:
And if one part remains, oil the joint with some of its oily fingers, and apply them to that part, and treat the other part;
and if there remains no point, place this oncin or higher up, and do it so that they issue forth completely without fail.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot return due to stiffness. so it is necessary that you wrap it in a bandage, as long as it is completely healed.
then put the cupping on the joint of the sole or at the elbow, and thus it is necessary that you do the same with the other hand, and with the feet.
And if the head of the infant is large and it is twisted at birth, or if it has an aquiline nose assembled. It is necessary that you put the spinal instrument between your two, and make the head straight and pull out the needle; or you round to the instrument which is called "almidach", because its form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and thus in the same way, I do it for the infants who have a large natural head; and then treat the bones as if they were tendons,
and if he has a strong neck and holds fast with strength, even if it be broken, as long as the moisture that is or comes out strongly;
and if it cannot issue, then cut it into pieces at the joint where you can;
and if it is inflamed in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce as long as the moisture flows.
And if the inflammation is on its feet, then it is light attraction, and the adjustments at the mouth of the morrow are lighter.
And if it is twisted in the belly or in the breast, it is necessary that you straighten it with a drape, enveloping it in the hand. and touch the belly or the breast, as much as the moisture that is there corrects;
and if the other limbs are numb, and the head remains, if you insert your hand into the fontanel of the marrow, and draw it just up to the mouth of the marrow; Then apply a poultice of onion or garlic, and make a gentle treatment.
and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come there, then it does not need to be worked on. then one must administer moist and greasy things. and apply poultices, and make soft, gentle, and soothing applications.
And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, then amend that which we have said in the living infant;
and so that one has no power, if one treats it by parts, and does not leave anything of the secondary.
And when you have done this, amend that which we have said in the abscesses that come from the marrow;
and if blood flows out, then it should be placed in a warm restraining bandage, and amend with other treatments.
And I saw a woman whose belly an infant had been dead, then she conceived another on top of that, and the other was stillborn. After a long time, there came abscesses in his stomach, and they grew so much that they burst open, and he began to have great pain.
I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.
I placed on it a strong plaster, and an bone came out, and after some days another one. I marvel greatly, because this wind has no bone.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I touched the wound, and extracted many bones, until the woman was in a better state. and the woman soon felt better, and immediately had a little movement of the bone in her arm.
and I have not recorded this chapter further because, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put it right.
to return the hammer to its place
Hereafter comes the form of the pressor, where one weighs the books; and at .ij. turns as .ij. heads of the .ij. ligaments. In every way, the horns should be more subtle than the constrictor, and should be made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the box be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees should be, and one and a half palms long; and in the midst of them the joints should be two adjustments of this same box, which are fastened on one side and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
and these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the clamp to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of the tenons. and it has two joints, if you see, a palm's length, and two fingers wide;
and when you see open the marrow to all the instrument, if you make sit the woman on .i. bed, the feet pendant and the legs covered, then put the two joints together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument below between his hips; then open your hand to all the instrument, if you have made the tendons equally, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the marrow, so that the bile makes what it wants.
These instruments are all superior, and their similarities are multiplied; and when the masters have appeared to them, so much the more haste is in the work, and the higher the esteem of men for their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument that you have not appeared to, for their necessities are not excusable.
When the secondine is retained in infancy, then you must command the patient to regain his wing, and then make him stretch out with confidence, and hold your hands at the mouth and nose. and let it jump through that, well it is.
Here is the translation:
all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or put in water over the fire; then place a cane or a tube from the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the patient.
and the cloth as long as the vapors come out of the patient's mouth; then make it stop, as we have said. If the secondary humor is hastening. And if it remains after this treatment, and does not flee, then instruct the patient to soak their left hand in oil of sesame or in a mustard plaster, and then put it in the affected area.
and hold the second one; and when it has been found, take it and stretch it little by little directly, so that the veins do not burst at the extraction; but you must move it gently to the right and to the left, and then draw; if it comes out and becomes loose.
And if the mouth of the vein is constricted, we have spoken of the treatment of sternutation, and of fumigation with herbs;
and if it is not in all that we have said, beware that you do not fail in drawing;
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marrow, you apply it to the hip of the woman, then anoint it with four-drug ointment;
if the pores open and close again, and come forth fiercely; but nevertheless, when they open if bad smell comes from the stomach and head, and hurts the patient.
It is necessary then to use conjoined fumigations for this: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of fresh parsley and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the secondine is this:
And it is to be seen similarly to a dog, and one puts the subtle head in nature, and the large heads above the fire;
and let there be fumigations upon the coals, and the tinea until it is exhausted, and recommences another.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, then it is stopped up by subtle skillful hands: Then it is necessary to give the patient a bowl so that he pierces his own hand, and does not let him perceive the spatula with his finger, and makes the bandage so that it does not touch it.
then put on a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until he is healthy.
And if you doubt that he will not recover, then put or insert a tube of lead, and leave it there for a long time, and be careful when the veins want to burst in chambers.
And often these stoppings come suddenly from a wound or an abscess; if it is necessary to cover that sudden stopping: let it be treated, as we have said about the tube of lead.
of the fistula at the bottom Fistulas that come from beneath the fundament are a knot, and larger than those that come from beneath the fundament outward, or in the space of the adjacent parts,
if there is one fistula or more; and when that knot is ancient, it operates, and encounters moisture or a white or subtle swelling,
and these fistulas are never persistent; and they are known by the fact that they come out or eject or expel air when the patient makes an effort, and sometimes suddenly burst forth with a sound.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the rod; and they extend just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the knee.
And thus one recognizes the fistula penetrating to the foundation, and not piercing through: and it is that you apply your indexed finger to the foundation, and insert a subtle needle of iron or silver into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if there is twisting, you insert a subtle probe of lead, or a horsehair, as long as you feel the probe or hair at your finger.
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come from a sharp perturbation or evacuation, nor from wind, as we have said: know that it does not penetrate deeply; thus you hasten to cure.
And when the fistula is close to the bladder or close to the urinary tract, then the urine jumps, and cannot be soothed by medicines.
If it is perceived close to the joint of the hip, then the tense vein comes close to the place; If there is no twisting and the discovery of pain inward, it is that it is always thus bowed, and there is no medicine that can be suddenly applied by pricking.
and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except through effort, and vanity of foolish remedies that get in the way.
In one that is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced.
and it is that the patient places himself between your hands on his back; and he lifts his legs up to his hips, and has his hips inclined towards his stomach; Then apply a tent of thread, or of lead if there is torsion, until you know where the thread comes from.
If the patient feels it at the foundation, then it is necessary that you apply your right index finger,
Then sense that the thread has penetrated; and so discover where you feel between your finger the siphac or the flesh, then know that it is perforating. If you do not work on it, one cannot heal it.
One cannot completely heal all wounds, but it happens rarely;
and the aid that one does, if it is that one heats the subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it has been said before; and insert the hot iron into the fistula, until it reaches the bottom; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these hardened crusts are burned, which resemble a bird's feather;
and then treat the tender moist areas with powder, until those crusts are dry, then treat with ointment, soothing and closing the wound.
If he is thus healthy, it’s good. If he does not have it, another way cannot make him healthy;
and hold it between, and do not prick exactly to the finger which is at the foundation, and between your finger and the holder a thick covering of flesh or of skin, and you see the fistula at that which follows the covering of the vein; if you cut from the beginning of the fistula, and thrust before the holder, and then apply the cautery, until it reaches the head of the holder;
and the holder will be delivered, and fall; then I will show you those worn-out flesh that seem like a bird's feather, and none of them will remain.
And if the wound is swollen, and it forms a crust between the skin and the vein, then cauterize with fire or medicine water.
For the fire cauterizes assemble many things: it is to know, the burning of these joined flesh, and the staunching of blood and the drying of moisture.
then the treatment of swollen limbs in mud or in a broken box, as long as the blood flows freely, and it makes the burnt flesh open in the mud;
then treat the wound of the swollen fingers with a dry poultice made from hard charcoal, and these are the dry medications.
For when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not relapse again.
And if a fistula comes just to the edge of the foundation, and is separated from the body, then you should apply your finger or foundation, and inquire about it.
If you feel the tension, and between two is the cloth or the suture or flesh, or it is near to piercing, if there are not more ways than the way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
where you cauterize as we have said, or you cut just to the base, or if you can place tente and cure as before.
and do not go too deeply into the marrow, lest you pierce the tendons that hold the foundation, and come to the gestures by the deliberate sense. then the treatment, as we have said;
then the treatment, as we have said; by chance if it will be healthy, or you remove that covering and the bundle, then it is cut from the deep foundation, either by tension or by another appointed instrument; then I will show you that faulty flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can;
Then study how to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part that is opposite the foundation: if it is easier for the patient.
And often fistulas are treated in this manner: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is where the foundation of the wound is beneath the skin above. if you take a perforated tent according to this form at the head: And you push a twisted thread into it, and push the tent onto all the threads in the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is deeply embedded in the margin of the wound, then extract the thread of the affected part, so that you touch your finger or base;
and draw the head of the thread, and join the two heads together, and hold one to the other, and let it stay for a day or two;
and restrain it no more, until the threads consume these flesh that are between them, and heal;
then treat the wound until it is sewn and healthy.
If the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep inside.
For it does not suit to make a copper setting in the depth, and then the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
The shape of the spine-like fistula that one makes if it is very narrow at one end and cutting. and not on the other part, because one should not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
Bruises are of two kinds: either they are deep in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they immediately stop the blood flow. and there is one or more, and they are deep in the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are deep have little moisture,
and immediately stop or a little yellowish water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body.
and the treatment of those who have them in the foundation, if it is that you instruct the patient to stretch out for walking in chambers, until the foundations issue forth, and appear the threads; if you hurry, and hold it like a bandage, or you hold it on your finger, then cut it at its roots;
and if the uncle cannot hold them due to moisture, take them with a strip of cloth, or a ribbon, or a piece of chamelot; and stretch them to your fingers, then cut them, and sprinkle above some warm powders that are in the vein of cautery; where you cauterize as it is said in the chapter of cauterization, then heal with other treatments until they are healthy;
and if the foundations cannot issue forth, then cleanse the patient of piercing and bitter clusters by washing what is in the foundation, so that it may issue forth openly;
when the patients cannot take it, and if the veins are far from the foundation, then the treatment is light; and it is that you take them to your finger or to the nails, and you cut, then you treat as we have said, until they are healthy, and that they fear the incision by iron.
Here is the translation: and it is very loose; and hold the thread firmly, then pinch the thread, and extract the needle, and do thus with all the others, and leave them there for correcting the excessive bleeding.
then put on the dressing, a piece of cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate, and put it on the base, and instruct the patient to rest.
and then leave it until it heals, and when they will be healed, if you treat with ointment and other treatments, until they are healthy.
of the dryness of the veins or base Here is the translation:
It is necessary that you hold the point of a spatula or on one nail the scab over, which does not allow it to become damp. then heal it as soon as it is dry so as it is necessary.
and if it cannot be dried, then restart the rubbing more forcefully than before, until it bleeds much and is scarified. then heal it as soon as it is healthy.
you apply heat Formica is a small, swollen appearance that goes against the body, and it eats much in depth;
and often one finds the frost, and it feels just like death from heat, and it comes to all the body, and more in the hands than other parts.
And the treatment is that you take a small thread of an eagle's feather, or a strong vulture's feather, and put that thread on the heat, so that the circles surround the heat entirely. then turn your hand to the whole cane as you grasp everything around the arm, and put it in the foreground, and strip the arm of its roots.
And if you see, make a cane of iron or steel in this form, and be subtle below and draw above.
do not pierce, because you must hold with your finger, and press; And if you see, cauterize the arm, as it is before or in a chapter of cautery.
of the form of the cluster Never make a cluster of silver or copper, or tin alloy or chain mail; and never make use of these small and large instruments, according to the ones that are at hand.
These therefore that one uses in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, are small.
The shape of the small and large cluster is above large, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
and there is a separation or the belly is tied, as you see, and the chest is perceived within; and has on one side a perforated opening, and on the other a perforated opening.
and it be the belly or womb where one puts medicines of a bladder of beast or of parchment, and it be pierced all around with small holes,
and have between each hole a thread of space, then insert into these holes strong thread strongly twisted in X or around, and assemble the belly as if it were a sack; and when the medicine is inside, then tie it to the instrument in front of a strong thread, then cleanse; and that's the form of a circle:
And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clistere with oil or apple juice, or similar thing, then insert it lightly;
Then the minister's fingers are applied to his joined hands, so that they be completely visible, then the cluster is removed, and the patient lifts his legs to the bench.
and if the medicine wants to issue, then the bandage as much as he can; and if he sleeps a night entirely, it is more great aid.
And if you clusterize him in illness of bowel disorder, and the medicine hastens to issue, then recommend it as much as he be healthy.
And if the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or abscess, then let the cluster be as subtly applied as for a child.
and it is the subtle form of the cluster held steady on the skin:
of wounds
We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the division; now we will tell you about manual and medical treatments, according to the fulfillment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the locations or places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Here is the translation:
where they are made according to the laws of the body, as if a wound is situated on the neck, or on the head, or the feet, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the remedy will come to its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is a judgment of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely ruined and the wound is great, and you doubt the vehement aposteme heat: if you make it healthier from the cephalic membrane at once, so that it comes little blood from the wound, and let the health be contrary to the naval part;
and abstain the patient from repletion of wine and of coarse meats.
And if he does not want to recover, let his meat be diminished, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any flesh.
and apply to the wound, a poultice made with hot oil rose soothingly, or with wine stippled.
and if there is no hot abscess, apply to the wound, so that it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will tell a little about later.
and he arms it moves, if you put on some ointments, as long as it is healthy.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by stretching, if they are assembled by stitching, as I will say about wounds of the belly, from the stitching.
If the wound is discovered in the bone, and it is deep, and holds no more than a little, if you probe; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard skin in place of skin. and instruct the patient to eat thick foods, as if they are tested and cooked well, like roasted poultry, and similar things.
And if you find a skin lesion, and it does not adhere to the bone, so scrape off all the putrid flesh, and apply a dressing, then treat.
and if it has entered into the wound or vein, without a crust, and it cannot be staunched by medicines, so seek out the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it off with a thread. and if that does not benefit, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which soothes thus that the arsenic has moved.
And the manner of the powder is: take encense in one part; blood of dragon two parts; lively chalk three parts, and subtly grind the powder. and apply the plaster, and hold it firmly in place, until it adheres well and joins to all its blood;
and then bind it well, and leave it without loosening, so it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healthy.
And at no time does one make a poultice of chalk solely, when one has not the encense nor the blood of dragon, but rather the arsenic has not moved the wound.
And if the artery has moved away from the wound, meanwhile it is in this state, if you do not put this powder.
but apply some digestive ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it casts off the pus. then treat other wounds as long as they are healthy.
And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pinches.
and I will tell you about the breaks of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it's the nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave the cure, and not to put anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract. and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the essence of nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but let the medicines be soothing, as if you warm the water in sweet oil, and mix it with rose oil, and cook the water thus in sweet oil, and other remedies of mine according to this method, and moist applications.
And if the wound is large, sew it up with bands, then treat it until it is healthy.
And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, prick there or lower down;
and if the artery is cut, and a stream of blood comes, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize, for this is his profession;
and if the spinal cord of the throat is cut, or the knees, and the conduits are guarded, because that's where the food goes, if you cut the knee on the vein of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then hold it firmly, and let it rest for some days, then heal the wounds completely so that they are healthy;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, so to speak; and if there are fragments of bone, remove them gently so you can, and those that you cannot have, let them be until the wound putrefies; and clear away and align the discharge;
and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then the treatment should be as I have said in its chapter.
from a wound of a spear or a knife
If it is a blow of a spear or a knife, and the wound is deep, then examine if the wound has become putrid, as soon as the patient complains: know then that the wound is mortal.
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put the powder at the first hour, nor bind it with a bandage that does not stop the bleeding. and return to the body, and open the affected part; but I put an attractive ointment, and bind it with a bandage several times a day;
and if you have no ointment, put much cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture,
and have the patient sleep on the wound for two days, or three days, or more. if there is no spasm coming, nor evil trembling of heart nor signs of anguish; and when you see the good dispositions, then know that the wound is saved. Heal the wounds with tents and other treatments, as long as they are healthy;
and if she cannot heal, and operate, then know that there is a fistula; if the treatment is as one must do it.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or in the chest or back, then treat what is in front.
if it is large, of stitching; and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has caught pieces, then cauterize the wound, and remove the excess flesh if they are decayed. and if they are not decayed, then let the wound rot, if you alleviate the extractions.
and of other wounds to other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
Here is the translation:
The rupture of the belly is great and moderate and small;
from the great wound sometimes the intestine, or the ends of the intestines, because of the introversion of them;
and the stitching is more troublesome, and sometimes it is better to have a small wound than a large one;
because when we put the intestines back in place, we must not reinsert them from hot to hot; Because the intestines swell so much that they feel cold, if they retract more to points,
and because it makes the moist wound worse, because one must reset the intestine to its place like the others.
And know that the rupture of the belly is in three ways:
the common ruptures have a rupture of the belly,
and the treatment of other wounds of the body and other proper treatments are common to other wounds;
and they are even more proper with the treatment of the belly, and I will tell each one and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine is outside, and grievous things are to be reset, it is by one of the aforementioned methods: for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
And when it is chilled, warm it up in such a way: soak a sponge or a piece of cloth in hot water, then apply it gently, where you burn with a pointed iron and sprinkle and pierce, and raise the intestine until the inflammation is removed;
and many times they make these constricted veins, and it is murderous that they should be relieved of inflammation.
And when you see the inflammation departing, then anoint the intestine with hot water or warm milk and bad humors are cured, because it is aligned with the entrance to a little thing;
and if it cannot enter, then make a little wound at the instrument through which one gathers the blood vessels;
and the first treatment is to remove what is superfluous; for we must not cut without great necessity, lest it harm;
and it's the instruments for the splitting:
if you cut deeply into the curve and do not deviate, and see there the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine bursts out, if you put it back in its natural shape in its proper place, Here is the translation:
When the wound is large, and it is on the lower part of the belly, it is necessary that you lay the patient on his back, and place his legs higher than his head; and it is in the lower part of the belly,
and thus the rupture of the belly is in one of the injured parts. if you find that the injured part is higher than the other;
and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in great and minor wounds.
Small wounds heal when that which is prepared for you appears.
then they are in your hands, I, a pitiful minister who draws the entire route to his hand, and bring together the lips; and it is the common manner of stitches,
and it is the common manner of stitches, and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound, I do not spare, and I fix a needle or it has a strong thread; and pierce the skin with the skin of the siphal,
then strain with a double thread within the needle of the wound, through, then gather the heads of the wounds that are about to open,
and then let it be touched by the space, and fix another needle; then thread the lively file as you did the first needle and do not cease from doing that, according to what you have mastered of the needles until the entire wound is restrained;
and let the needles be moderate, between subtle and large, because the subtle needles grasp all the flesh, and those too gross cannot enter well: for it is necessary that they be ground;
and it is not necessary to push the needles too far into the depth of the flesh and soft skin,
so that they grasp and open the wound before the suture;
and then cut the heads of the veins so they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and I hold tight or wrap around the heads of the veins to keep them steady, and let them be until the wound is sewn;
and this method of cutting the veins is more suitable for small wounds, for he suffers from a needle or .ij.
The second wound is common, and it is that you gather the .ij. heads of skin and the .ij. heads of soft tissue together with a needle or he has a strong thread in the middle; and when you have pierced these heads all together,
and when you have pierced these heads all together, If you reset the needle to the part where you began, in the manner that one cuts the threads;
and place a space between each stitch the thickness of a smaller finger;
this stitching follows the bone,
and I treated a wound that one had in the belly or abdomen,
who was wounded by a dagger and the wound was more than a palm's width of great, and it was deep into the intestines, well .ij. palms of great,
and the wound was in the belly. I bring back the intestine, then it has been 23 hours, for
and the wound was sewn up to the 15th day, and it was cured, and it was healthy.
And the doctor had given up that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and did not cure him with ointment, for I stayed in the place where they found none, nor any medicine; and apply a moderate heat on the wound cotton cloth many times a day, and wash with warm honey water as long as it was healthy.
Now I will tell you the proper ways of suturing:
Take the needle, and sew up the part that is hurt just up to the place that is inside;
when it has pierced the right heart in the right way, if you have sewn up the head of the siphac or cousteit or where you have sewn with the needle,
and have them pierce from another part of the inner section just up to the area of defeat;
and the understanding of this treatment is that you sew as the pelleting maker makes the pellets, and that you leave once the stitching of one part, and take it up again from another, until the treatment is entirely completed.
The second manner of treatment, which Galen says is proper,
if it is so, like a spring which naturally assembles the disjointed parts and apply one head of the wound to the other head, in such a way:
insert a needle or a pointed instrument into the wound, and make it pierce the swelling beneath, and let the disjointed heads of the wound Then turn the needle, and make it pierce through the weakened part just up to the sensitive area within. as it clears the syrupy head;
then make them pierce one and the other through the weakened part just up to the sensitive area within, in the other heads of the syrupy gut that are on the other side;
and it is the most common manner of stitching and the most frequent.
Galens says this passage, and no one bears witness to it,
one must cauterize the belly with .ij. needles, or there will be a thread in each of them;
and one must push one needle from one side and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew up wounds;
and know that when the rupture is within the belly, if it is the seam more grievous than other places of the belly wound.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of the other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound in all its blood, thus showing that the artery has moved, then reset the intestine, and the cut; then put on the powder of engarrating charcoal,
then reset the intestine, and the cut; then put on the powder of engarrating charcoal, and he arms are swollen, if you put on any ointment that is present, as long as the wound is festering; and cut the vein, and be careful with the skin, and the membrane; then heal the wound as with the others, until it is healthy;
and if you have no medicines, put them on, as soon as it begins to fester badly, much cotton; and he moves it several times a day so it may be healthy.
For you do not have mastery of another medicine in many dispositions when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not affect the principal members, then it is necessary that you apply a light bandage in oil of temperature-calming, or in rose oil, and place them between the jaws, and beneath the seat bones;
and if he feels pain or rotting in his belly, and many times it happens, if they administer a cluster of black wine enema, and meanwhile the rotting reaches up to the intestines;
and pierce it within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine that is called "fasting" cannot heal when it is wounded. and it's because of the delicacy of the veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the approach to its natural condition.
And if the scar heals from the wound, then set it back as soon as the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and turns towards green or black, then you must read the place that is black, which removes blood that does not come from a vein. because there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the vein, and put the eyes watching from the part below the wound until it befalls to alleviate the extraction when the wounds close, and the wound heals.
from the rupture of a broken bone
When the intestine is inflamed, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in some ways,
because I saw that a man was wounded or pierced in the belly by a spear;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and was inflamed and became fistulous, and thus he lost digestion and windiness;
I put a treatment according to what I could, and did not stop subtling until he was healthy, and the wounds dried up.
And when I saw him dry up, I doubted that the patient had a bad thing in his belly; and he had no trouble, but remained in better dispositions, and eating and drinking;
and they direct some experimenters that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied up in such manner: take firm hold of large thighs, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the thighs have opened their mouth, then place them on the two lips,
then put another ferment in the same way as before, until the wound is completely covered;
and sew up the wound. That head if it gets stuck in the intestine, and does not cause any harm to the patient,
and one can bind the intestine with a subtle thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal,
in such a manner: take the head of this intestine thread which should be very loosened, and then tie it to the head of this thread, that is a subtle twisted flaxen thread, Then put the thread in the needle, and sew up the intestine, and reset it in its proper route.
and this manner of stitching wounds is not fiercer than according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal tubes, if there is no ingenious remedy, except for subtlety.
of a fistula or wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes swollen, is universally called a "fistula". and similarly when it is hairy and produces a lump.
And a fistula is according to the truth a hard, painful, and white nodulation, where one does not feel pain, and it is also hairy like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes in clear ulceration, and sometimes in thick scabs; and sometimes a little, and sometimes enough;
and I have already spoken about the classification of wounds, that every wound that is not sutured, and there is no flesh; it is not otherwise except by one of the eight causes:
it's knowing, by the small passage of blood or course; or by his wickedness; or because there is hard flesh within, and on the lips, which does not allow anything to be born of flesh; or where there is too much swelling; where the lesion is putrid, and the material is of bad quality; where the medicine is not good in the treatment; where because the corruption is a type of plague; where the property in the region is slow in digestion, and slow in health, and weak by nature; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the medical treatments in the division.
Or it is necessary that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula which is done by surgical operation with hands.
Know that fistula occurs in all tender parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come to the great veins, and to the arteries, and to the nerves or to the spleen, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to some joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is no remedy but labor, and ignorance;
and if it has any fistula that does not come near the place I have told, and you have confidence in the cure, and you will examine it, if you take a thin rod of iron or steel, the fistula is straight, if you want it;
and if the fistula is twisted, seek it with a subtle probe of lead, for they fill themselves with muscles against the twistedness;
and they form a fistula at the pierced hands and you cannot well examine it by palpations, if you touch it with one of the pierced areas,
for the moisture flows from one pierced area to another, and it festers;
then you recognize by your power whether there is bone or nerve, and it is shaved away in the front.
and ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and the place where they feel it;
and when you truly know the place where it is, and whether it is near a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, if you cut according to what I have told you,
or in any of the places that I have told you, if you cut according to what I have told you, and remove for the putrid matter and the corrupt humors that are within and then the treatment so that it may be healthy,
and if the fistula is well perforated in the right place, then you should cut through deeply, as much as you can, then I apply warm compresses in medicinal agua, and the boils just at the head of the fistula,
then I apply warm compresses in medicinal agua, and the boils just at the head of the fistula, as long as the medicine corrodes the excess which is remaining at the bottom;
and then I put ointments on the wounds, so that they may be healthy;
and if it is not healthy by this, then one should cauterize as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then one should cut. If a vein or nerve does not bother you with principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is decay and blackness, so let it be until the decay is entirely removed, then heal the affected things in the same way as long as they are healthy;
and if it is not healthy, and render void what was before, know that you are not able to heal just as they do:
if it becomes uncovered and you strive as much as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healthy, that's good. Here is the translation: if there is no other remedy than to let Nature do its work;
and if it has a small corrupt bone, and you can treat it with bandages, if the extraction is done with an instrument suitable for that,
and if it has many bones, so take them out three at a time, do not leave more than one;
and if moisture makes you oppose, there is no error or fear, if you bind and moisten and heat, and release the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then put on the wound a poultice causing rotting, and let it be until the flesh is rotten among the bones,
and then if they have lighter bones;
and if it's a large bone, such as the leg or thigh, if you extract so much of the corruption that the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of the rotten corpse, it comes just to the mole of the bone; if it is necessary to sew and cover up to the corruption, and then to treat until it is healed;
and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, if you take an example and help in your work.
He was a young man of around thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body,
until the humors went to the leg, and he was afflicted with a large abscess, and had no way of relieving himself by opening;
but his mirror showed him foolishly that they were so swollen that the abscesses opened, and in corroding much of the matter, and it became fistula, and many perforations occurred that all gathered together in a wound and moisture of the body;
and many a mirror mirrored cure within these years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands,
until I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated, and that which corrupts through the pores to a great body; and the body of the young man became red, and had a yellowish color.
I burned a tent in one of these perforations, and then sought all the perforations.
and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I hurried then, and cut into one of the perforations as far as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupt and pierced, and the corruption came just up to the bone within;
I saw those who appeared to me with a corrupt bone, and I believed there was no other corruption, except for that which I had.
and I began to restore the wound with medicines soothing over a long period, and could not heal;
and then I recommenced, and discovered the bone as it was beforehand,
and found the continued corruption in the bone, and saw it, and then had it, and thought of healing the wound;
but I do not touch it as much as I grasp around a palm of the bone, and the trait follows to its entire mass, then I restored the administration of medicines; and it was healthy and sound immediately,
and it did not require to restart the work forcefully because of the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer, and for the fear of death that I had of him. For because of the blood evacuation often, but he was entirely healthy.
For because of the blood evacuation often, but he was entirely healthy. and a hard crust formed on the bone, and he was of good disposition and had no hindrance nor contradiction in everything, neither in going nor coming.
and stretch the head, if you pull out the corrupt flesh from below, and uncover the flesh above the limb where you see swelling, so that the swelling does not affect the flesh; and apply a poultice or a tablet under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh; and it is necessary to clean so much that one can see and feel the corruption, and to clean again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not appear so, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover the entire flesh; then apply a poultice under,
and then the putrid matter spreads from one part to another, and it is the putrid discharge of the corruption that pours out, as we have said.
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut off the corrupted joint, and pour out the bone or whatever it contains from the other part;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the joined bones, then there is no other remedy than to cut through.
and if the corruption is in the grasp of the hand, or in the grasp of the foot, then it is very strong that thing, but however it is necessary that you inquire about this decay, how it appears to you; and the decaying in all the ways that you can, but that the vein or nerve does not make contrary signs to you;
and know that the incisors and the veins are for coping with these bones which are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the outlets, and their thickness and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare each similar appearance of surgery instrument;
and know that the work will show you the instrument you will have need of, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the methods of illnesses; if you prepare the instrument you will have need of, according to what is necessary for it.
for fire The head collapses either because of inwardness or because of fury;
and when you will have applied the medicine to that corrosion through the treatment with medicines, and it does not benefit at all, then you must cover that member up to the place or where the corrosion comes from, if the patient is wounded by this of death, or by malice, which is greater, than the fault of the limb;
if the patient is wounded by this of death, or by malice, which is greater, than the fault of the limb; and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire, and afterwards the blackness spreads, then goes that corrosion of limb to limb, and takes over the entire body; if you hasten to cure it,
and it is through the impact of certain venomous beasts, like the sea scorpion and viper and similar things,
the corrosion is at the chief of two fingers, thus the cope, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, thus the cope at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, thus the cope at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death. and it is of no use to apply remedies that are not equal to its virtue;
and thus we do when the corrosion comes or hurts: if it comes in the first joint, then it seizes after one joint and another;
and if it comes or hurts, then it seizes the whole foot; and if it climbs up to the leg, then it seizes at the joint of the knee;
and if it comes from above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the patient die of the wound;
and the way to amputate or to saw through the limb is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister on one of the lower ligaments, and another minister on the other upper ligament, and you dissect the flesh that is between the two ligaments at a spacious interval, so that the bone may be uncovered;
then apply the cupping or suction, and put a piece of linen on each part, so that the suction does not touch the healthy skin. and bring to the patient another wound and abscess ulcer.
And if the flow of blood comes when you open, then cauterize the skin hastily. where you put on some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is accomplished.
then he should bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healthy;
and I would advise him that he had an injury in his own foot:
he had a black spot which seemed to be burnt by fire,
and that corrosion came first in his toe of the foot, so that it devoured the entire foot;
and when the man sees the decay, if he hastens to cover the foot, and was healthy;
and long afterwards the decay returns on the hand, or on the other arm, and it comes to me,
and I put them on receptive things after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corroding;
and he saw that I covered the hand, and I did not want, that I had hoped to recover the matter; and I also fear that if he cuts his hand, it will not die for the strength of the man was feeble; and he became desperate, and returned to his land and he hastened to amputate his hand, and was cured
and I have not counted it as one of those things that are done in another way, so that one has mastery.
Never does an abscess come to a head swollen with charcoal, and it stays so long that it forms a large collection of pus. and then it bursts and pierces, and the pus jumps out, and the swollen eyes become dim, just like a vessel; and the skin that is above is as subtle as the delicate folds of a cloak, and they do not touch the bone, nor the nerve, and such illness is called "healthy",
but since it is so extended that it reaches just to the bone in front, it is called "fistula";
and the skin is so that you cut through the whole circumference, and likewise when it is subtle, just like a thin sheet; and it does not appear due to its corruption.
And if you have seen that the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not on the surface, and the skin is thick with flesh, if the treatment of the cluster thus:
look at the sins are great, and the abscess that is in it is of foul odor, then the clusterization of Egyptian medicine which is thus made: Here is the translation: as long as the medicine is red, and appears as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and make it into a thin layer and in honey, and cleanse the wound, and hold back the pus; and let the medicine stay there for two hours, then remove it by sprinkling;
Do this many times, until the breast is exhausted, and the pus is evacuated.
and no time is it cleansed with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes from the wood of a vine, and throw water on top.
then cool, and cleanse, until you know that the breast is well purged.
and if the patient cannot endure it, neither Egyptian medicine nor powder of ashes, if they are treated with water and honey or have a little bit of litharge broth; or you treat it with honey and mulled wine, which has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the wound dry;
and when you have done this, and you have seen that the senses are well purified, if you cleanse what makes the flesh grow in them,
and it is that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with oil of rose and wine; where you cleanse with certain medicines and ointments, whose properties I have discussed in the treatment of ointments;
and if the pierced skin is small, and the needle of the lancet cannot enter, if you enlarge it with a iron a little, and put in a tent of the Egyptian ointment, or ointment basilicon, until it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too large, then cut and leave it so that the lancet can enter,
and if it pierces where the fluid is above, whether it collects or flows down more below where it is. For when the fluid is in abundance, do not let it be exhausted quickly; and if you cannot cover the wound from below as you have seen, if it appears in such a way that the fluid flows to the lowest place where it is,
and if you cannot cover the seat below as you see, it appears in such a manner: that the bowel collapses lightly downwards, and does not leave anything of the bowel; and take consolidative medicines to put on the seat,
and stand on the drapery of linen that covers the whole breast; then apply a strong bandage in the correct place around the nipple, a little larger than at first, then make a gentle binding on the other drapery according to the quantity of the nipple, and put it on the nipple of the breast to align the bandage, and do not remove the large drapery unless after many days once;
and he who is above the perforated breast, often breaks by breaking the suture. and knows that which runs from the suture, whether it is venomous or little or enough, or digested, or undigested;
and take heed of the patients who feel pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has been extended in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps above the perforated breast, If you know that the veins are open, and approach the healthy ones;
and then dislodge it in the morning, or the third day, and when you dislodge the wound, if it changes, I change another dressing, and renew the bandaging.
And if the veins are agitated by indigestion after many days, know that the veins have not been opened. And if you come subtle cords afterwards long tension, do not despair of the health.
For the health approaches. For there are men who take long to heal their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
and if the bowel is indigested, it hurts within a few days after many a day, beware that the senses do not get worse;
and if the senses take long to clear, and it is prolonged, then administer moist medicines in substance and dry in virtue; Here is the translation:
Take a treatment of fire cautery, and make it with rose oil, and the juice of old wine in equal substance;
then boil it down and use it; and this same mixture makes honey cooked into a thick paste, when the fire cautery treatment is not present,
where you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is on the fire; and then apply a glue-like dressing, and spread it over the breast, and at no time does one minister as an Aristologist for a long time, and roots of the celestial, which is also like flour of vezes and a hundred;
and roots of the celestial, which is also like flour of vezes and a hundred; and in use of simples or of compounds: crush them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and in use; and if the cure is lengthy, and it is not cured by this cure,
and if the cure is lengthy, and it is not cured by this cure, then it is known that the corruption is deep, and makes an impression on the bone, or in the hard members, or in the ligaments; if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess on the finger
Panarice is an abscess that grows beneath the fingernail of the hand, where you tread, where by chance you are born with other fingers;
and when it is swollen, and one does not take care, if an abscess comes to the ankle, and run and throw so that it runs against the root of the nail, and by chance it runs entirely;
and there come ulcers up to the bone, so that a foul pain comes, and the head of the finger is swollen, and the color is dark.
When you treat as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not profit at all, it is necessary that you cut to the finger all the superfluity which remains in the corner, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauterization is a great aid if the bone is healthy, and the finger is healthy;
and he applies the iron to the flesh, and begins to prick, and the blister. it is necessary that you put the straight edge beneath the iron so it does not touch the flesh, and the tip upwards, and subtly and lightly feel the flesh, and apply to the remaining part of the flesh medicines that are burning and corrosive to remove everything;
And if the corruption is in the bone, cut around it, and pull hard, for as much as the corrupted bone is, so it cannot heal;
and if you see the decayed tooth, cut around it, in the same way as it has been said before, then the treatment so that it is healthy;
and if he is bruised, and swollen, and he feels great pain, then it is necessary that you soothe him first; then cut the corner of the spatula-like instrument, going across above,
and beware that the cutting does not reach just to the flesh which is beneath the corner, for the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it happens, then put something on it which soothes.
The two fingers that are born on the hands of certain men by chance are completely numb, and by chance it has a piece or bone, and never has a nail,
and none of them is born at the root of the joint, where the birth is in none of us of the two. He who is born with a bad humor does not move himself, and he who is born at the joint of the humor, by chance moves;
the size of one who is lean is light, in such a manner: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Here is the translation:
In one who is born or owes to the rear navel string, it is necessary that you first take hold of the round flesh up to the bone. then take hold of the bone at a convenient socket for that, then cure until it is healthy.
The dislocations that come together in this way come from birth, or from a sudden wound, or from burning by fire, or from similar things.
It is necessary that you take hold of the dislocation, so that the bone returns to its natural shape. Then put between two warm tents or moistened cloths in rose oil, so they do not stick. or you put between two subtle pieces of lead, as long as the wounds are stuck together, as it is suitable.
They stick to one of these two with the palm, if you cover that stickiness as it is suitable.
Of ulcers
Here is the translation:
and they have more in legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, than others.
It is necessary then that you administer sometimes purging of the colon, and then the sap of the basil.
The treatment with iron is in two ways: one is that they are cauterized, and one treats the black blood. and the other way is that you open the vein, and treat it thoroughly.
Here is the translation: Then strain the leg of the patient from above the thigh just to the part below the knee; then cut open the vein in one, two, or three places, of a large size,
then let blood flow and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood as the virtue of the patient can endure;
and then lay him down, and instruct him to abstain from eating black cole (cabbage) for a while;
and begin the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and annoy the patient.
The elevations of the limb are according to this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in a bath, and raise the leg to warm water as hot as it turns red, and swell the veins;
and if you have no bath, heat it with fire, and then apply it to the vein from the loin to the head of the knee, or in the part below the joint;
Then open the skin at the ankle, and scrape the vein of each part, until it appears when one feels it.
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters under the skin it seems also like a pale white cord;
then prick beneath, until it is lifted from the skin, and then pinch at the ankle more lightly,
then cut in another place beneath the two fingers; then scrape the skin on the vein until it appears, then apply the ointment to the reason, as you have done, and attach it to another ulcer, as you had previously done;
then cut another incision, or more if you are a master of it, then apply the ointment, and attach it to the two fingers of the foot;
then pull and apply the ointment up to the second incision; then extract the incision from incision, until it is completely clean, then attach;
and if you cannot pull and lift, if you need to insert a strong double-threaded needle everywhere, fully fortified; and the bandage and the binding, and you will make a splint underneath, and turn your hand from one side to the other, so that it holds in place; and be careful that it does not slip, for if it slips, one cannot draw or lift, and it causes harm to the patient;
and when you have fully drawn it, place on the surface of the wound a lint soaked in wine and rose oil; and treat until it is healthy.
And if the veins are constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and they are not straight, as we have said, it is necessary that you bend it straightly, but do not cover it badly; and treat it thus as we have said before.
it is necessary that you bend it straightly, but do not cover it badly; and treat it thus as we have said before. The shape of the iron that one uses to touch the wound is curved, and does not cut badly, so it does not touch the vein.
and it is of large curvature, for if it were subtle, it would touch the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is the form.
Of the civil vein
This vein is injured in the legs, in warm places where there are neither herbs nor trees, and in earth where there is no moisture;
and perhaps it does not grow elsewhere than in the legs, and that comes from the putrefaction that lies beneath the skin,
as it grows within the body snakes and worms, injuring between skin and flesh.
And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, Then he changes his eyes, and begins to open a vein for bleeding, just like the root of a plant.
When the head is open, it is necessary that you envelop it with a piece of cloth around one and a half inches up to the nail, and the nostril.
and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it is not on the defect, if you envelop it around the cloth, and the nail. and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and envelop the remainder, and do not cut it in its root, so that it is entirely freed. because you take it, if you return to the flesh, and bring about an abscess and putrefaction in the limb, and a bad disease;
for which it is necessary that it be treated little by little until the head, and nothing remains in the body;
and it is not at all this vein when it is treated with five fingers' length of an inch, or ten; and a hundred steps came to me, at whose hand it issued from ten fingers' length of an inch, and when you take it, if you apply an iron or pierced instrument, and pierce it deeply;
Here is the translation:
And often at this vein many times, and similarly when it opens into the joint of the foot, or where the foot. and many holes come about, and then they often jump; heal them thus as we have said before.
Of the wounds that grow between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "ox disease", because it often affects the oxen.
and it is a small vein which grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the entire body ascending and descending, and one feels it well at the passage from member to member, as far as the skin or where it goes, and jumps suddenly;
and it is caused by bad digestion of certain humors, like worms, snakes, and lice that live in the belly;
and one doubts its evil nature, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, perhaps returns, and destroys the eye; and this happens often.
When you see it curing and treating, if one cannot do better than when it goes:
then it is necessary that you read the place above and below with a strong and well-tightened ligature,
then cut above and the tail of the vein, and if the verse is deeply embedded in the flesh, and you do not find it, If you cauterize with fire above, as much as it dies;
and the greatest harm that he does, if he runs to the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the eye, hold the eyebrow firmly in place, then cope with it above, and pull it out strong;
and it is suitable to use the patient's mundification of bodily medicines solving the bad humidors,
and beware of wounds becoming putrid from rotting flesh.
Of the pain that comes from flatulence. This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes into some members, and then it moves from member to member; and I see what I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm;
and soon after, I saw it swell up like a worm at the shoulder, more painful than anything, as if alive silver when it runs from one place to another;
the pain departed from that place, and fixed itself in the shoulder,
and then a little later it corrodes throughout the entire body, until it reaches the other arm;
then it turns again towards the body, as I saw it.
I was greatly amazed at how it moved in this way from member to member, for I had never seen this illness behave in this manner. However, I had seen that many times how well they wanted to move pain from one place to another, but I do not aid him willingly, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins, and for this reason it appears that the constriction of the womb is evident;
and I do not appear to be according to this reason among those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and responding veins.
And when you want to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, it appears as we have said. if the limb is positioned above and below hastily, and then stop there until that ventilation constrains the limb in its place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
if the treatment of those who dislocate the ventilation, like foul pills, and serpent's pills, and similar others.
Of the arrows
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they strike.
The diversity of them is that there are those which have large heads, and small ones, and notched, and smooth; and of those which have sharp angles, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are fragments; and it falls on a member if it falls in seven ways: whether in a principal member it falls,
if as brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then in any place of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appear: you must beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many ways. and when this evil symptom does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out, and heal the wound.
And the symptoms of the brain when the arrowhead is in the head and pierces the bone, and remove the swelling that is on the brain, it is when there is numbness and heaviness and darkness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and perturbation of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it is without force in the nostrils, or in the ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and it jumps from the white moist wound resembling a pimple, and it jumps out also like a broken piece of flesh;
and this is a sign that appears, if you hold on to the treatment, and remove the arrow so it doesn't remain.
The signs of the arrow when it falls or strikes, are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not at all loose. and by chance the arrow moves also like a pimple, and in a dark black blood, and brings forth cold sweat and cold faintness. Here is the translation:
And the sign of the arrow wound that never leaves the forearm is that without swelling of ecchymosis it bursts from the wound, and the throat inflates, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and quiets the cold sweat.
And if the arrow head sticks in the covering of the thigh, it is beneath the small ribs; and it throws great anguish and great pain and breathes; and moves all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrow head sticks in the stomach, by chance it bursts from the wound with some undigested food.
And if the arrow head sticks in the belly, and bursts into the intestine through a perforation, there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrowhead remains in the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out in a gush, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joints and the spine of the back and the ribs and the hips and the legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to several dispositional arrangements. When the arrowhead is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not venomous, thus I will tell you what happened to me, because that's why you should do something else.
It happened to a certain man whose arrowhead fell or was stuck in the root of the nose: I touched it, and I pulled from the other side beneath the fat of the ear, and it was suddenly healthy without manipulation.
And I pulled out an arrow that had fallen into the fat of the eye beneath the skin beneath, and the arrow was positioned, and it could not be touched except for the point towards the empty space, and it was a large arrow from a Turkish bow, with a whole iron point without an iron ring; the game was healthy, and no evil accidents happened to him.
And pull out a vein from the throat to a Christian, and it was an Arabic vein at the ears:
I shaved the beards, and I subtly pulled out as much as I could, and the Christian was healthy.
And I pulled out a vein from a man's body, which was swollen in the belly, and I thought he would die;
and then after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change at all; I cut on the arrow, and I extracted it, and I made a hole, but there was no bad accident.
And if you see a man whose arrow fell or got stuck, and the wound was sewn over;
and delays the arrow within him, and does not change its natural arrangements, nor did he find harm in any of his natural works.
And it was seen with another man, who had an arrow in his face, and the wound was sewn up;
and he lingered thus, suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
And they removed an arrow from the king's prince's man, which had been shot into his nose, and it was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was entirely removed.
I was called to the case after it had fallen for three days. I found the wound very constricted.
I touched it with a subtle touch, and did not feel anything; and he felt a sharp pain and ache beneath his right ear. I thought it was from the point of the arrow.
I put on the patient a plaster of attrative digestive, because the limbs do not swell. and I separate the limbs from the arrow.
and I separate the limbs from the arrow. I put on the plaster daily, and heal the wound thoroughly, and thus I relieve the patient of long pain.
until he felt the arrow .i. a day within his nose; and it was pointed at me. I apply the cauter to the wounded place with a corrosive medicine by gentle touches, so that it was opened.
and I touched, and felt the head of the arrow which had adhered to the flesh; then I adjusted in the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, so that the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and it passed well beyond the terms within three months,
and then scarify if the wound is that I touch the tendons, and the muscle on one side and the other, and cannot issue;
then I did not cease from subtilying and engineering in ways of instruments, until I took them for well-made tendons. according to that which its form will come at the end of this chapter, so that I may heal it, and restore the wound.
And the mirror judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or I have told you about the quality of extracting certain arrows, if you apply your treatment to those things that I do not mention, for the book cannot take everything in;
but wise masters compare well a big thing with what is present and failing, find new work, and new instrument, at the understanding of the strange things that occur in this art.
I say that arrows do not issue from limbs where they are fixed, except in seven ways: or through the soil where they enter, or through another part;
and the one that jumps forth where it enters, it's an arrow entering into the flesh, and it does not jump forth at any time now.
And if it does not jump now, let it be until the flesh is porous all around, and the issue is clear.
and also if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, let it be thus for some days, and move a little each day;
and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, pierce all around with a subtle iron, as much as the eyes all around are enlarged, and then pull.
And if the arrow is stuck in the body of the corpse so that one cannot see it, seek it out thoroughly everywhere; and if you feel it, extract it with no suitable instrument;
and if you cannot do so because of the narrowness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve, if the wound is so great that the pain is severe; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has an arrowhead in the arrow where it holds,
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has an arrowhead in the arrow where it holds, if a bone is stuck with a splinter of wood, remove the part that you can, and then break or bend the arrowheads of the arrow, so that you can extract it;
and then break or bend the arrowheads of the arrow, so that you can extract it; and subtly understand that you do not break the arrow, that you remove it more gently.
And if you cannot at one time, if you leave it until the surrounding tissue is purified, then remove it, for the extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood contradicts you, if you amend what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of the incision near the nerve and vein, and take heed how you can safely remove the arrow without danger.
where you burn or scorch, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form it was when the arrow fell in. for it is the greatest aid that it be, and if you cannot, then place it according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another part, or which reveals nothing of it, or the skin is inflamed in a place if one sees or feels it apparently.
Cut then underneath, so that the tongs can grasp, and then extract: if it jumps out now.
And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then pulls it out.
And if it cannot exit, let it still be, and then recommences the extraction until it exits forcibly;
and if the arrowhead is there, thrust it to the entire shaft;
and if the shaft breaks, and you want to administer a thrust, then it administers an instrument that breaks; If the point of the arrowhead enters into the hair of the instrument; and then apply force,
and if the arrowhead is hairy, he applies it to the instrument with the point entering in, to ease the extraction.
And if the arrowhead is touched, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can, then heal the wound as it covers.
And if the arrowhead is in the hand or foot or belly or bladder or ribcage, and it is close, and you can cut above, then you cut.
and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, if that is your job; and treat until it is healthy.
The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
And there are many ways: large, medium-sized, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
of the veins of the common body Of the veins from which one bleeds are 31, because there it has or makes 16.
it is to know: 2 veins that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech" veins; and the 2 arteries that are in the 2 temples appearing; and those veins that are in the eyebrows of the eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the small veins that are at the neck; and the veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and veins which are beneath the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the head, and the lay people call it the "vein of the head"; and the moyenne is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and they call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilica is on the right side, and they call it "vein of the belly", and it is on the pubic area, and it is the one that is bled, which appears clearly on the pouch.
And the little vein is the one that is between the auricular and anular, and if it has two roots;
and in the leg and where the feet are, there are three veins: one is beneath the curve of the left shinbone corner, and the second vein which is at the ankle of the right shinbone corner; and the vein called "nesse" which is at the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg are three veins beneath those.
The wisdom of the veins that are behind the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and migraines; and you examine the patient's quality, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient
and you examine the patient's quality, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient and rub the place where the veins are of a rough cloth; then the patient tightens their neck to a vision, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in the two lids depending on the head: where you touch with your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, it is a sign of anemia;
Then take the lancet and insert it beneath the vein just up to the bone, then lift your hand above the entire vein. and cut and open the skin and the vein well, you should make two traversing cuts, and make the blood flow out until you see it;
then hold it back and let it go, so that it may be healthy;
and I have already spoken of the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is to remove old inflammation, and swelling, and accustomed optalmia, and at the course of the tears, which waters the eyes;
and the quality of the health of the patient is so, as I say: and it is that the patient's neck is strained, so much that the two veins appear openly; and let the hairs grow underneath your finger, and then sign with an inch;
then raise the curve on the vein above your finger's tip, and put the lancet underneath, and raise the vein above, and the cope, as you have done with other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
then release the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put it on cotton;
and then shape the lie, and let it be until it is healthy; and we have already spoken of their coping and their extraction, where the beginning of the book.
The health of the vein at the forehead is worth as much as the health of the cephalic as ancient diseases of the face, and migraine, and redness;
and the quality is that the patient strains his neck by twisting, so much that the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", whose shape is this:
And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; Then release the patient's neck, and lay the vein so it is healthy and no longer swollen from a large flame.
However, it is not suitable for the flames to be too sharp; and the vein of the crossing, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flames when they are subtle.
The veins of the eyes that are in the eyelids help with the eyes, and at the forehead, and at the temples, and at the orbit in the eye, and with diseases of the face;
and the quality of their health is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting no ligament, as before;
then the vein, and let the vein be of two traversing paths, a little long, a little wide, for there is no cartilage.
And if the veins are subtle, perhaps they break; then make a correction of blood, as much as you have mastery, and then let it settle on the cushion, and bind it well.
The veins of the vein of the nose are worth examining for ague, and for sudden faintness, and for facial diseases. as if it is migraine and redness that comes on the face, and especially when it is old;
and the quality of the sanity is such that the patient tightens his neck, then tightens his nose with his left hand; and take the subtle flame long, and insert it in the liver at the space which is between the two nostrils; for the veins do not appear well, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and do not go too deep into the wound, and make a correction of the blood according to the necessity, then leave it for a night, because it is nearly fully restored;
The health of the two gums helps in the stretching of the ligament, and at the beginning of messeliness, and in many diseases, and in impetigo, and in corroding, and in herpes, and similar things;
and the quality of the health is that the patients stretch their necks from one side to the other, as we have said; and let the masters stand over the patient's head, and the patients sit on their seat
then sound the vein of the loin a little broadly, then draw out the blood moderately, as much as the master is;
then repeat on the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and hold the veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle; and let it be just until morning, so that the wound may be healthy.
Of the health of the livers The health of the veins of the livers above, if they aid in the hole in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and cracks of the lips, and bad nests and interior.
And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold their neck steady as I have said; then turn the lip, and examine the veins, of which one is on the right lip and the other on the left, and they know them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins: look carefully at one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt,
look carefully at one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, if you examine the largest of each part, and thus you make a distinction between the veins that are above and below, for it is a similar manner.
About the health of the tongue below The health of the veins that are beneath the tongue helps after the health of the head, and it's at the constriction of the throat, and in diseases of the eye, and in diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the healthy one is such that the patient's hand should be held before the sun, and lift the tongue, and look underneath for a vein on each side;
Healthy then is one and the other, and do not go too deep in the font, because underneath are the arteries.
The veins of the neck where one commonly finds health are healthy in three ways:
where I prick everything, I flame mirrin large, or olive oil subtle as if I cut trenches, and it is called "anesil"; and they are large and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the flame mirrin is very renowned, and it is wide as if you see:
And it has a master for opening the veins full of thick apparent blood, and which contain thick blood and turmoil; and it is the form of the olive flame:
and it is more subtly pointed, and is for purifying the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrus blood.
The purification of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with the diseases that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the foot, and in the belly;
and it is necessary for the purifier to purge strongly, and that he beware of the artery that is beneath. And if he touches the artery, and blood flows out, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and one should not be pricking the flame, but rather cutting similarly.
And if the basilic vein does not open manifestly, it is necessary that you extract it, and change to another; where you want no vein of it, or you take from its bed the vein in the arm: it opens manifestly; and the head to the flame anesthetize, as we have said.
And if you want to recognize the place of the wound, it is necessary also that you stretch out the arm, so that you touch the place as much as you feel the pulse; then mark the place of the incision, and then stretch out the arm, and apply the vein to the flame anesthetize;
and be careful not to strike into the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is of the artery: avoid that then.
And if you see it swell above like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is without an artery: Hurry then, and place your finger on it for a long time, then lift your finger if the blood is stagnant, which often happens;
Let the arm be still, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and be without fear, and do not move them until they are healthy.
And if the blood is not stagnant, and it flows, and the medicines are not present, then cut the artery so it opens, for the head of the veins returns; and the blood stagnates.
And take a scrape of fistic, and make it, and take one of the mallets and lay it just beside the other one;
if the wound is staunched, that's good; if not, then cauterize, as we have said, with powders that staunch blood;
and the stauching is not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the possibility of the joint of the arm.
The health of the vein in the middle if it helps that it draws blood from the head above, and from the body below. because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to be careful lest he cut too far in by the nerve that is underneath, and if he presses too much, he finds the nerve, and it becomes inflamed and the sinews are irritated, and perhaps he cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any home because of its subtlety, it is necessary that you sound the instrument with skill; and avoid the nerve at your power.
And if he has a vein between the muscles, then make it two fingers long.
The bloodletting of the cephalic vein helps, which attracts blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
and it is necessary to bloodlet at the flame olive or at the flame martian, because it is the safest of all the veins, since it has neither nerve nor artery.
However, it is necessary to choose the lightest vein, and not to grievously harm anything if one fails the first time, and then recommences. and by chance inflame the eyes of some men, as it happens at first, but it does not harm anything. The quality of the health is according to your thinking.
The first thing you must know about healing, is that healing is not accomplished except by preserving health,
and to avoid future diseases; and let the healthy vein be made in one of the four veins that are on the couture: it is to know, cephalic, fasting, and basilic; and one should bleed in the beginning of taking preventative measures against a wound, and in autumn and in winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear;
and one should bleed on the first day or the third, after 8 hours or 10 days.
The bleeding that is administered for the illnesses has no fixed hour determined, but rather whenever it is needed, whether by day or by night, at all hours and in every tension;
and it is not suitable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying fruit for four months until September. Nor should they cauterize the old who have passed 60 years.
And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever manner it may be, then it is necessary that they evacuate the intestines with a lightclyster. if he has much retained feces, then the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful humors from the intestines, which are nuisance to the principal members.
One does not heal quickly who is too full of meats, nor he who is drunk, as long as there is fury or dropsy.
and it is worse for the sick one after passion of colic, and vomiting, and decay of stomach, and multiple miscarriages in a woman, and labor, watching and fasting, and this that takes away all virtue, or by thing of the arm or soft body;
then thin out the humors, if the blood is thick, by meats and by drinks and by medicines, if you have a weak power;
then enter into a bath, since nothing can dissolve it, to thin out the blood;
and you suck out of the vein the worst that is between the third, as we have said;
and you beware of that day of labor, and of point, and of luxury, and of similar things;
and be gentle and joyful, and let the healers be higher than the one who is sucking, and rub the arm three or four times;
then extract the thread from above gently, for when it is too stretched out or short, it cannot correct the sinew;
and then rub the joints with his hands, until the veins swell, and he feels it;
then anoint the sinewy parts with a little warm oil, then place his right hand on that vein below the joint a little where he wants to heal; so that the veins do not fade and fail to heal. For there are veins that feel like cords to the healer, and if they have such ones that are full of windiness, if one puts on the flame, one draws back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is of these.
and if one opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, because it is necessary that the surgeons be advised in these things.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or near the joint, so the veins are not inflamed.
And if the veins are inflamed, and the patient is in a hurry, let them be for a day or two, and do not bind the arm: Perhaps it will come to abscesses or ulcers; do not insert anything, then resume the health as it pleases him.
and if the perforation is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not issue as much blood as you see, then pierce that very opening correctly in the entire flame directly;
and open a little hastily, so that the eyes may be swollen; for this happens often, when the wound is small.
If you see the eye swollen, do not resume the health, and put a little of the oil of olive on it, for it alleviates the body's bloody flow, and is a remedy in this eye the oil that I mentioned.
and then administer the oil of olive in each healthy vein that you know, to staunch the flow of blood;
and this same remedy makes a triangle and bulge of eyes, when one places it on the organ; if subtly the senses are separated and they are apart when it is too large.
And if there comes a large abscess, which occurs many times, especially when it is not healthy unless at that time when the opening of the vein is small, if you hasten, and place on the organ a sponge moistened with water and oil, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood issues from the vein, and if it stays in place after a few days without any black or green color, then it does not harm him. and if you see, put on some kind of aloe or myrrh remedy in juice of calendula, master, or similar.
And many times an abscess appears at the wound of the basilica: put your hand on it then, and if you find the soft spot at the compression of the hand, it is that bad appearance. Avoid then that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for it might happen in court without an artery; but the fact is to make a plaster cast to harden the spot, then treat with another treatment, until it is healthy.
And draw from each person's blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it thin out until it becomes subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is suitable for one who is full and strong, and has mastery of blood extraction, that one makes a larger wound, and the flames are large;
and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is more suitable to bleed him little by little, and he should be bled in a crosswise manner, not in a piercing way;
and this manner of health is free from deterioration of blood and from impairment of nerve, and is worth more than the health that gives long life or wide life.
And to the one whose body fails in health, it is necessary to give a millet porridge in juice of green apples; if it is heated, so draw out three times or four times.
And if it is of cold complexion, so eat before health millet porridge in musky syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicories, and well-odorous syrup.
And if it fails in health, after the issue of much blood, so it is necessary that he drinks broth of meat, and subtle well-odorous syrup.
and also use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of a vein.
And if he wants to clear his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when he is afflicted by great bleeding, that he be bled little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
And he who wants to clear his arm after the first bleeding, and it has hardened strongly, should be bled at the seventh hour after the first bleeding, or at the ninth hour.
And he who wants to bleed from another part, should be bled on the second day or the third.
Because there is much blood inside the body which is already heated, and it causes a fever to come; if one must treat a large quantity, and enlarge the pores as much as it bursts into sweat. Then you should check all the signs of health, and put your hand on the pulse when it beats, so that death does not come into the body. and this happens often, when the healers are negligent;
and you should not move when you dislocate your arm, and make the blood flow out a second time, and the pores are closed, so that you press strongly upon; If he is curved, he stretches out his arm hastily, for it would be bad.
but let him stretch out as long as it heals the second time; or you prick at the tip of the flame, as long as the blood which is congealed at the mouth of the vein issues forth. and put on a small piece of silk in water, and press on lightly.
And if the vein is inflamed, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
And if a second bleeding is necessary, then open the same vein again, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is healthy in the place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the manner of the bleeding is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so that the fistula becomes red;
then it should be tied moderately, so that the vein appears well, then the bleeding now from across, not too wide nor too long;
and let the perforations be large, and let them be well near the joint of the hand, and if you cannot get them out, reset the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough;
and if it is in this state, do not reset the hand in warm water, for they put it more in winter than in summer;
and the vein of this vein is healthier than all other veins, for there is no artery nor nerve.
The vein of the little finger on the right hand is good for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
Here is the translation: and if you make a crosswise incision, and if you cut all around, do not cause any grief;
and do not dig too deeply in the font, for the nerves are underneath, completely bare of flesh,
and then put the hand in warm water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot issue forth.
And when you have drawn out as much blood as is necessary for the task, then put oil on the vein and sew it up hastily, and thus make a remedy for each wound.
The health of the left hand is worth more than the disease of the right, and do everything just as I have told you about the right.
The health of the spleen is worth more than all the diseases that are below the body, like diseases of the liver, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its health is that the patient's pain is relieved by warm water, and rubbed on the vein until it perishes. and lay it on the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they go many veins;
sound the congealed blood where it is more abundant or larger vein, or at the ankle, which is of greater value.
And if you sound the congealed blood above the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and the congealed blood traverses also as in a coping; and let the flames be gentle.
And if the blood cannot flow out, put the foot in warm water, and let the vein open well.
And if the veins are faulty for the first time, restart the second above a little, because the veins are salty; Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make a soporific of the other foot equally.
The veins of the sciatic vein are at the level of the thigh, and their sinew is worth the pain of the hip, when it's due to hot blood.
And the quality of its sinew is that the patient goes between good and bad, and extracts above the thigh, three fingers in twisting.
because otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then you should examine it in all ways that you can, and by penetrating. and it is necessary that you touch it, because the blood is stagnant, and it is much accumulated in many places at home.
and it is necessary that you touch it, because the blood is stagnant, and it is much accumulated in many places at home. And if you do not find it, then no vein opens or gives dew to the foot, and towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves;
and make a correction of the blood that you see, and then release the bond, and put on cotton and the tourniquet; it is now healthy.
The suctions of cupping.
Cupping is made of horns, or of antler, or of glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by striking and attracting blood, or without striking.
And this cupping that is without striking is done in two ways: either it is with full fire, or without fire;
and others in the sides of the neck; and the veins below the chin; and the veins of the shoulders; and the veins on the knees; and the veins in the arms; and the veins of the legs; and the cupping glasses of the seventh rib; and the cupping does not draw a point of blood, except for the small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
and because of this one does not become afraid of it, just as one makes bloodletting of a vein; and it is not necessary that it be administered, nor at all by fire nor sense of fire, in any illness that comes from excess, as long as the body is purged.
And if by necessity of illnesses it is necessary to bleed, or by habit, if we administer them each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and in every tension;
because there are some who, when they have the task of applying cups, weigh heavily on the head;
and there are some who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and there are some who experience a flow of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and spit blood; and there are some who sigh, and see nothing but blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we command to apply a poultice after three hours of the day.
The saliva of the mouse helps with the greatness of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that it be after the evacuation of the whole body;
and this poulticing is in the place of the saliva of the cephalic,
and it is not suitable for one who has a cold complexion in usage, or who has a catarrh, because that causes them great harm;
and because of this it does not seem to me that the old men are using it, nor those who have cold heads with bad diseases.
And those who often feel dizzy, they become oblivious, and therefore it is necessary to put the cupping glass a little lower down due to the fear of obliviousness.
The cupping on the neck is in place of the healthy head and the basilica, and therefore it is good for the stretching of the foot. and a fracture of the channel of the forearm, and a bruise, and a replenishment;
and it is necessary to puncture, for if it holds too firmly, then there will be obstruction of the bowel or stomach or heart.
The windings are like the ribs of the spine if they hurt in the head, and optalmia and migraine, and in the constriction, and in the pain at the roots of the teeth.
and it is in the vein of the vein of the basilica; and it is necessary that you instruct the surgeon to press his hand to put it, so he does not cut the artery, and does not see the flow of blood.
The windings beneath the chin are like a disease of the mouth, and a corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the veins of the .ij. lips.
Here is the translation:
The ventosations of the seams are worth as much as three good veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these thick veins;
and instruct the surgeon to not make too many incisions, for the flesh is naked of skin, and knows of underlying nerves and arteries.
The ventouse that is on the backside is worth as much as emoroydes of the foundation, and as illnesses underneath, and it is necessary that the ventouse be large, and be of a certain size, so it has mastery to treat well; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And if the wound is large, it is necessary to cauterize many times: the first time to subtly open up the path of the large blood wound.
And if the wound is very deep, it is necessary to cauterize a third time; and when we want to draw out the little blood drop by drop, then we suffice with only one application.
And if we want to remove a lot of blood, we recommence often; and if the wound is deep, we cauterize in the background, and the ends are such that the crust forms suddenly.
and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and whose pores are obstructed, that you open the pores of the oily aperture with apertif and dissolutive oils. if it is in this state, of violet oil, or of almond oil sweet, or of oil of cucumber seed;
and if it is in ivy, of oil of cress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar.
And if the surplus is thick and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsamite, or oil of anise, and the similar.
And if it is one who has tender and large pores, it is not suitable to put oil on them.
but it is necessary to wash after the ventilation of warm water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or similar things.
And he who has much moisture, if he raises with vinegar, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
And those who have thick superfluities raise themselves with old wine, or water of elder, or a decoction of aniseed or chamomile, or other similar things;
and it is not necessary to be more careful of cupping before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the ventilation.
and it is necessary to warn when one must be warned and when it is warned. And beware of the one who is wounded by choleric passions, and if their blood is too sharp and inflamed; it is necessary that he takes cold things, such as apples, grapes, and lettuce in the shade, and similar things;
and avoids peaches, and meat from a castrated animal, and damp meats.
And he who has a cold complexion, if he takes syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and mixes a little, and mixes a little peaches and small birds and pigeons;
and the day when he feels dizzy, if he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give to some men three or four draughts of triacle or muscat before the dizziness, or afterwards, to comfort the main limbs; and let the blood be subtly treated, but it is not suitable for those who are hot when they drink.
The blisters that are placed without striking are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and on the podagra, and on the stomach and the bowels and the loins and the thighs, for these members cannot suffer a blow from above.
and do not make it so that blood flows from member to member, as we put them on the limbs when they are not healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we put blisters on the stomach and on the bowels to diminish the member;
and remove the pain, when there is obstruction or stone, if it removes by its attractive virtue through adventure the obstruction, or dislodges the stone from its place;
and thus it happens when one puts it on the fire and on the soft part when there is retained windiness
and these windinesses are administered voided by sucking too much; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes full of watery tediousness
as in bad illnesses of the lungs, and in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with warm water or water in which one has cooked herbs convenient for that
The shape of the cupping glass administered to fire is thus:
And it has two fingers' length and a half palm's width from the fontanelle, and it has or it is next to the milestone, a small perforation, just as if one would prick with a needle.
and let it be of iron, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when putting it on the limb;
and have in the middle a crossbar of iron or steel, to put a held clamp,
and they should be large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
for the blisters of children are other than those of the old, and of the thin ones rather than the fat ones.
And one should thus put this blister on the limb:
take the candle of wax or lead, and put it in the blister across the vein that is in the blister, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the blister so it does not burn the patient;
And then place it on the limb, and let two be on the perforations that we have mentioned, so that when one wants to, the vapors go out, and remove the ventouse.
and take in the linen cloth as before, and rewrap it often, if you have need of it.
In the ventouse where it is administered in the disease of pleurisy, at every corner, there is no vein nor perforation, and it is not administered unless when it is full of water, and is placed on the limb only slightly.
and that is the method:
Here is the translation: and in the dislocations of the flesh, as we said or not, and similar things;
and the quality of the usage is that when you find veins that are in tender sweet nodes without bitterness, if you take them;
and put a node in a tender sweet spot, until they become familiar, and have nothing in the way; and then be cleansed of vein and of abscess, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the veins;
and when they are flat, and dry, it is the time to apply a cupping glass, if one can put it, for that is very useful afterwards.
If not, then lift the skin of the axis, and then of water, very well, and then sprinkle;
and if the skin is too sensitive afterwards near the body of the veins, so anoint with a cold water compress, and put on, until the vein is constricted;
and if the vein is multiple, then apply a powdered glass or gypsum, or similar things, until it is constricted;
where you apply on the body many peeled beans, and let them stick as long as they adhere to the skin, it will staunch now;
and if you have more of this kind, take other sapless ones.
And if the sapless ones do not want to take, rub the skin with fresh blood, or you fix a needle so that the sap comes out. and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they stick;
and when you see that they are falling, powder on a little of aloe and of dried brookweed, or of cinders, if they will now heal.
Here begins the book of fractures.
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Know, dear son, that the foolish wise men who wrote this chapter, did not find anything in the ancient books, nor did they read any letters about it.
and because of this cause is estranged the knowledge in our land, for I never found any good therein;
and I knew nothing, except that through the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life;
and I have described for you here in this chapter what is contained, and I have summarized it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are needed, as I have done in these preceding chapters;
It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where wisdom puts its understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who have experienced it know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or bruising comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, so nothing hinders you completely, just as weakness of body, or old age, or feebleness.
or the tension is not very strong, or too cold; and avoid cold foods, it's known that cold joints are bad, and excessive eating of veal and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat too much of raw vegetables, and do not overfill with meats that fill the veins with blood, so you have no fear of hot abscess, or expansion of matter in the limb; if the patient returns to their initial good governance which they have used.
And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or it has viscosity, just as fermenting in water, and rice, and bread, and feet, and pork belly, and eggs, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things. For a suitable nourishment represents marrow and more quickly heals the fracture.
And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well taken in hand or joined according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, like the bones of small children;
but it is not so, reset the broken bone with thick tendons which are reunited and join the limb together, so that it strengthens as it was before; and do not touch any part of his work, and therefore he must be nourished with thick foods, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. Because there is a break that goes to the arvolt, and another in agitating, as the cutting of a quill for writing.
Because there is a break that goes to the arvolt, and another in agitating, as the cutting of a quill for writing. And if it breaks with a wound, and breaks all along a small crack.
And in each manner it has its engine, and its own instrument in the restoration, according to what the memory comes back into its place;
and it is known that the break of the bone occurs because the joint is twisted, and opens well by force, and sounds at the pressure of the hand;
and when there is no twisting in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no point of breaking;
but it can well have twisting, or crack, or small break. If it does not suit you to move the hand, but put on medications that come hereafter, and then hold steady now subtly.
And know that the break which goes in awry, and are the disjointed parts, it is necessary to put them now in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not gather there.
and if boils appear, they come if he lets them alone for a day, until the boils are softened; then put it evenly on the muscles that you can lift lightly and easily, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restorations of one where it has pieces; then hold steady, as it will be afterwards.
And if there are broken pieces in the bone, if it is dislocated in two or three parts, whether it is hand or foot, or a small limb, or with two cords, or with a cord and your hand;
and put the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are dislocated, you reset them by adjusting all the joints in their proper place on the muscles that you can lift, and take care that through your work no harm or injury comes to the patient.
and adjust well the joints of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel well with the hand if it seems to you that it is not good: if you straighten it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press as they do who come through their work of abscess and contraction in the limb, as we have often seen.
And when the limb is in a state, reprimand the patient well that they do not move it, neither while awake nor while asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and take care that the limb is so positioned that it does not feel any pain. Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: and you ensure it is set straight, so that no twisting occurs when it is restored;
and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
For there are small members, thus arms and fingers and similar: so it is necessary to envelop with gentle and subtle bandages;
and those that are large, such as the thigh and leg: it is necessary to bind with a wide and sturdy bandage, for wide bandages embrace the entire large limb, and hold it steady on all sides equally, so there is no unevenness.
then the internal dressing is light, 3 or 4 turns, according to the limb, and hold the hand a little above all the bandage, then go above the break and hold it less, so the break can slowly move the break.
and soften the bandage little by little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy limb, then take another bandage, and turn it again above the broken limb.
then return to the part below the break, and hold it moderately, neither too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first chapter above.
Then put between the swollen veins of flax or drapetz, so it is all equal, then bind above with a bandage, and then put your well-made stitches above, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
And if there is inflammation or abscess, put above something that appeases the hot abscess, and which removes the inflammation, and leaves it thus for some days;
then bind above your stitches, and make a poultice of a large cooled canvas, or of wood where they make the cleavers, or of palm fronds, and adjust according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the stitch that one puts above the wound be a little thicker and larger than the others;
and let it be as long as it is suitable for the limb, whether small or large;
then hold it steady on the edges just as you did at the first operation, then tie a thread above, just as on the fracture at the break;
the more tightly it is held, the less so; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too thick nor too thin, and be of soft flax;
for if the threads are thick, just as I have seen foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted flax cords, and this is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it does not matter that there should be less than two fingers' breadth of space between each edge.
And if the patient is injured by the heads of the stars after the tightening in their sound limbs, put beneath them a dressing of linen or a piece of cloth, so that it does not become black.
When the wound is with the breakage, and the course is broken, I will tell you the cure hereafter.
And know that it does not suit to tighten these stars all at once on the broken limbs the first day. For when the limb is large, it does not suit to put these stars in place until after 5 or 8 days, or more according to the severity of the abscess that occurs.
and thus you see the manner of the ancient plasterers to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and it is that you take flour that holds as by the walls of a mill, and mix it with abundant egg white, and make this confection, not too clear nor too thick, and in use, and it's the common manner of the plasterer restoring the fracture to many dispositions, and especially for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of plasterer restoring the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take abrasives and ladanium and enula and asa fetida and Arabic gum and myrrh, in this proportion .x. 3.; mirre and aloe, in this proportion .v. 3.; and alechil .viiij. 3.; and make into powder, and mix with abundant egg white; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores the broken bones, and is suitable for many men.
Another manner of plaster that is suitable for torsion: take myrrh and vismalve, in this proportion .x. 3.; mirre and aloe, in this proportion .viiij. 3.; acacia .vi. 3.; Armenian bole .x. 3., and grind well, and mix with water or abundant egg white, and apply it.
Here is the translation:
Another way to restore broken bones: take dry fig leaves and earthy peony leaves, crush them together, and make a poultice.
Another way to restore the broken bone and for reducing the remaining abscess. Take root of vismalve, chamomile, violet flowers, fine flour, each a part; crush, and mix with wine, and if the limb is hot, mix with moist coriander water, or water, and use it.
Another way to restore even stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes for the restoration of the limb. Take roots of vismalve, and seeds of flax, balauste, mellilote, and sansuce, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each one part; crush, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Hypocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb to restore it except for cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between two extremes, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that one should apply to the broken member, to restore, things which are a little warm, like myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of applying that is good for a lesion and pain: take mugwort and chamomile decotions, or pellets of bird's foot, and vismallave, and make it even, and crush them, and make an application on the affected area.
And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone out of its place; if you do not loosen it for many days.
And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, without rest or inflammation, if you hurry, and loosen it, and remove the application now; and take a lighter dressing, and a moist sea-sponge, and dip in water, and lift the limb, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is alleviated. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on a dry linen cloth, wrapped in water or rose oil, and lay it on a nut, until you are certain of a warm abscess.
and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then resume the subtle treatment, and a little of the poultice, and do not strain it too much as before; and subtly until it is healthy.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you have mastered the poultice and the bandage, then resume it, as you did previously in equal measure.
And if it does not come to the limb from what we have said, do not delay further than 8 or 12 or 5 or 6 days; and never leave it for 20 days, according to what is seen, until the fracture is corrected, and the adjustment of the flesh is near.
then you restrain more than before, and the swelling grows, as I said earlier; and if you see the limb drying out more than it should be, know that it cannot heal. apply the warm water treatment, every time you dislocate it, and let it be each third day, and ease the bandage a little.
by this work, then the healing of the limb is cut short, and it is hastened by what foolish people do, which twists the limb awry: it's bad, and if it's a painful operation, I don't see anything else but to let it be and to open it straight away.
of various ways of fracture There are many types of fractures, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinguished.
For there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a spear, and the neck of the bone is broken all the way to the syfac which is beneath the bone, as if it were shattered or crushed; and for this reason this type of fracture is called "shattering".
Where the spear strikes the bone from above, piercing senselessly, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two grand or small fractures.
And if there is a buried percussion, or fissure or break of the neck of the stone, or fall on the stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a penetrating wound that approaches just below the skin which is beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is the wound whether large or small.
And if there is a wound that is embedded in the bone as subtly as a goat's hair, and it is a small fissure, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary".
and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or falling, or similar things, and makes the piece of bone go down, and it is like the joints are set as the craftsmen do when they strike on the anvils; thus within the bone.
And this happens more to those who have soft and moist bones, like a child's head.
and there are all these ways of breaking which small pieces are dislocated as if they were; and I will speak of them in their place.
And we recognize all ways of breaking by the withdrawal from them, and the inquiry into tendons, and by the corrupted flesh that is on.
The similarity of the hair-like [structure] is known by that when one has uncovered the bone, and one rubs against it, then the black breaking opens.
In the treatment of breaking, beware of accidents that harm the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and numbness, and feverish ague, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in various dispositions, lest it cannot be healed without doubt.
And if you do not see an immediate accident, and you expect a cure, then begin the treatment.
And when the nave comes first to you, and it is in winter, then you must open the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to open the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone does not become corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned do not occur.
And if the break of the bone reaches the tissue that covers the brain, then you must divide the divided part in this way: and it is that you take hold of the chief of the ailing nerve, and uncover on the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more softly than you can.
and if the flow of blood comes to discover the bone, or an abscess swells, it is aided by that which it needs, and it is that you fill the hole with dressed oil in a rosed oil. and make the wound rest until the abscess swells are appeased, and be assured of the flow of blood; then begin to treat the bone from the outside, and it is done in two ways of working: one way is that you cut at the tight stitching beforehand, and this is the form.
And then you make another stitching even larger than the first one.
And the second way is that you have a number of diverse stitches, some tight and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are of iron indeed; and in working lightly, so that you do not blister the head.
And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you make a perforation around it, so that you administer moderate blows with a hammer, not too deeply so that they do not penetrate beyond the bone of the test, and must have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have more, if each one returns to its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have blows for all tests; and this is the form of the three manners of blows.
The quality of blows to pierce into the broken bone is that you put a blow on the bone, and turn your fingers so that you feel that the bone is pierced; then put the blow in another place a little afterwards, and do it all around, then make incisions in the space of the bone which is between the breaks, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you hold as if with pincers; and beware that you do not touch the brain or the spleen.
And when you have pierced the bone and extracted it, it is necessary that you prepare the instrument which remains attached to the bone at all other instruments similar to an incisor, but it must be more slender and more subtle than the other incisors.
and if it remains none of the small bones, no empty shells, if they lightly touch on the instruments; then cure the wound with tendons and ligaments that we have said.
And the other method of surgery is what Galen said, which is more wise; and he praised it greatly, and that's his word. It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, where the break appears, so that when you have discovered that part, then put beneath the head of this lenticular incision the form:
And do not cut from one part, and the affected part is in the .ij. rib, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently cut around the entire bone, and be very careful of the membrane that is beneath.
if it is loose at the bone, lift the bone lightly, for one does not feel well-being, but feels fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is covered only superficially above, and there are small pieces, so it is necessary to remove that asperity, and to extract the scales with a subtle rasping tool which you must have in various quantities, to prepare each place most conveniently, according to the work and shape of the fracture.
If you rasp before with large rasping tools, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing this until it is well.
In each of the other delicate hair-like fractures and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you prepare the cause according to its direction; and this is something that is not easily responded to by one who has put their study into this art.
And if the wound is exposed, it is necessary that you apply a dressing of linen according to the quantity of the wound, and anoint it with rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another doubled dressing in two or three layers, and anoint it with wine and rose oil, and place it on the first dressing; and make it as light as possible so that you do not irritate the wound, then apply above another linen, and do not constrict it more than necessary until it holds the wound sufficiently.
And let it be thus for a day or two, until the aposteme (abscess) has been appeased, then discontinue it, and apply medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of vegetables, and powder of incense, and aristologe, and similar things; and make powder from these things, and place on the wound, and apply again medicines without causing mortification.
And beware that the wound is not too clean, that you do not leave it open, nor do you assemble a swelling, for when a swelling assembles on the fabric of the brain, it corrodes and putrefies, and brings great evil to the patient; for when one places something mortifying on the wound, it becomes necrotic above.
Here is the translation:
And if you cannot find a fire that comes from the medicine that one has put on, so that some virtue has, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glueing a drizzle, and you put it on the syphac. then heal by ways of cures that are suitable, until he is healthy.
Know that no time are broken the three parts of the nail above, or one part by the solvent, for they are three bones; and this below is cartilaginous, and does not break, so it does not make force to enwrap or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the three parts is broken, then it is necessary that you apply your small finger or pertusions of the nail, and put equal to this breakage within your finger index, and in the pouch by default, until the nail regains its natural shape. and do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the nail, and cannot come out at the joint, then it is necessary that you put it evenly on top of a straight rod a little thick.
And if the break is of two parts, then make another one alike, and hasten to restore it on the first day, so you can.
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscessed swelling is appeased, then it bursts at the head of the nail, which is tense with threads of linen, if the break is in one part.
Where you apply it on one side, the break is there; and let the tendons be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
And they say that one should mollify the tendons in butter, and change every day. It does not seem to me that it is good, but it is necessary that they be mollified with a concoction of egg white and millet powder; then let the tendon, until the bone is strong, and the cartilages hardened.
And sometimes apply it on the nose where the tendons of the egg are, and if there is a swollen drapery within, and it holds the break, and soothes the patient among; or do as you have seen.
And if abscesses come to the nose while you are operating, if you meet cerotate or cotton mollified in rose oil, or in a little pouch of dyacolon.
And if abscesses do not come, then apply an emplaster made of flour of six herbs, and powder of incense, mixed with the yolk of an egg, then place light poultices on top, and do not bind it tightly;
and if the break of the nose is small, and it is broken into little pieces, then remove as many fragments as possible from there, then sew up the fracture, and treat the injuries that are swollen and painful, and afterwards, apply suitable emplasters and ointments to them;
and if there is no deep wound in the nose, then treat it with tinctures, and apply a poultice of plants, until it be healthy.
of the fracture of the jawbone
When the jaw is dislocated downwards, and there is no wound in front, and the break is downwards only slightly, and it is not broken in two, because of the corralling within, if one examines it lightly.
It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left jaw, then put your index finger of the right hand, and gently push the break into place, and hold it with the other hand from the front, and set it even.
And if the break of the jaw is dislocated upwards, then it is necessary that you apply extension to the upper part, so much that it is even.
And if the teeth are moved out of place, or broken, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put it on the broken jawbone, and put on a double dressing; and put on the dressing a well-made steel staple, or a piece of equal leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it to the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light food.
And if you see that the figure changes, so disengage it on the third day, and then put back in place what has changed; and apply a poultice there, made from flour of the mill with plenty of egg or meal of sifted [flour], after you have removed the crust; and put a light poultice there, and if the poultices are effective, and the condition of the patient does not change, let it be until it is healthy; many times it is healthy in eight days.
And if abscesses or wounds come, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, remove the useless piece of bone that is in the way; if you subtly remove the obstructing fragments with care.
And if the wound is constricted, then enlarge it with a flame according to the necessity.
And when you will have gathered all these pieces, and it does not remain there, if the wound is large, and put on it suitable dressings to cauterize the flesh, so that it be healthy.
of the strength The fracture breaks more often beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners: either it is broken and disarticulated in two, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or it has a break with a wound.
And the operations are when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the broken strength; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put the break in your hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor movement.
And if you have mastery of extending further, then put under the shoulder on the patient a round sphere of cloth or of wool, and let it be thick according to your necessity; and stretch and lift the strength, and hold the sphere in your hand, so that you put the break in place, as it should be.
And if you cannot straighten the head of the fracture at the defect, because it comes in deeply, then it is necessary that the patient leans on his shoulder, and puts the espaulier behind, and pushes the ministers below the shoulder, so that the bone of the fracture is raised.
And then adjust the fracture with your fingers, and if you feel debris there, it is necessary that you probe inside; and pull out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, apply one of the instruments you have; but put the instrument under the fracture, to ward off the blood flow:
and it seems a spoon, and it is not a shame, and let it be as large as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the wound; and have two hands, as you see, and let one be large, and the other narrow, as is the routing of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
and when you are assured of a hot abscess, cut into the wound, and if the routing is small, or you doubt it is a hot abscess, fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
And if abscesses come, thus much. It drizzles into rosated oil and in vinegar and in wine, and puts on.
The tightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and without surgery, is that you put on the bone a plaster made of miller's powder and egg whites, and put light staples on, and put a splint underneath, if you are skilled in this. then take a very wide bandage of a palm's length, then put a double layer of drapery on the staples and the plaster; then take a subtle stick of two fingers' width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage remains suspended. and put the stick on the fracture, and turn the bandage around the neck, and underneath the healthy limb, and underneath the diseased limb; and reset each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture firmly, and you clearly see that the stick does not move on the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when the ligatures are loose, then restrain it.
and make the patient sit up on their back, and place a small pillow under the joint, to raise the shoulder high; if you adjust the fracture of the clavicle by adjusting the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not dislodge it so that bad accidents do not occur, until twenty days.
then reapply the poultice, if you see that it is necessary, and hold it in place and let it be, until it is restored; and it is restored within twenty-eight days, and less for some people.
of the fracture of the shoulder
Although the shoulder breaks or becomes dislocated, it is not set in its place except by touch; if you adjust it according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can; then put on top a powder made from mill flour with enough egg white, and light bandages, and put on a double-layered cloth; then put on a wide and subtle strap, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the strap is not evenly placed on the shoulder, adjust it so that it is even; and then tie it firmly with a strong bandage, so that the strap does not move from its place, and examine the dressing every day; and all the times it becomes loose, adjust it, and put the strap back in its place, and guide the patient onto their side; and the shoulder is restored within twenty days or twenty-five. And when this number of days is accomplished, then release it, and be sure, for it is not right to set it free too quickly.
And if a piece of bone protrudes beforehand, and not below the heart, if it befalls thus, and the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the force to appease the hot abscess.
of the breaking of the foot
The foot is not always broken in the middle, but it happens little; but it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken within, it declines below, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks alignment, and twists, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the fractures in the broken bone, and feels well therein.
And the restoration is that the patient places himself thus on his back, and you place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs of the broken bones with your hands, and subtly put them in order in all the ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on emplaustres and stoups above the subtle layer of salt, or another lighter dressing, and envelop it in a drapery, and tie it on the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the round ligament to the back, and hold it firmly, and reward each hour the bandage, and if it becomes dislocated, then restrain it; and if you see it becoming loose, due to corrosion or pruritus that comes from the wetness, or pain or abscess, hurry, and take away the dressing, and address what has come in ways of cures; then restore the dressing, and hold it firmly until it is healthy.
of the breakage of the ribs
You know that the breakage of the ribs does not occur unless in the large ones behind the back, and at the inner part of the head, and they do not feel it unless because they are slippery; and one feels it well during the interrogation of the two.
And the restorations are that you make equal the breakage, as it is suitable. And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a stick, so you have mastery over it.
And if the breakage of the ribs declines inward, the patient feels very great pain, and numbness, just like a pierced lung, because the bone pierces the membrane; and it produces spotty ulcers, and all sorts of plant-like growths of blood, and it is a grievous wound, and the old ones have put great effort into it.
And if there are those who say that they need to administer foods that inflate the belly, in order to cure the rupture by filling the void.
We do not make this, for hot abscesses will not come, if it has not arrived. And if it has arrived, then bleed it.
And they said that no one puts ventouses on the limb, to suck out the matter, and it seems like a reasonable thing; however, there is doubt that the ventouse does not attract the excess humors from the limb due to the weakness of its disposition.
And they say that one must cover the limb of a injured thigh with hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to equalize the air inside, then one is cured of the treatment for pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear through the hole that touches the fabric, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to break into the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to ward off the blood; and then one must cut through the bone, and treat lightly, and then sew up the lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat with poultices, until they are healthy. And if apostemes come, then place warm dressings soaked in rose oil on them, and put them on the limb; and treat thus the limb of those who need to cure an abscess, and apply soft poultices on the rib where it is necessary, until they are healthy.
of the breakage of the neck
Sometimes a breakage comes to the bone of the neck, and soon it will swell; and also it has a swelling on the spine of the back. And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take heed of it, you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, you do not feel it. Know that it is mortally in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when one holds them tight and firm, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient is cured, so one must apply treatment.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take heed of it, their feet are softened, and if the accidents that are in their hands, and on the back there is loss of sensation and involuntary evacuation; and when one has evacuated on their belly, it is an involuntary evacuation. And when it is evacuated on their back and they want to sit down, they cannot. Know that it is mortally ill: do not labor in vain in their cure.
And if this accident does not come to them, it is the thing most lightweight.
And the cure is that you apply if there is a hot abscess, put on the spine oil of rose or oil of Mayeu's water, as much as it may be appeased; then put on one of the comforting and drying poultices, and bind with a string, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel pain, until they are healthy. And if some bone is dislocated, it must be covered on the heart; and remove the bone, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound, so it is large, at a costure, then the treatment of ointment by making a dressing, as long as it is healthy; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the kowe", you put your pouchet in your left hand, and place it equally with your right hand on your power, then apply the emplastrum and stel on top, if you have mastery; then hold steady, and if there is a dislocated bone, make it straight, and remove it, and treat the wound until it is healthy.
of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Because the bone of the hip is broken, and if it breaks, then there is a small amount of diminution at the head; and make a long bandage, and apply it to the paralyzed parts, and come to the patient's pain in the loin, and puncture, and inflame what is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand on top, as long as you are above the fracture; and know what kind of break it is and its shape; and if the break is only at the head, then place equally on that break, so that it may be in a natural shape.
And if the fracture is very long, or it declines inwardly, then make the patient sit on their belly, until the restoration of that fracture is apparent. And when you have set it straight, put a splint on it, then put it in a wooden or wax mold, and hold the fracture steady so it does not move; and apply the remedy under the ribs, until the ligature is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
And if abscesses come, do not touch them, until the abscesses are calmed, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold it steady as it is fitting, so that there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
of the fracture of the shoulder
The shoulders are what is between the neck and the head of the shoulder blade, and if it is fractured, one must restore it according to one of the two methods: one of which is that you take a full flat plate of moderate thickness, in this form:
And place the two shoulders thus, and bend them upwards, and sit the patient on his seat; then he throws his broken arm on the plate, until it comes to the joint, and has in the middle a curve of wood, then bends over something heavy or the ministers extend downwards; then put the mirrors with the fracture evenly in their hands together, so that the fracture returns as it should.
And the other method is that one supports the patient on his haughtiness, and ties the hand to his neck, then instructs the ministers that one should hold what is on the fracture with their hands, and the others should hold underneath all the ligaments, and each extends to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is too forceful, hold steady. And on the breakage, and extend each of the ministers to their part. And if the breakage is close to the head of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you put steady the vein beneath the joint, and another towards the neck, beneath the breakage; and also if the breakage is towards the neck, then it is necessary to put steady the vein lightly, without labor, until the breakage is even on the limb, and on the neck; then set the breakage evenly, as it is necessary, and hold steady, so that abscesses do not come.
And if apostemes (abscesses) come, do not restrain it less than eight days, and put a soft cloth in oil and rose water, so that the abscesses are appeased; then hold it steady, and the manner of holding it steady is to place the plaster on the break, then assemble the arm at the joint, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the dressing, and hold steady at the joint, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, and nothing disturbs it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and put on the break a larger and stronger splint than the others, and have two fingers' width of space between each splint, and let each splint be as large as it passes over the break; then hold steady with the splints, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter, stronger and less aloof.
And if you see the setting of the splints, and the holding, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is hot, leave it to bind until seventh day, as we have said; then look at each .iij. days the bond, lest it does not swell with life coming into the place, or the nourishments cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted. If you dress, as we have said.
Here is the translation:
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile", one of which is small, and it is the one that follows the pouchet; and the other is large, and it is the one that is beneath, towards the little finger; sometimes the large foscile breaks solely, or the small one, and sometimes they both break together.
When the small foscile is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are both broken together. If it is the small foscile that is broken solely, then you must extend it gently, and set it evenly.
And if it is the large foscile, then you must extend it more strongly; and set it on a cushion, and hold the pouchet of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed thus, and the cushion before him higher, so that the patient suffers no labor; then extend the ministers like an arm to the part beneath his hand, or to the string, and another minister to the other above. And then set the mirrors evenly, according to its best form.
And if in the breakage it falls to pieces, set each one in its place, and if there is no disarrangement that grips the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint and bind with a bandage, as we have said before.
And if with the breakage it is a wound, I have spoken of it to the singular chapter; take the treatment.
And if at the beginning of the restoration, abscesses occur, apply a dressing; make a wrapping of soft cloth treated with oil and white wax, not too hard nor too soft; and apply the wrapping subtly, so that the abscesses are appeased. And then remove the wax, and put on an emplaster of powder from the mill with abundant egg whites, afterwards put on the splints, and let the splint of the breakage be a bit stronger, and a little larger than the others; and know that it must have five or six splints or arms in different positions: whether the breakage is in one of the bones, or in...; and hold more firmly onto the breakage than other parts, and tighten less often, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the dressings that are on the breakage be soft and moist, and not hard nor dry; and let the thread, which is strained, be of linen, not too large nor too small, as we have said. And rewrap the limb and the bandage afterwards a few days. And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, as it happens to the limb, then it is necessary that you warm the limb with hot water, so that the irritation is appeased; and let the limb not be constricted or reposed. And then resume the binding, and if the bandages are loosened and the bones disarranged, and similar things, then address it.
And if you take a warm poultice that the numbness cannot come to the limb, because it is too constricted, then it is necessary that you soften it a little, and let it stay there for some hours, until the numbness is corrected, and then hold it steady.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not loosen until 20 days. Or meanwhile, then he puts his hands on his neck, and his neck is even, and he warms up with movement and stretching, and sleeps on his back; and knows that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexities of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two fingers, there have been few fractures, and it does not come but rather frequent dislocations.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient sits crossed, and sits straight in front of him equally; then he puts his hand on the extended toe, and extends the minister's broken bones, and sets them equal with the mirrors, until they are well joined; and he applies the plaster and the poultices, so that apostemes do not come, then he puts a staple according to the quantity of the blood; and it is enveloped in a linen cloth.
And if the break is in the middle of the hand near the belly of the palm, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken palm; and then strap it with a long bandage, and let the staple be of soft, smooth skin, as big as the palm of the hand, and strap it, so that it is as necessary.
And if the break is in the finger, it is necessary that you put a staple on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand is covered and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and stop the fluid between the two.
And if the break comes to one of our fingers, it is a pouch, set it equal, as necessary; and strap it with the palm, and if you see that you put a small straight staple to lift the break, and do not move; and if the break is in another finger, like the index or one of the others, set it equal, and tie it with the healthy finger that follows; or you tie them together, holding firmly, or you put on a staple, as in a pouch; and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of hot apostemes, and avoid what comes, as I have said.
of the broken hip
The bone of the hip is often broken, and one sees it well when it twists in front and behind; and the restoration is done by binding above the breakage, and another below. And the patient puts his face, then each minister extends his bandage equally on his part; and it is when the breakage is within the bone.
And if the breakage is close to the root of the hip, then one of the bandages goes towards the thigh, and the other below the breakage. And also if it is close to the knee, then the bandage is placed below the knee, and the extension is downwards; then put the mirrors on the bone equally with its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, so that apostemes do not come there.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down, then return to your work and your treatment; the remedy is done in such a way. It is necessary that you bandage the fracture thus: wrap doubly around .i. with a double-layered bandage in .ij. or .iij., and remove the excess, then bend the leg so the ankle reaches the root of the nail, and insert .i. long thread between the thigh and the leg, from beneath the knee, and make the end of the thread above; then wind around the leg and the thigh the double-layered bandage, then place these bandages on the fracture, and put a staple on the bone of the leg; then fill in the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to tighten evenly, then start to bind strongly .iij. turns or .iiij. around the fracture; and when you go further up from the fracture, it tightens less; then take .ij. heads of thread that you inserted between the leg and the thigh, and unlace .iij. staples that are above, then return beneath to the head of the thread, until you reach the foot; and the binding, if it does not move from its place, then let it be thus, so there comes neither abscess nor inflammation or similar things.
And if it happens, then undo it, and address what comes next, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that are grasping, then it is necessary to extract them, if one can; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to break the bone, and make a new arrangement; and the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
And sometimes the hip is broken in this way when you put it back, just as in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration made in this way, it does not close for the patient.
And you should know that the hip is restored at the joint, either less or more, according to the diversity of the complexities.
of the gutter of the knee
You should know that in the gutter of the knee there is little breakage, but it often splits apart. And if it breaks, then it's not just a crack, or a perforation, and it has to do with all wounds, and without wound, and this feels very bad.
And the restoration is that one puts equal what is rounded to its two, so it is assembled as much as one can; then put the plaster, and I put a round stick, if you are skilled in this, and hold it steady as it is necessary, then reorder all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, like hot abscesses and similar things; if one puts for each accident what is fitting, so it is healthy.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "straight" and the other "oblique"; and there is a fracture just as it comes to the arm, and therefore the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the works are all the same.
And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
And if the subtle bones are broken, they turn beforehand.
And if the large bone is broken, they feel great pain, and it is seen clearly; and it turns inward. Then administer an extension, and set it evenly, and align the edges evenly; but however, it is necessary that the break is gentle, and there are many pieces, so the extension should be minor and lighter; and adjust according to its strength.
And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints that cover the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee down to the foot; then wrap them in two layers of bandages above and below, and tie them in the middle, so that the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one administers two wooden splints along the length of the leg, which are of wood, and they put it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly make a cast around the break where there is a wound; and remove each day the dressing to see if there is an abscess or another accident; so cure until it is healthy.
of the break of the bones in the foot
At the hip, there does not come a point of breakage, but at the double bone sometimes comes breakage and at the two little bones, and it is not necessary to have a fracture in more than one disposition.
And if it happens that you have two broken bones in your foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if they wanted to walk, and then put your foot on top of theirs where the bones are elevated; then press them together so they return to their place; then apply a poultice and bandages above, and put under the belly of the foot a small table at the plain joint, then hold the foot firmly in place, then you have enveloped drapels around, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether broken, whether dislocated.
And if there are any of the two bones broken, restore them, as we have said about the fingers of the hand; then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little larger, then put under the foot that small table I mentioned, and hold it firmly in place; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then put on each finger a splint according to its quantity, enveloped in a linen drapel, and hold the small table under the foot; and let it be standing on top of the small table, far from the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said; and attend to each accident as it is necessary.
from the fracture of the bone one should prick
When the bone of the womb is broken, if it makes her sit enlarged, then incline to the back part, and hold it from behind; then fill the bag with cotton, and put a large amount inside; then remove the woman, and lift the back little by little, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the womb, and restore the bone with the stick; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and thus do for seven days or eight: if the break will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of birthwort, and tie a string around the perineum, and pour all the bladder into the womb; then blow into the string strongly, until the bladder is inflated inside: the womb will restore the break; then fill with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until it be healthy.
And when the bone of the finger of the man is broken, or of the woman, restore it thus as we have said in the bone of the thigh; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from one who puts their study and use into it, and reads my book. For the break signifies more dispositions for the right way of restoration: then give it.
In the rod, when it is broken, take an eye of a goat and put it in the rod; then wrap drapels around it, and leave it seven days or eight, and it will be healthy soon.
of breaking with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be set in place now, so that the healthy ones that we have mentioned testify to this.
And if the wound is healthy, and the treatment with vitriol fails, and you have no other remedy, then recommence to restore the break in the same hour, or that day, lest abscesses come from it.
And if abscesses come from it, leave the restoration until the ninth day, so long as the abscesses are calmed, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, lest you cause a bad accident to happen.
And if the broken bone appears on the uncovered skin of the chest, it is necessary that you set it in place lightly with your hands, with small extensions.
And if the extensions are not available to put in your hands, then take hold of this instrument made of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and it is necessary for the mirror to grasp 3 or 4, according to what is needed in each cure of fracture; and let it be rounded and a little thick, so it does not slip at the compression on the limb during your work, and let it be straight in front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved head be placed on the apparent bone of the chief; and the bolt is fixed once, so it holds, and let them be even one against the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, it is necessary that you shape the head of the bone, so the instruments have possession of it.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then take hold of an instrument suitable for that, or incisor or saw, at your power; then remove what is stuck in the bone of asperties and small scratches.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it's not in its natural place. Do so much that it's in its place, then anoint with a black stippled wine, and properly, if it's in this state; and don't put anything on the raw wound or anything else where oil is, lest it brings about putrefaction and corruption; then administer these when you've restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take great care that the wound isn't constricted with the breakage; and many times have fools made this mistake, and have brought about death or corrosion on the patient many times; and may the strapping be more gentle and softer than other breakages.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents may come, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then don't put anything on it; but envelop it around, in the place of these, with hard bandages, and bind them. And when you see afterwards, whether in a day or two, to anoint the wound with a bow, then remove what you've put on everything, and apply ointment healing wounds, as one applies tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
And it is necessary that you unbind the limb three times a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is sound and healthy.
And it is necessary that the limb be arranged in such a way that the bone returns to its lighter course.
And if it happens many times, and it cannot be joined back but returns to the bone, knows that there are small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you touch the wound with tenderness, and remove all these separated pieces that cause that pain.
And if a fistula comes to the bone, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in his chapter before. And when the bone is broken, and opens onto the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large members, do not touch it, for many times death comes, but let it be until it purifies; perhaps it will fall apart after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
of the bruises that come onto the skin
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and it remains weak and subtle afterwards, it happens for many reasons: because one is that it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and they could not bring nourishment to the member; or due to a multitude of medications; or due to too great movements, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient's body thin, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and give him a warm bath, and give him joy and happiness; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the frequent flow of water soothes, so that the nourishment flows to the member; and it returns to its natural shape.
the member is twisted after the healing
Here is the translation:
And often the node is removed by continuously and gently rubbing with damp hands. And let there be gentle movement in the limb at every hour.
And if the twisted parts are inflamed and hardened, like a stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, if it is convenient to cut just up to the bone, in subtle incision lightly; and put caution and study into the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to none, if it must now be brought back into alignment.
For because delay, if one inflames the joints, and by chance if it is reset to its place; for that reason it must not be moved at the hour when it is inflamed: many times it brings on spasms and other pains.
Always, when this happens, if you make the patient healthy, then leave him, until the aposteme's heat is appeased; then raise the member with warm water and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each member as the treatment comes into its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the main joints up to the feet.
of the jaws
Sometimes the jaws are dislocated and swollen, and the dislocations of the jaws occur in two ways: either they are slightly out of their place, and become soft; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so it cannot hold it, nor close its mouth, and entangles its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns to a better position through several manipulations.
And if it is entire and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
and in this manner that the ministers touch the patient's head, and insert their fingers as if from one of their hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two fingers should be opposite, to put them even; and instruct the patient to relax, his jaws, and move them in all directions.
And the fingers place them evenly, until they regain their proper position.
And if the reset is difficult, meanwhile it is the two jaws together, if they arise from warm water and oil, until they are lightly reset; do not delay in resetting, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without becoming numb, if you place a moist cloth made of oil rosat and wax on it, then tie it lightly with soft threads.
and the patient should sleep on his back, and his arms be steady between two cushions, so that he does not move either to the right or to the left, nor make an effort of moving, but take light food, until the pains are eased, and the jaws are relaxed.
and then chew what he wants lightly, and do not exert himself to open his mouth while eating and drinking, until the jaw is well relaxed and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be adjusted to a point at one hour, and are not converted to their proper places, then fever and severe pains come, and perhaps a disturbance of the stomach, and perhaps a vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of peril; and many times the one who has had it dies within eight days.
of the force
The force cannot dislodge from the side where it is continued and from the foot, and it is dislodged many times at the defect, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient places himself on his back, and stretches out his arms; and then presses the place firmly with your palm, and it will return to its place; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place.
and the joint that is towards the side cannot dislodge; if not, and if it does dislodge many times, reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until he is healthy.
and thus the same is returned to the head of the shoulder, when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in four ways: one is when it dislocates at the part of the bone above; and the second is at the part of the foot below; and sometimes it dislocates at the top, and this happens rarely.
and it does not dislocate backwards for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inward for the nerves; and many times it dislocates downward towards the bone, especially in those who have little flesh, because in those who have little flesh, it quickly becomes inflamed; in those who have sufficient flesh, it becomes inflamed slowly, and returns to its place slowly.
And by chance it happens to some men that they receive a blow or fall, and inflame the shoulder of a hot abscess, and believe it is dislocated by this.
It is necessary then that you examine them, as long as you are certain of them; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that dislocation occurs when it falls towards the axilla, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a manifest diversity. and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the axilla, touching the head of the shoulder, just as if it were a bone; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move with any movements.
and thus, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly at the toucher;
and this kind of dislocation does not force to be reset, when it is new, or the patient's fever is bad.
And the method is that the ministers lift the hand of the patient above, then put their fingers underneath the axilla, and lift the joint strongly above at the place; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it above, then put it underneath; if it will come back quickly.
And if it does not come back as we have said in many days afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and the minister should arrange for a softening and soothing treatment, such as a decoction of alder, fenugrec, and melilot in water, and it should be administered.
then be careful with the patient on their back, and place under the axilla a stick of equal length, not too soft nor too hard, then put the mirrors by their heel on the stick, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and treat the good hand of the patient.
and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder returns now, and if you see that you reset it according to this method:
and it is necessary that you make a helper present, who is stronger than the patient; and be straight towards the side, and push the shoulder under the axilla of the patient, and lift the axilla high, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister treats the good hand of the patient downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too lightweight, then weigh him down with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And one resets it in another way: and it is that one fixes a long pin in the ground, so that the head of the shoulder is reset just like a pistol, and not too big nor too slender; then it should be placed under the patient, but that they have soft drapery spread underneath, and the patient should be standing far from a long beam; then their hand should be extended downwards from the other side in a straight line, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then make this treatment: take a pin of two cubits in length and three fingers wide, which has the head bent to enter obliquely under the bone, according to this form:
then place it on the head of the beam with soft drapery underneath, so that the beam does not hurt the patient, then put it under the bone of the patient; and extend one arm on the beam of the length, and place the shoulder on the beam, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on a support of a large chair, and extend the hands downwards, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is in, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary that you place under the seat a layer of equal linen, then apply the plaster made with powdered mill dust, with incense and egg white, on the entire shoulder and around, then hold underneath the seat firmly, and turn the ligature on the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let it remain there.
And it is necessary that you massage a little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then massage more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is strengthened and not softened, it is healthy.
And if the joint is weakened by moisture or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer three cauterizations to it, as it is described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint cannot hold together, and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is injured or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be in its proper place.
Here is the translation:
And if after healing comes numbness to the limb, and later on movement, if the patient often bathes, as long as that numbness is alleviated, and it returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the joint
You know that the joint of the joint is dislocated to points, and to points it returns; and it is dislocated in all parts, and meanwhile before and behind, and the dislocation is not repaired, for one sees well and feels well; and dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the injured joint with the healthy one, then you can see it openly. For the joint is crooked, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it thus, so that the abscesses which come to life, for if the abscesses come, it would be grievous to reset; and by chance it cannot be reset from all sides, especially when it is behind; so it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration is, when it is such that one can bring it back, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and his arms be spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the count inwards, from above and below, and bend the joint to its knuckles together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and fixes from the root of the palm the count that is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold the two ministers, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer long and wide.
and when the mirror joins the joint to its hand, if it oils with any oil to soften the joint, then bend the joint firmly, until it returns.
and when it is in place, set a dry poultice with egg white, and hold the arm firmly, and bend the arm at the neck of the patient, and leave it for some hours, then disband it.
And if the joint is firmly in its place, disband the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, start the poultice and bandage again, and leave it thus for some hours, until it is firmly set; then disband it.
And if he feels grievous after the replacement of the joint, and it moves, soak it well and rub gently, and press until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a fat sheep's grease, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make him enter into a bath. and when he sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the grease on it again, and then enter into a bath; and thus do three or four times, until he is healthy; and if you see, set on a moist warm cloth with butter, and hold it steady; if it returns to its natural disposition.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is light, more than the other joints However, it must be quickly returned to its place, in the same manner that it dislocated, so that the limbs are not swollen, or an abscess forms there.
And the remedies are that you place the injured hand on a table, and extend the fingers of the hand, and align them equally, so that you place your palm over the appearance of the joint, and bend it until it returns to its place.
However, it is necessary that you examine if it is well in its place; then put the injured palm of his hand on a table at extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand with their palm on the table, and the doctor places their hand under the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
If not, then strain the swelling abscesses gently, and let them begin to soften again.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in its place after several days, the twisted joint remains.
and do not annoy the patient further than when the hand is numb, and cannot strain anything at all: then know that the nerves are damaged, or the arteries; if there is no other remedy for it except to strain by fire cautery in this case, and perhaps nothing else will work.
And when the hand is in its place, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and let it go immediately, then release it and let it be thus.
And if it cannot move well, and there is no swelling, apply the warm water poultice, and rub until it is healthy.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Never are the fingers of the hand dislocated in any part, never on the back of the palm or on the belly.
Then they stop, and push the dislocation into your pouches as far as it returns, then support the top of the arm, and bend towards the part where it is disjointed.
and let it be still for a while, and then make it even with that day; and bind the lie, as we have said, and loosen the day, and make it move, and rebind the lie; and do this often, until it is straight.
and do the same thing, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy; and do the same thing, when it is dislocated from another part.
for the dislocation of the spine of the back
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of healing, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations suddenly occur without will, cannot hold it, and often some members are softened, or the two hips or the two arms.
And often the spine changes in four places; the one that changes at the back is called "gilbositez".
The treatment is that you rewind where the gilbositez has come from childhood; if there is no point of healing or salvation from the entire body.
And that which comes from falls or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cures by grand words, where it is not in all great profit.
but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed remedies in various ways.
I say that in the gibbosity that comes to the worst before, no one is healthy;
and thus that which comes directly to the ribs, and one cannot cure those unless it is properly treated which comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient should be stretched out on a level bed, and have support from beneath him, so he does not slump.
then place a thick pillow under the head on the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and bind a bandage beneath the patient's joints, and another at the calves, and at the knees, and at the ankles.
and two attendants should bind the bandages, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the thick pillows.
and they should be well fastened, the pillow as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine firmly, until it is reset.
And if it does not return through this treatment, take a tube of three inches long, and shave the skin around the area, and the patient should be in a comfortable position, and put the head of the tube under the skin, then place the middle of the tube on the spine; and put the mirrors to his feet on the other head of the tube, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, make it in the turntable that turns by hand.
And it is that you fix three stitches at the head of the patient's arm of great size, and towards the feet three others, and between each stitch, above and below, a space of one inch;
and have in each stitch one perforation, where the turntable runs, and let the stitches be firmly fixed to the ground, so that they do not move; and between each three stitches have one turning stitch, where the rope turns, and have in two turntables two small stitches of one inch, to turn the turntable;
and then the ligament that is among the bones at the turning of the body towards the head, and the other ligament towards the feet at the other turning, and each of the ministers turns his turning to all the ligaments, and the masters set the spine even as we have said.
And when it is even, set on the emplaustre a decimating plaster with a lot of egg white, and then the bandages, and then the stelae of a .iij. two-inch long tablet, which grips the body of the gibosity and the part of the healthy spine, then bind with a ligament, as we have said, and use the subtle nourishment of the patient to be healthy;
and if anything happens at the end of the health, you must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the stelae that we mentioned before; and never administer it in a piece of lead,
and never does the appearance come in the back of the spine below the ribs, and beware that it may be dislocations; and it is the bone that opens, because one must not have presumptions: for fear of death may come suddenly.
of the dislocations of the thigh
You know that the joints of the thigh and the joints of the shoulder only come out of place through dislocations, not as if like other joints; and the joint of the thigh is dislocated according to four parties: inward and outward, forward and backward; and more inward than outward, and slightly dislocated forward and backward.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inward is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and opens more the sick knee than the healthy one, and the sick one cannot bend its knee towards the fire. and it is the limb that is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the hip comes there.
And the signs of him who is approaching death are that these accidents are contrary to those beforehand.
And the signs of him who is approaching beforehand, it is that he stands well on his leg according to the accomplishment; however, do not double the knee without pain, and if you want to make him walk, it cannot go forward, and he retains his urine, and inflames the ankle, and when he goes, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of him who is going backwards, it is that he cannot stretch his knee, nor double, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the level of the ribs beneath the ribs.
The reminders of this kind of dislocation are that you should beware that the dislocations are ancient, and they remain according to their disposition, if there is no cure; and it does not seem that he has a presumption.
And in that case where the dislocation is fresh, and it's one of three manners of dislocation, if you hurry to turn the joint, and stretch within and without, and move to the right and left; perhaps if it returns, and there is no need for another cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you apply a strong minister, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee. and another minister extends his hand above in such a way that he puts his hands under his haunches, then tightens with a soft bandage on the thigh; and another holds the head of the bandage.
and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This manner of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If it is not so, then one must put a cure on its similarity. When the dislocation is in the pectoral region, then it is necessary to place the patient on their healthy side, then put the bandage at the root of the hip, and the place that is under the groin, then stretch the bandage upwards towards the groin, and towards the strength.
then take another minister by the arms, and embrace the large limb of the hip that is diseased, and stretch it to its former shape: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary to bind the four feet of the diseased limb together with a strong and soft bandage above the four heels, and above the four knees, so that the diseased leg is extended four fingers more than the others.
Then be hung from the head of a beam, and be two inches above the ground; then instruct a minister to embrace the head of the hip, and be another minister hanging with the patient, who firmly embraces the hip, for the joint returns quickly now.
And when the dislocation is in default, thus guide the patient, as we have said about the one who has gout, and stretch .i. the bandage properly on the affected leg, and on the foot also;
Then put two splints, one at the head and another at the feet, then fix the splint between the hips of the patient in the correct form; and place moist bandages around, so that they do not harm the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the surgeon puts his hand evenly on the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good. If not, put on the table, and press as we have said in the gibbosity, and adjust the patient to the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and place the mirrors to reflect the image onto the affected limb, then press with the other hand, and extend down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the back, it is not necessary to stretch the affected limb down, nor lift it from the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip were dislocated at the back, just as we have said about the positioning on the .ij. hips; and be on its face, and the ligament is stretched as we have said before, and one should press on the joint at the table;
and it will be a point when the patient stretches out his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hips, and apply the plaster, and hold with a bandage, so that the hip does not move;
and it rests for two or three days, then dislocate, and apply the plaster on top; and if you see that they are even, hold steady, as before, and leave it for two days; then dislocate, and make it comfortable enough so that the limb is comforted.
about the dislocation of the knee
The knees are dislocated in three ways: that is to say, within, and forward, and backward; and not at all in front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if he does not adhere to the thigh, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and put your foot against his feet.
then take his knee in your hands, and draw it between your two, then bend the .ij. costs of the knee forcibly; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he adheres well his leg to his thigh lightly.
and put the plaster on, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together strongly .iij. hours or three., then unbind it; and do not trouble the patient anymore, until the limb is comforted.
And if the limb is not at all, if administration is strongly extended, as we have said in the treatment of the ankle, until it is healthy.
of the dislocation of the ankle
The ankles are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, and inward and outward.
And the signs are that the shin is inflamed, and it pulls towards the part where it is dislocated:
We remind you it is lighter, and one must extend it lightly with their hands when it is slightly numb.
And when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit upright and hold it in place; ministers force by the leg, above the knee.
then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left; do this several times, then hold it high up, and nicely push the foot high up;
and do this several times, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it goes back into place, that's good; if not, start the treatment again, for it will go back into place.
and if he cannot return thus, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix the affected limb firmly in the ground between his thighs, and wrap the blankets around, so the patient does not twitch.
then stretch the ministres to the thigh, and another minister stretches out the foot to his hands or to the lien, so that it is on the hollow of the foot; then stretch each minister equally, and the straps be thus between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when one stretches them;
then put the mirrors equally on the dislocation with his hands, and another minister stretches the healthy leg downwards, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at the point, set the plaster and poultices above, and hold firmly in place, and bind the foot to the leg, and beware of the nerves that are on the back of the knee, so that they do not become too constricted.
Then let it be for two or three days, and if the ligaments are numb, hold them in place; then loosen them on the third day or on the fourth, and forbid the patient to move about for four days. And if he goes beyond this term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses appear, you must touch them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
of the two
When the fingers are dislocated, they must be beautifully extended without effort, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any of the fingers or toes, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns to its place.
and when it is aligned, and there is no gap, put under the sole of the foot a table at the knee, then strain firmly, and let it be for two hours, then dislocate it; and make it rest, until it is healthy.
of wound and of dislocation together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies.
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, be wise in the art and you have not used it for a long time, and be pitiful and merciful and slow, not hasty.
and apply at the beginning of things appeasing hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health. and when you see hope, if you now reset the limb to its place, so that the abscesses dry up and come to life;
and when the limb is in its place, if you administer soothing things to dry up the abscess, and heal the wound, as it is fitting, with desiccated ointments;
and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and you gently reset the bone, then set them, and do what we have said in simple illnesses;
and beware of entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for this is worth more to you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and your body. Amen
