Here is the translation: And it came to me in a vision that I should accomplish this with the treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from everything everywhere, thus the knowledge is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of the powers except for small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come the error and vanity, and the intentions are closed and the knowledge is estranged.
It seems to me that I should vivify it together with the ordination of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of the ferrumens of cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, it is the art of medicine extended. And it behoves him who undertakes to learn the science of anatomy, as Galien says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of the bones, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of holes, and the movement and resting of the veins moving and resting, and the issue of their exit.
And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name with the noun is little, and with the work is small; and likewise in the art of hand.
We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the aforementioned things, should beware lest he falls into error and harms men; thus I have seen many times more of those who undertake this science and abandon their sense and experience.
Here is the translation:
And I saw another doctor who treated a stone of a man's age, and the stone was large; if he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within 22 days.
And I had already been called by the doctor, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they had removed it well he would have died.
And I saw another doctor who took in hand the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the breakage he had a wound; and the doctors, ignorant of the art, held the breakage against the wound as they were strongly bound, and did not leave the wound to heal, and left it thus terminated; and he ordered that it should not be touched again; and meanwhile the leg became entirely inflamed and the foot came to perdition.
I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come and release the leg; and when I had released it, he was at ease and felt no pain.
But all the way the corruption was already confirmed in a member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the entire member was almost lost.
And I saw another mirror that burst into an abscess, and then became inflamed due to the evil of its dominance.
For cancer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not seem that one should touch it with iron unless it is in a place where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
And for this reason, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into three divisions: namely, it is known, whether there is danger in multiple dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary for you to take care of yourselves, so that evil people cannot speak badly of you.
Take your arms in consideration, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and salvation; and abandon the diseases that bring grievous sanity; and remove your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of a bad illness, lest you be called foolish people."
I have divided this treatise into twelve chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cautery and medicine for ague, and it is the chapter organized from head to feet; and on the forms of instruments, and the iron of cautery, and all that which is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping glasses and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter organized with the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from head to feet, and on the forms of instruments.
Thus we must remember in our work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of each aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the longest word and subtle science and hidden responses; and many wise men spoke about this, and agreed with it; and I suffered little from their words, for I reduced the length.
I say that fire cautery universally aids every complexion where there is matter, because there are two complexions: it is to know the hot temperament with matter, and the dry temperament without matter.
In hot and dry complexions with matter, some devised none and said that fire cautery is great aid; and others said the opposite: that fire cautery is not valuable for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to cure hot diseases by heat, nor by dryness; and he who said the opposite said that fire cautery provides great aid for hot and dry diseases that come from the bodies of men. Because you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it true many times by experience.
And all the way, no one interferes with it except those who have experienced it, and who know through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the events and the space of time; we do not fear other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses. And all the mirrors assemble and agree with the cautery.
And know, son, that assembling fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than medicine burning with ardor.
For fires are simple, and do not come except to the member that is cooked, and do not harm another member unless poorly named.
The burning medicines pass from member to member by alleviating, and bring to the sick member the grief of salutary healing; and thus happens to the patient.
The fire, because of its height and goodness of its substance, does not make this, if there is no excess.
And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it is established on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me to reveal the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out bodily illnesses, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; or you receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they should agree on what time the cauterizations should be done, and take precautions.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries occurring are often mitigated by the help of cauterization; and similarly, the cauterizations are for necessary pains and hastenings that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
And do not think otherwise, dear son, as foolish people believe; for the disease that is cured by cautery has no recurrence; and they say so; but it is not so, because cauteries are not medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that cause pain, and is worth more than medicine due to its speed of healing, and for the virtue of its work and signory.
And it is possible that the disease returns several times according to the complexion of the patient and the virtue of the disease; and the excesses are gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered at the site where there is little excess and moisture, just as dense cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth more than medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cures in some disease and they do not work, then we administer cauteries, and it is worth. Then it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish people.
The ancients said that cauteries of golden instruments are more effective than those of iron, and did not say this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and said that the eyes of cautery do not make putridity, but it is not seen because I have experienced it, and found that it is true in some homes; and golden cauteries are worth more than those of iron, as they loudly declared.
And however when you heat the golden instrument, you do not know how it is heated by the color of gold, and it is quickly cooled down; and if one heats it too much, they make a fire; and thus there is enough impediment.
And for this reason we use iron cauteries that we have made more suitable to our work.
Here I have ordered this chapter of the loud chief just at the foot, because the way should be easier to find.
For the olive cautery
These cauteries are good for moisture and cold on the brain, and they are used because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend to the head as eyes, ears, and multitude of sounds and pain in the teeth and throat, and also for all diseases that come from cold if like paralysis and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by medicine solving and modifying the head, three or four times, according to what the strength and age and habituation of the patient can suffer; and then make a remedy for the head of the patient.
And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on the soles of his feet; afterwards put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes; and where the two veins meet, if it bleeds from the nail, then heat up the cautery which is called "olivare", because this is its form:
And place the sign on the affected area with ink, and make a slight impression by gently twisting your hand little by little while turning; then lift your hand slightly, and examine the area to see if you see a small opening; and if you do not see it, start the fire cautery again until you see the opening as I have told you; afterwards take a little cotton soaked in oil and place it inside, and put it on the affected area, and let it be for three days; afterwards put a warm compress wrapped in cloth; and leave it on until the inflammation subsides; afterwards treat the wound of the joint that is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
And they said that the more one delays putting pressure on the wound, the more it suppurates; and for this reason it is necessary to help with motion.
And they said that one of them should leave the cautery so much that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
And they said that one should leave the cautery so much on top, and thrust so strongly that one detaches from the bone as large as the vertebrae that women put in their fuseaux (bundles) because the humors issue forth; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one must cure and sew.
And these two manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good in every way, unless in some homes where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we demonstrate in other members; and similarly when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more salvaging and mending for me, and I have often observed a healthy outcome.
of the old pain of the head
When in all the head comes chronic pain, and lasts a long time, then the patient should use hiera and pills which are called "cochie", and of purging the head and eyes and applying plaster; and if they perform the cautery that we mentioned before, and it does not work.
Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize below that cautery a little that we mentioned above.
After making the cautery on each horn of the head just to the bone, as we mentioned before, and make an incision in the place that is called "vasselz"; and it is a place where one puts ventouses; and lift your hand so that you do not see just to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it seems that the cauteries of the horns are more subtle than those on which one makes an incision on the middle of the head, and this is the form.
For the fire cautery of the head When in one part of the head sudden pain comes, and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is purged with mundane medicines, and other treatments I have mentioned in the division of diseases are made, but none of these profit: then I do cautery according to .ij. ways, that is to know medicinal aigu and fiery.
The medicinal cautery of aigu medicine is that you take a handful of alum, and remove the crust and recoat .i. spot as .ij. heads, and then make the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can replace the handful of alum under the skin; and when it will be replaced, tie and hold well and leave for .xij. hours; and then dissolve and treat further the handful of oil, and leave the wound thus .ij. days or .iij.; then put on top a poultice in burdock so that it can putrefy in this.
After the treatment of ignition as long as it is healthy; and if you see that you have done thus with some burning medicines that I have written or treated in the twelve treatises on burning medicines.
The iron cautery is according to this method. Heat the cautery of the form it is:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a nail or it has little curvature, and in the middle a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and twist the iron a little more gently, so that the majority of the skin of the wound is cauterized; and lift your hand so the artery is not harmed, which is deficient, and abundance of blood flows out.
Afterwards put cotton in the wound, and place it on the spot for two days; then I put moist cotton in a poultice, and then cure the wound of inflammation so that it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this emigration with the cautery called "cultellare", at every point, and be careful not to cut the artery in this emigration which is not ancient.
of the migration
When you treat migraines as we have previously said in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not profit, and you see that the cauteries mentioned before in medicine do not suffice, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and sign above on the aching eye a line half a finger long, and lift your hand once, and hold still so you do not touch the artery and do not reach to the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when one chews, and the nerves have no regard for what moves and spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the flow of blood from the artery when it is touched, which has great fear and trouble for the one who does not know it, and who is not a student and experienced; but I shall leave this in the middle of the road; however, I shall tell you how to restore blood when the artery is touched, and I shall show you where it fails in this book.
And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize in the same way as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have mentioned or chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. Coutelz; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
of the pain in the ears due to cold.
When pain comes from cold, and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other treatments which we have mentioned in the section, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery, called "points", because of its shape.
After pointing all around the ailing ear, or around the eyes, where the pain holds in both, and you detach a little from the root of the ear then you have signed the place of the bite; and have ten points around each ear; after healing the place until it is healthy.
from the torture of the mouth
Torture that must be treated by cautery is not fiercer than those that move with phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make a cautery at the appearances that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
When you treat this type of torture that moves with fluxes and evacuations of the head and gargling, and it does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little below the temple, and the third at the joint of the lips; and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery exactly at the top of the ear above a little from the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger; and let the cautery remain there until the majority of the blood is drawn out; and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the similarity of the cupping that we have presented before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the cups be a little larger; after treating the place as I said before, until it is healthy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauteries: one on the horns of the head, and one in the head, and one at the place called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the fourth cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be treated thus as we have said before.
of the sluggishness
At this disease it is necessary to give the patient large and round mondified pills for the brain; afterwards, you place on the patient's head a poultice of mustard, which is written or treated in the book of poultices; and that is the manner of cautery: if you do as I have said.
If he is sensible thus, it is good; and if he is not, do it three times: make three cauteries on the skin of his head, descending just to the neck, and leave a space between each cautery of two fingers' width; and cure him as the others, and if you have seen them hastened, and the patient is suffering, do it in the middle; and if need be, do three others on the three horns, and cure until he is sensible; and let the cauteries which are called "olivare" be done as I have said before.
of the coldness of the head Here is the translation:
of epilepsy
The epileptics should not use fire cautery unless they are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to modify the treatment of years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the patients are great and suffer from taking medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot suffer, make them gargle and chew modifying the treatment with good meat; afterwards they will raise their head in a mirror, and it makes .i. cautery as we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vessel, and on each corner; and if the patient is strong and suffers, make them undergo cautery as I have said to those who are paralyzed and mollified of body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive-based according to the method that I have said.
If the patient is an infant, make them undergo subtle cautery according to this method:
When the cause of melancholy is excessive fluids or corrupt and gross moisture, then you should apply fire cautery to those areas as we have said to one who has been paralyzed.
And if the cause of melancholy is declining excessive fluids into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will cleanse their brain, according to what is written in the division.
After taking the patient's head; after making a well-made torteil of linen, like a circle, if you put it on the head; and the patient should be crossed, and held firmly in all parts; after applying the liniment, and washing with old berry broth; and heating it with tempered fire, so that the pain is alleviated; after removing the circle from within the head, and letting it cool; and do this to the patient each week once with another good government, until they are healthy.
Where you see that the fire cautery is made by making points on the entire cautery area. This manner of cautery moistens the brain immediately; and then put cotton soaked in broth and grease of goose fat on top.
of the heat of the eyes When heat comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begins and gives drink to the patient something warming the head, and warding off all moisture, and makes them sweat or bathe many times a day.
After commanding to reposition his head, and making him undergo cautery in the head, and making him undergo two cauteries on the temples if the descent of heat is in both eyes together, or if the descent is in one; and cover all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then staunch it with a poultice as you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision of the vein, how you will staunch them; and no one makes a cautery or hematoma beneath the two bones at the back.
Here is the translation:
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and are on the veins, or beneath the arteries that appear as a cold, rheumatic superfluity; then it is necessary to perform the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of the work descending from the eyes: .i. fire cautery on the head, and .ij. cauteries on the temples, and .ij. cauteries or burning beneath the bones; and if there is need for more, so cauterize gently above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
two courses of tears deep within the eyes
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give a drink to the patient .iij. nine cups; afterwards, let the head rest, and perform cautery or mild burning of the olivaire cautery; and make .ij. cauteries of the cautery called "clavilis" on the .ij. eyebrows, a little beneath the hair; and beware of the artery that you do not touch it. And it is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
When the skin of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization of this cautery which is called "olivare" is thus formed.
And if you see that the cauteries are made on the small veins as long as the small hairs are; and do not let your hand stray except until the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair which pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted into pains, and prick the eye, and they make cauteries in several ways: namely by fire, or by burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then place the patient in a healthy position; afterwards, sign on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as much like the leaf of a dead tree, and let it be the beginning of the sign among the hairs; then put cotton moistened with glaire of egg and muskillaige of persillion on the eye, then heat the cautery in this form:
After cauterizing on the figure that you have signed little by little and many times, so that the heart is at rest in that place; and the signs of the health of the eye are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs lift at the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put cotton moistened in balm until the burning sensation is gone; afterwards cure with ointment until it is healthy.
And if after that the hairs come, and the paper is softened, then restart the cautery on the same place, as you did before; and if the hairs are disfigured, then cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye with the hairs.
Here is the translation: When you have had this done for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger. And when the morification will be passed, lift the lever of awe, and reward yourself if you see the parchment lifted thus as it was lifted by constraining fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good. If not, then put more medicine on the lever or the medicine has not worked, until your operations are even, and your eyes are in place; then put cotton soaked in bitter water, until the heart's arteries are clear, after curing the lever of the ointment which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
And if it is necessary that you guard yourself well in your operation by great guarding so that no part of the medicine reaches your eyes.  And if the parchment becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the medicine on the lever which is softened by the proper parchment, thus as you have done beforehand; after curing until it is healthy; and this is the form of the foil of the dead mirror:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to this, adjust your constraints; and do not respond with the direct way to him who is studying this art.
of the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary to perform cautery in this manner.
Instruct the patient to place their head in a healthy position; and hold their temples between your hands in such a way that they do not move, nor nod their head; afterwards put cotton soaked in egg white or juice of persillium on the spot; afterwards heat the cautery which is thus: it is shaped like a pen of vulture, assembled so that the cautery is thus; if you see, if it is pointed from one part to another, and if you see, if it is also as a tent; but always, this which is thus made is more useful for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it is overturned, and removing the pus, and the dryness; and if it is closed, open it, and remove the filth from the wound; afterwards place the hot cautery in the shape of a bow, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nail beneath the eye, so that your hands do not make a fool; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: and they make a quantity of .Z. of poultice; and hold your hand or camahan firmly, and the patient does not move at all, so that the poultices do not fall on their oil; and it is necessary to put on the oil a patient cotton cloth in a stream of water or in awe: the poultice if it is the fistula, and the healthy part marvelously sanitizes.
And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have said, it's good. If not, then it is necessary to administer pertus to the nave, and to bring the fistula back to the body of the nave according to what is necessary in its proper place.
of cracks in the lips Many times we have seen cracks in the lips that are called "pox", and similarly on the lips of children.
When you treat these wounds of the head that we have mentioned in divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then apply a small cautery scalpel according to this form:
And insert it hastily into those wounds as far as life comes forth; after treating the sore with cerote until it is healthy.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess forms in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth, after it has made putridity and rot, and becomes fistulous; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit at all: then it is necessary to apply a cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after boiling or piercing the fistula, and holding your hand so that the iron rod comes forth at the fontanelle, and behind the ear; and do thus once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in cures, until it is healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the source of the corruption and cut out the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
two movements of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it's not effective, then put the head of the patient in your healthy one; afterwards heat the cautery to the point where it will come later in such a manner that you place a candle under the tooth; and place the hot cautery hastily, and hold your hand so the patient feels the warmth coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards release your hand and resume the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and let it steep for an hour and rinse forcefully.
And in this manner the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupting moisture is dried.
of the pain of the teeth
When pain of teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or vein, and the cures of medicine do not prevail, then it is necessary to resort to cautery in two ways: and cautery of borax and cautery of fire.
Cautery of borax is such that you grasp borax of a vaiche, and the end in an iron or copper spoon; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and boil it in borax water, and put it on the aching tooth quickly and hold it until it cools; and do this often so that its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see the cotton and borax water become cold, and put it on the aching tooth, and put it on the iron rod so that the force reaches the gum of the tooth.
The fire cautery is such that you grasp an iron rod or copper cane, and it should be thick so that the force does not reach the mouth of the patient; afterwards heat the cautery, so that it forms a crust after, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this often, for the pain will be removed the same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with good borax water in the impression of that cautery, and then roots firmly; and this is the form of that cautery:
When the swellings are from flux and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion through medicines, then heat the fire cautery to make the form that comes after, and open two openings for the fumes to exit at the cautery of the other part; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or where it is needed, until it reaches the source of the abscess; and if the abscess is small then apply cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and put on cotton wool moistened with balm as long as the wound is open; afterwards cure the limb with ointments and tinctures until it is healthy.
When the moistures flow onto the channels of the arm, and likewise when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first with solutive medicines; afterwards make fire cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to come too close to the throat, and do not harden the skin but just a little. Afterwards make another cautery at the jointure of the neck at the top of the spine, and let it be the cautery which is called "clavile" from which we have the form before; and cure the limb as we have said before until it is healthy.
of the injury When all the diseases of the arm are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever nor shivering, and it is an old disease, then apply fire cautery on the strength in their veins; and another cautery between the muscles; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form mentioned beforehand.
And if you see, apply fire cautery by pricking the entire cautery which is called "poins" because of its form beforehand in the disease of the ears; and let the poins be just below ..., or wherever it hurts. Afterwards, treat the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be at three points according to this form:
And because they are lighter cauteries, because you make three of them in one application.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After the patient is accustomed to it on his back and on his side; after lifting the heart which is within the small of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery that has 22 nerves where it forms:
and cauterize the heart as far as it reaches the side, and thus comes the figure of the cautery with 3 cauteries; and for this reason, cautery is done with the cautery that has 22 nerves, because the figures of cauterization are 6 cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a thread, and it is the form of the cautery that has 22 nerves:
And at no time is it adjusted on this nerve because there are 8 cauteries.
After putting fire cautery on the affected area with oil; after that, have the patient rest, and do not move their limbs too much for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, that little thing happens rarely, then do cautery on the thick skin of the clavicle, or many cauteries in pricking. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
with fire cautery of the pleura.
The ancients said that one should do fire cautery on the pleura with roots of aristologe, and in this manner: take a long root of aristologe, as large as you can find, and dry it, and make it as thick and long as your fingers; and boil it in oil, and hold it to the fire, and cautery. Do fire cautery between the forked part and the neck, and do small fire cauteries a little lower on the part that is beneath the beard; and do fire cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining backward a little; and do fire cautery in the chest, and another on the stomach, and between the shoulders, and between the sides of the chest, far from the fire cautery which is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make it open as if sniffing.
And certain ancients said that no man should use fire cautery, similar to a razor, and they heated it and placed it between the ribs, until it reached the abscess; and suddenly the pain ceased, as we have said in the aposteme of the liver. But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the spleen
When you treat the disease of the spleen according to what we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit at all, then they resort to three manners of fire cautery that are good for everything.
One of these manners is that you make three fire cauteries, or four, in a line according to the length of the spleen, according to the figure of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the fire cautery, and let the patient be placed on their back.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
of dropsy
Cautery does not work for dropsy, except in the manner that is called "asclytes". When you treat it according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in the place of the pis; and let the cauteries be well close to the skin of the heart.
Afterwards, let the cautery be opened by a gentle purification for a long time, and do not delay the treatment of the patient's disease after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the three intentions will be assembled with the aid of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be a keyhole that we have previously shown; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is written here before.
of the inflammation of the feet When the feet are inflamed in someone who is dropsical, and are full of citrine water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular; and hold your hand with the cauter without turning. And do not enter too much inside, lest you stir up the citrine water, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
After doing so on both legs, make two cauterizations on each leg at the point of the cutellaire; and let the cauterization be from top to bottom, one above the knee in front and the other behind, within the leg; and leave the cauterizations uncovered for a long time without curing, so that the water exits; after curing with the other cures that we have said.
of the menstruation
When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are afflicted, and cannot be cured by methods of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and strongly, if you make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before or cautery of the stomach, with circular cautery; and three cauteries around the subtle bowel everywhere, one subtle clave cautery, and two cauteries on the thighs.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the finger, and one cautery on each island, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is profitable when it has good aid.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or one or more, and are ancient and consist of gross cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit, if you make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, which is all divided below the almond date a little and a little in triangles, and one cautery below the bowel, two fingers.
and if you think that the stomach is cooled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face inflamed, then one should apply a large cautery to the stomach, as it was said before, and another to the liver, and another to the spleen with all the clavile cauteries; and let the cautery stay long enough. After curing the limb until it is healthy.
of the fleshiness that is named "thelul"
When you touch thelul, if you heat the cautery that seems suitable, and then apply it entirely to the affected thelul area; and let your hand be so guided that the cauteries reach the base of the vein, from which the blood flows freely; do this one or two times, and if there is much of thelul, if you cauterize each one as we have said; after the treatment of wounds benefits so they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it will provide greater aid.
of a badly healed wound
When the patient cannot suffer cutting or opening, which we will describe in its place, if there comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Here is the translation:
of the disease of the kidneys When pain of the kidney comes from cold, and great windiness, and does not take heed of a woman's advice, then it is necessary that you apply cautery on both sides of the kidneys to the clavicle cautery that we mentioned before; and if we cauterize in a straight line, it will be of greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you should apply cautery on the upper part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery as long as our thumb; and make a cautery above the back, or if you need to do so; and make the clavicle cautery according to the method mentioned before.
of the marrow When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow it to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms are delayed; and when they come, if they feel great pain: then it is necessary to perform three cauteries around the belly, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back; and let the cauteries be gentle, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the places of the department are visible, so it is necessary that you cautery the patient on the hip joint with a cautery similar to a circle, and mark in front of the place around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those with which one has cauteryed the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not present to you, make three cauteries of the olive tree, large and deep, and let the cauteries be as wide as all the wounds; and treat until they are healthy.
of the pain in the ankle When pain comes in the ankle joint, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is not cured by what we have said in the division and the treatment does not work, and the illness is ancient: then it is necessary to purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
After making the cautery; and the manner of making the cautery is in three ways: it is to know that you assemble burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is in many ways, one of which is such: that you make three triangular cauteries on the ankle joint according to this form, and make a good profundity and greatness, and leave between each cautery the width of a finger, and let it be olive tree cautery; at no time do they make a cautery in the middle on top of the ankle joint, because there are three according to this form:
And if you see that the cautery is made in a circle around what we have previously said about the dislocation of the thigh; but make it in such a way that the circles encompass the entire thigh, and all the spaces around the skin are burned.
And it is in this manner that one performs the sciatic treatment, when the pain holds in the thigh and does not reach just to the knee or just to the leg. And if it reaches the knee and the leg, make them .ij. cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds, and .i. cautery above the ankle .iiij. fingers, a little to the left side; and whether it is a cutaneous cautery, and whether the skin around the knee is burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends just to two fingers from the foot or almost there, then cauterize where they feel the pain .iij. points or .iiij. at the cautery which is called «points».
And if the mastery is, then make more of it; and if they know that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then make a cautery at the cutaneous or circular cautery, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much cautery that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more great nuisance and contraction.
And I have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot also, and was pierced and corrupted to the point where the foot was lost. Afterwards, a ventosity of the belly occurred, from which he died.
And if the pains are in two parties together, make cautery on one and on the other, in this manner. // And the wise men say in the cautery of the thigh, that it is thus: make a .i. iron rod as big as a small nail of a finger, or a little less, and let it be between the skin and the bone, just to the measure of a walnut; and let the rods be above two inches, and let them also be like our nails, and they have a well-made iron handle; and this is the form:
And let it be heated until it is all red hot and gives off sparks, and then place it on the thigh of the affected hip, and turn it on the healthy side; and cauterize once .i. cautery sessions and leave it for three days; and then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the treatment is finished until it is healthy.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its effect, and few see those who use it; and yet it is one of the good cauteries, which can alleviate suffering, and there where it is applied.
of the pain from the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from a fall or percussion or too great an evacuation, or from similar matters of cold expanded material, none of these similarities is worth cauterization, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold material.
It is suitable after this that the patient is void of fetid pills or other similar things, that one makes on his back, there where the pain holds, three marked lines of an inch, and in each line five or more cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the cauterization be made according to the cauterization which is called "poins"; and if you see fit, make two or three cauterizations at the clave mole according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a stiff neck when they lift themselves up, and fear; and you find it in the lower spine of the back and in the appearance which comes on the other spines.
When you see this and you want to cure it, then apply the cautery according to this method.
If the cautery should penetrate to a certain part of the spine evenly. And if you want to, then apply the cautery around the spine with a poignant cautery .ij. lines or .iij., and let the points be close to one another. After curing the limb so that it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not misapply the cautery in weakness which is in spasm of nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When pain of the joints is from moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the foot, which they properly call "podagra", and when it is from cold cause and treatments with medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make a mound of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this method.
And if there is need to prick on the face of the foot, then make cautery at every cautery point. And if the pains come just to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then make cautery on each knee .iij. cauteries or .iiij. of each part, to the entire olive-colored cautery; and if you have more mastery, if you do more, but do not hold your hand firmer than necessary so that the heat of the cauter is sufficient.
And if the pains descend just to the knees and back, then administer the cautery as we have said in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the fingers .ij. lines; and if there remains any pain in the two, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come just to the thighs or just to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good government for the patient and take medicines. For if you make good government and you purge flux, it will be healthy with the help of God.
of the rupture of the womb
When the patient arrives in anguish, and the bowels are descending into the groin area, which is new; if it happens that when you examine the wounds, he does not eat anything on that day; and he uses things that ease the stomach, so that the flatus descends from his stomach; after this have him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his arm as long as the bowel is repaired, and you reattach it with your fingers, and mark the spot below the wound on the bone of the finger, and at all a sign that resembles half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery in this form:
as long as it becomes white and he feels sensations. Then reattach the bowels to their place; and have him hold his hand so they do not return backward; and prepare the thighs of the patient well, and put a cushion and a sheet on the thighs, and another on the foot that holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again until you reach just to the bone; and be subtly careful that the bowel does not slip when you perform the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or another evil.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worthless. And it happens that the cauteries for children should be subtle according to the measure of their age, and for great people also great according to their measure; after 3 days cure the wound of the cautery of borax so that the eschar is removed; after curing other wounds so that he is healthy, and lay the patient .xl. days on his back so that the wound is well healed; and it happens that his nourishments should be lax for a long time, so that the bowel does not slip when he gets up to go to the chamber.
Here is the translation: from the gut of the belly
When gut wounds come to other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow more, then make them into a fire cautery of the same quantity, and be aware of the third part of the heart; after the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at the angles of this form.
but first mark the level of the notch and make a line along the width above the wound, and another below, and hold your hand in all the fire cautery claw. But the first cauteries are lighter and more flexible.
from ancient pain in no member Here is the translation:
of the malady
The maladies are often helped by cautery with great aid, and especially the malady that comes from the putrefaction of flux and melancholy. When you see the cautery, take care that the malady is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor remain, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the malady, then make .v. cauteries on the head: .i. emmi the head anew, and another towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; and .ij. on the .ij. horns, and .i. behind on the haiterel; and leave so much space with your hand that the cautery comes just to the bone, and as long as the scabs come out so that the vapors of the gross humors can come out; and cautery on the mouse according to what is before.
And if the malady is scattered throughout; and it pert manifestly, then it is necessary that you make the cauteries of these cauteries that we have said on the head, and .i. cautery on the nose, and .ij. cauteries on the spine of the neck, and .vj. cauteries on the spine of the back, and .i. large on the chest and .i. another on the loins, and .ij. on the shoulders; and .ij. on the hips, and .ij. on the tendons of the foot, and .i. on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and take care of the nerves that are on the rear of the heel, so that you do not burn them; and never make a cautery on the bone of the finger, and .i. another on the bone of the stomach, and .i. another on the liver.
And know that when you make a cautery, the more it helps, and it is profitable; and know that the maladies do not feel any pain from the cautery if they are healthy, because the body is already almost completely corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the ferrous. After curing the wound with flour and honey and other cures so that it may be healthy.
of inflammation
When inflammation occurs in a member and is treated with medicines and ointments and emplasters, but it does not heal, then one should perform cauterization on the member according to its size and the smallness of the member; and let the cautery be a little inside the thickness of the skin; then cure it with ointments until it is healthy. And often one performs cautery on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the member, and thus the inflammation is removed; and never intervene if it is not knowledgeable about the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
of swellings
When the disease called "albaras" is enveloped, and the engines of medicine are of no value, then one should cauterize with a cautery a little deeply, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed; then cure it with flour of fenugreek and of lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colocynth and blood of almonds, each a part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a bandage, and apply it to the skin until it is healthy.
the treatment of chancre by cautery
When chancre appears at the beginning, and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with a cautery that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the chancre. And some wise men say that one should do cautery also in the middle of the chancre; but this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen; and a more correct thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said about many cauteries.
of the inflammation which cannot heal
When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it takes time to heal or because of the excessiveness that it does, or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and has little blood, or because of the tension; and you want to hasten healing: then cauterize around with many small cauteries pricking; afterwards let it be so. For it will hasten healing.
And if you see it piercing through all the cautery, heat up the cautery of that which is its form:
And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the heart, and be such the cauteries that the patient feels relief in some manner so that the course of the putridity is alleviated. After the cure, until he is perfectly sane.
the cure by fire through iron
Another manner of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a mangling of members, for it eats away the members just as fire eats away dry wood. If you see this disease in someone who can suffer cautery by fire, then heat up the cauteries little and greatly, according to what is necessary for the person or the disease; after cauterizing all parts so that you eradicate all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that all that is corrupted may be removed. And then leave it .iij. days, and put on the cauterized places a poultice made with oil so that the burns from fire are removed, and all corruption. After the cure, generate charms.  And if you see after .iij. days that healthy flesh does not grow, it is good; and if not, then recommence the cautery on what remains of the corrupted places. And this mangling has never been cured by medicine except with fire cautery; but all cautery by fire is of great aid, and I have already said the cure of medicine in the division: take as much as you need to master it.
for the pores that come to the feet
Often it happens that the feet are afflicted by a disease called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a large swollen thing that whitens the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are in two ways. That is to say cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water. Cautery of fire is that you heat a cautery iron like a pen of vaulted, and make it from good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail from all parts, and that it has subtle margins; then you put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand totally around the nail until it comes to the font of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to rot; then make a poultice of savory herbs boiled with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nails will fall out and be disrooted from their roots. Then cure the foot of ointment, anointing so that it may be healthy.
And if they are converted by the defect of the body, and often it happens in the hands and feet, then you must apply cautery of hot water; and it is in this manner: take a cane of iron or copper, or a pen of vaulted, and put it on the nail and the surrounding area, that is to say for porous veins; and put the cane so that it pierces all around, then you put a little hot water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand in turning so that the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and then finds the hot water going deep to the root; and let the patient suffer a little the biting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will disroot all from its roots. Thus do after another, until you eradicate those that are in the body, then cure with ointments that engender health.
the cure of trembling
When some people shiver with cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you apply three fire cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one fire cautery between each spine; and one fire cautery or foot, and one on the stomach for olive oil cautery; if they stop shivering, and hasten the healing of the cold disease.
of pus-producing pimples
Never appear by default the bodies that are bathed, or pus-producing pimples, that come from gross corrupt matters. if it is necessary first when they appear that one applies fire cautery on each head of the pimple: a subtle fire cautery of mistletoe wood, of which the point is seized by fire, or of aristologe root, or of lens-shaped cautery. And never are they cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow further, but are dislodged the superfluous things from which they come, and are healthy; but it is necessary that it be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Here is the translation:
And whenever it happens to none, if you hasten to put your indexed finger on the wound of the vein, and hold very still so that the blood is appeased beneath your finger, and no longer issues; then apply fire cautery more or less small and large as they are all red; then take .i., great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is directed, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery still so that the blood is restained.
And if it happens that when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are on fire.
And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is stanched; and beware that you do not harm the nerve which is nearby, and that another evil does not come upon the patient; and know that when the blood does not flow from the artery, it cannot be well stanched in the same way as when the artery is large, so it is not by one of the three methods that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines placed upon which have the power to stanch blood; and let it be tied and held firmly in place.
Whoever administers the stanching of the bleeding tightly with bandages or puts things around it, or similar things, does not profit if they do not do it well.
And if it happens to no one and there is no better medicine present, then one must put their finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch well so that it be rested on the wound and on the vein; and do not move the finger, but move the malleus of cold water often so that it be very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and rested; and make inquiries beforehand about those who need cauteries and medicines.
As we have said in the first chapter, every disease where it is necessary to use fire cautery, or burning medicine, and the instruments and causes and materials and forms of cauteries; and I have placed that chapter near the foot, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method, for one finds more easily what one wants.
And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one on cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for cures. If they come from those who hurt themselves with their illness so that they die quickly due to the violence they find in their disease, and because of the greatness of their evil; and it is right to have fear. And of these there is one who gives you his sense, and says: "Wait, I am healed"; and the disease is despised. It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of those things of which you are certain, and of which you can have taken and lost; and use prognosis and indication in the cures of your diseases where salvation may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good renown, and glory, and long memory.
Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and direction, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And I never saw this disease except in children, and among all those that I have seen it hastens death; and for this reason it seems to me that it is worth leaving aside the work on some cures.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head swelled every day so much that it could not be supported; and I believed that the moisture was so great that it would die, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone under the syphac, between the heart and the bone; and the treatments are such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and let it be as long as it needs to drain, and see here the form of the spatula-like instrument.
If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the signs that you observe the membranes of the head covered with each part, and the water flows out as soon as you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this method:
And after the incision, extract all excess moisture. After, hold back the edges of the wound with drapels and powders, and apply wine and oil, and let it be so until the fifth day; then dislodge, and treat the wound by taping and by ointments, and let the head be straightened, and give meat to the patient, dry food with little excess moisture, as long as the limb is comforted and healthy.
And another way of incision is that you examine where the greatness of the abscess opens, and assemble the edge of the water; for it is never before; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.
Cut then where the abscess opens, and fill with water, and make a wound according to what you have the power to do; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and beware of bleeding, so that the patient does not die from the deterioration of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
of swelling
When it happens that a disease is called "catarre" in the eyes or in the chest, and the disease is chronic, and medical treatment does not benefit, then the last resort of treatment is cauterization with fire which cleans the arteries.
Then it is necessary, when you cauterize the views, that the patient makes a gesture with his head; afterwards scrub the place of a rough cloth as much as the arteries appear, then hold the patient's neck with all the cloth; then look where the veins are, and the veins of one and the other are behind the ears, and are a little hidden; then mark the veins of the inch, then cauterize one and the other with a sharp pointed instrument, as much as the vein reaches just to the bone, and it should be done by the width of the head.
And if you see, put the pointed instrument below the artery and cauterize above, cutting just as much as two fingers wide across.
And when the vein is cauterized, then the blood flows back up continuously afterwards.
And if the artery does not open to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of two fingers, then sign from the notch and make just up to the bone; and what is necessary to put blood flow thus it is six ounces, and by chance a little more or less according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains on the bone point of the syphac, if it covers that apostemes do not come, then hold the wound and bind it, and the treatment of the ointment until it is healthy.
of the migrating (or possibly "of the wandering")
When the migrating pain arrives, and catarrh is sharp, because of the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is medicated by ways of medical cures and all that does not profit him, if we extract the arteries from the temples and apply cauterization, as we have recounted.
And the way of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs of their temples grow back, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is a little restored thus that in some homes which are too cold; and if it is restored, then strip off the patient's cloak from some dirty cloth, then rub the bone with some rough cloth, and raise the bone with warm water as much as the artery opens manifestly; then take the spatula made of wood, whose form is this:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Because fire cautery is helpful for ending moisture: therefore it is of great help against moisture. Where it is necessary to extract the arteries that one fills the vein with much cotton and places well-made tents; and when they are removed, if one is cured by dry medicines that make the flesh grow, and by tents, until it is healthy; and if without cutting into the artery as you operate, if you hasten to cauterize, or you fill the vein with vitriol and hold it in your hand so the blood is stanched; and if you do not have this present, if you put on the vein your finger as long as the blood congeals, and raise the vein of cold water until the blood ceases, and hold steady as it is necessary; and what is more moderate and easier in extracting the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this trenchant cautery, but the trenchant should be well spaced to avoid holding too long on the flesh. For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their warmth. And should have between the .ij. knives .i. thick of a span, and then when you have signed on the edges of the .ij. veins, and you put the sharp iron rod so that it reaches just to the bone, and cauterize the vein in .ij. veins; and should be separated between the .ij. parts because it is not suitable for this cautery from start to finish; and this is the form of the cautery:
of the tears
When the tears of the eyes fall from veins that are on the head of strong fire, and it does not profit at all from the medicine that one makes, and you see the face of the patient become red, and feel in front an ambulation as if of frenzy; and if they are tense and moist so that the hairs of the papers are bent, and the papers are heated, and scorched by the ardor of the tears, thus there is need of this cure.
And they called it the "confused cure", and it is that you make a row for the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then you make three equal incisions in the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be thus, as three fingers deep into the forehead downwards to the nose, and the other three costals by the papers above, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are above the papers; and remove your hand from the continuation of the mandibles, and each wound has the quantity of three fingers in traversing the joints;
Here is the translation:
if you put the instrument called "cultellaire" in the first incision, it is very sharp on one side and soft on the other, not very sharp, and that's its form. And put the cutting edge towards the dry skin at the heart, and the soft edge towards the bone, and the instrument as far as it reaches the middle incision. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as much as the incision continues until what opens at the heart, and then do the same in the middle incision until the other side; and then extract the blood equally, and express the limb for the taken blood; then put in each incision a piece of old cotton, and put on moistened drapery with wine and oil and vinegar, and beware that abscesses do not form; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and I will show you great pleasure, then apply the treatment of basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments with which one cures wounds, until it is healthy.
two edges of the eyes
When no vein receives accustomed catarrh, and you see the eyes clouded and small, and the vision is obscured, and the papers are burned; and the hair falls out, and where the head is in pain with aching, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these accidents that those matters and that catharr come from many veins, and the death cure that it is, if it is this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the forehead, and another equally large one. I. puncture. And start from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach just to the bone; and hold your hand away from the temples that move with the hammer; and when the bone is exposed, then suck up all the blood with a sponge, and then swab between the lips of the incision and put cotton much, and tie with linen thread; then lay a moist dressing over it with wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is drained, then you must rub the bone so that it starts to grow, then cure things that cause inflammation, which make it worse.
In this manner: take nine parts of flour of wheat, and twelve parts of colophony, and make a plaster; and administer it to these wounds to cure them completely.
of the swelling of the ears
Here is the translation:
When the flesh grows in the ear or another manner of thing that does not join to the ear, nor does it grow in the ear, then put the ear in the sun. If you see the pus, if it distills any tiny drop of violet oil or oil of sisament, then one begins extraction; and when it is done, the nostrils are stopped up with cotton or linen; and the ear is closed above. Many times this cure works; and if it does not work, one begins extraction as pinces subtly, because this is its form:
If it does not work as pinces, it is good; if not, one begins extraction with the onion-like subtle double-layered tool; and if it does not work by this, make a cane of iron and insert the head of the cane or perforate the ear strongly, and stop up what is inside the cane with wax so that the veins cannot enter with the cane; then extract in this form, for many times it works as we have said; and if it does not work in some manner, take glue from taking the osselets, and put on some instrument which is at a point to do this, and put a bit of cotton inside; then press the glue onto the pus or whatever it may be, and extract. And if it does not work from all these things that we have said, then hasten to open the ear thus that an abscess forms in the vein, and spasms; and the manner of the opening is that you first make the patient's head calm, and draw out blood according to its virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear above, and make a small incision at the root of the ear at the fatty or dependent part; and let the incision be as a crescent moon, until you reach the pus, then extract according to your power, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and continue the cure until it is healthy. And if it's a grain that is inside and it swells, administer an extraction; and if it cannot exit, administer a subtle spatula in this form:
and administer an incision of that grain. But do not do it when you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, so much that you have made many pieces; then use subtle pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction may be alleviated.
In the water where it falls into the ear, it is necessary that the patient uses the utmost care of condensing first, and wraps the ear with much cotton. And be careful on that same ear where the water is. If it flows forth through this, it's good. If not, take many pieces according to the length of your finger, and heat them a little at the fire; and put the patient in one or two holes of their ear, and raise on its own feet from another part, and fasten with another piece on the piece that is in the ear; and do not cease doing this from piece to piece until the water flows forth entirely, and thus it flows forth entirely; and if you see, take a joint, and put one of the heads into the ear, and the other head takes fire until the most gentle joint is roasted; then redo another part of other joints until the water flows forth entirely, as we have said in the piece.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, as we have said in the division, cure it thus; but if it is of great body that one cannot feel it, administer an extraction with pincers; and it is the lightest thing to remove what is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where you treat distillations, and the cure does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you expose the ear to the sun: if no worms appear, prick them with subtle pincers; and if they do not appear, take the candle of what is their form.
And be narrow below and wide above. And insert the most subtle instrument into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck it out completely with the candle; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey in coming out, stop up the cotton candle as I have said in the stone; and if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have experienced in the extraction of worms, and you will find them where you treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, of what is their form as you see.
And be of silver or copper, narrow below at a small hole, and above covered for distillation; and to press inside the distillation, an instrument of well-made copper is necessary for this, and if you see take the scraper and envelop it in a point of cotton; then throw your oil or juice, and what you have of your medicines in the candle, and the candle should be in the ear; then insert into the scraper all the cotton, and press with your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or flows from the ear; and the patient feels it inside, and let the distillations be slightly warmed by fire, so that it is not too cold when distilled in the ear; and beware that it should not be too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
of the swelling of the ears
No child is born with no holes in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through swelling of a wound, or a boil inside the ear, and these swellings come sometimes deep into the ear, if one cannot see them well; and sometimes it happens that the hole is small, and one sees them well.
That which comes deep inside, if one cannot see it well, is of grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in this one sees that you must put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look within: if you see apparent opilation, then the work has all this spathumile from which it is formed.
And let it be sharp and cutting before and behind all plain, so that it does not blister the ear; if the opilation is from a boil or sore of the ear, then you hold it with subtle pincers, and lift it lightly, until the charcoal is entirely removed.
And if the operation is deeply embedded in the ear, take a subtle and light razor and carefully shave a little at the fire, then place it at the curve of the ear. If you feel the operation where the patient feels great grief in the hearing, pierce lightly, and be careful not to graze the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and the malleus in the Egyptian fashion.
Do nothing for a day until the wound is suppurated, or take a tent and the malleus in aqueous rose, and powder with burnt vitriol; and if you see the ear inflamed, it is necessary that you remove the tent and replace it with another malleus made of cerote, which is made of rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is lifted; then treat until it is healthy.
And if blood discharge comes out, soak an sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the blood discharge which are or treat with distillations.
of the flesh of the papers
Here is the translation:
And if without decay, if the cautery of the subtle lenticular fire is good, and the cautery operator after the incision is worthy; and many times they repair, as long as nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not come back.
of the sprain
Many times there come in papers from the eyes things that seem like sprains in their form and hardness, and for this reason this malady is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of gross moisture above and below; the operations are such: take care that the grandine moves from one part to another, and it's an easy thing to know; make the dressing large, then scrape off each light part, then take it with pincers, and cover. If you cannot cover without piercing a little the paper, do not hurt the patient; and if the fissure is great, assemble at a costure, and cure until it is healthy; and if it is small, do not make force, for the ointments restore quickly and in vain.
And if the grandine is descending into the depths of the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper, and hold the grandine with pincers, and cover and press from one part to another; and if the paper is separated by incision, do not hurt; and when the grandine is covered, leave the oil of salt water, and cure the place of what injures so that the patient may be healthy.
of the fat of the eyes
There is a fat which is formed in the membranes above, and this happens more to infants than to old people, and greatly troubles their eyes, and they come to have morning cataracts, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and therefore they lie on their faces then, and sleep on them, and their membranes become moist beneath their eyebrows, which swells and appears covered with exinach that opens in the eye. And when you press the liquid with your fingers and feel the fat entering within.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient puts their head in a healthy position; and then takes a cloth of linen, and prepares a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinach from each part, and places it on them; and presses with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the fat is gathered within the circle; then makes a moderate incision in the skin with a sharp scalpel, not larger than the wound made for a vein opening; and makes the skin deep enough until you reach the exinach; and in many dispositions, exinach comes out of the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Take out the fat then, taking a piece of cloth between your fingers at the defect, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is dispersed; and be careful not to touch the incision, that you do not reach the entire skin up to the eye, that you do not bruise it.
And if the patient's skin does not open at the beginning of the wound, apply a little pressure to the wound lightly so it opens; then extract as we have said, then place a dressing in oil and water, and put it on the limb, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who bruise themselves and put it on to corrupt the moisture that is retained. Then heal until they are healthy. And if a hot abscess comes to the limb, then heal with soothing plasters as much as possible until they are healthy.
the hairs of the papers
When papers grow hairs next to each other that are not natural, and are enveloped, if they harm the eyes, and bring about various kinds of diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albumen, so much that it is due to the destruction of the eyes; and there is a cure in .iii. ways: either by cautery combined with fire, or by medicine according to what is before or chapter of cautery, and is done either by incision and suturing or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your healthy hand, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, prick there a needle at all points; and be it beneath the margin of the paper where the hairs grow from these hairs, and draw the thread above all the paper, and turn to the ruler; then make in the part below the paper, below the aligned hairs, all the spatula copant, from the large scissors up to the small; then extract the thread, and place beneath the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then sign on the paper a figure of an inch, if like the leaf of myrtle, and however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevate the paper which is divided into two.
And if you have a piece that is masterful, cope with a great quantity of the paper according to how much the paper is softened; then make all the spatula above the lines that you have signed, and start from the large scissors up to the small; and be one of the fissures near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then prick the onion in one of the angles of the heart, and scrape everything; then assemble the lips at a seam with a thread of subtle wool, and suck out the blood, and make the superfluity of the threads above the eyebrows at all things gluing, if you see fit to do so; and if not, take no care, then leave the seam and the threads until .iii. days or .iiij.; then cure the wound without a seam of things drying and constricting, for the paper revives suddenly from the wound and its assembly, but the seam is murderous (as the ancients said), and it is a work without fear;
and if there is another manner: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, at .iii. inches separated according to the form that is here;
then apply this which overcomes small equal forces similarly to the form that is here:
And if you cannot hold the tourniquet, and the thing is not equal, take a needle or have a thread. And insert it into the figure; and insert another thread from the large artery, and the second thread from the small one, and assemble them equally between your two threads; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin where you have signed, as we have related, then assemble the edges of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments.
and often it happens that the hairs of the papyrus are converted: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the suture in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the papyrus and make them within according to what I have said, and then make artificial canes by art, and subtle threads as long as the papyrus and the width of the spatula is; and take thus the heads of the parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above what overcomes the papyrus of the eye, and extract the artificial canes from the formed parties; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin which will be tightly bound will die and putrefy and rot, until it falls off by itself.
If it delays, if the wound takes hold of forces, then cure it so that it becomes healthy; and when the wound is sewn up, and if the paper is lifted, and they do not prick with hairs anymore; and this is the form of the 12 canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width.
The operations are such that you take a subtle needle, and thread a delicate silk thread; then assemble the heads and tie one to another subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then order in the hunt another subtle silk thread briefly, and tie the heads of the two threads; then put the patient's head in your healthy hand; and let it be in the shade so that the operations are declared, for this is a subtle and minute operation, then put the needle all along the hunt at the root of the implanted hair, and make it pierce through the paper hastily as you draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the hunt, and put into the hunt that hair, if there are one or two or three or more; then extract your hand so that the hairs come forth all along the hunt in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the hunt is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then draw the hunt to the bottom along all the thread that you had ordered, so that the hunt comes forth through the pertuses above and that you see it by the vision of the eye; then draw the hunt and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed for 12 hours or 24, until the hair is rooted in its place and grows out from the flesh; and if the hairs are small, then accompany a long hair from the natural locks, and let it be elevated with that which you leave, so that it is elongated and then set free.
from the rotting of the eye
When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the rotting of the eye occurs, it comes in two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or a cut, or a cautery, and similar things.
And the method of treatment is that you split open the suture, and separate the eyelids from it, and put in threads of linen, and bind it so it may be healthy; and it does not matter that you use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease returns worse than before; but I work with softening things, like fenugreic; and rose water or attar and seed of linen are cooled, and ointments of dyapulum founded on none of the eyes, and enveloped in a bandage, and the treatment of this.
And the success of this treatment is that you take care to guard against it not swelling according to its original form; and these treatments that we have spoken of are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to its original form.
of the flesh which comes into the eye
This disease that is beneath which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wound and cut and cautery and similar things; and the way of working on it is that you take a needle, in which there are two double threads, and prick the flesh, and make the double thread pass through the left eyelid to the right, so that the thread appears at the head of the flesh; then the flesh is placed above all the needle, and the cope is at a large spatula.
And if the shape of the papyrus returns according to what is necessary, it is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the papyrus, and make two cuts or sew within the papyrus; and be the heads of the two cuts at the angles of the incision that you have made a cope, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the shape may be as the shape of a letter which has no "j" curve; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges are agitated beneath, from what follows the papyrus, then join the two separated parts, and sew with a thread of wool; then heal with what we have said about mollifying medicines, and tents, until it is healthy.
And if the disease comes from cut or suture or cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain cut beneath the hairs of the papyrus, and according to what is before; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to ingeniously bring back the shape to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what they need of work and instruments in various dispositions.
you burn of the paper
When this burn has affected men in such a way that the paper above is scorched with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to apply the point of a razor under the paper, and lift it up high; and hold it as pincers, until you grasp what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too pointed nor too cutting, so that the patient may not suffer from the spatula being too pointed or blistering the oil; and make your incision, where you carefully remove the assembled thing, lightly, so that the paper regains its natural form; and it is all healthy, and never again becomes salty in the oily water, and raises a gentle and cool swelling; then put between the paper and oil a layer of linen, and put on the oil a soft and abundant ointment; and after three days use a gentle and soothing cologne, and similar things until it is healthy.
of the corner of the oil
You know that the corner is in two ways: it is nervous and resembles a hard, rough surface, and another which is not nervous, but resembles a soft, moist, congealed moisture, that when you touch it with iron and cut it with pincers, it cannot be; and one and the other resemble an encumbrance towards the great artery, and grows little by little until it covers all vision and all light and movement of the oil.
And the manner of incision is that the patient puts their head in a healthy position, then they open their eyes; and holds the paper in one hand, then coils the finger as small double pincer, and holds it above; then takes a needle, and inserts a horsehair, or a cow's hair, or an ox's hair, and strong thread; and doubles the point of the needle a little and sticks it into the finger, and pierces through the entire needle, and ties the finger with a thread and holds it above, and strips off all the hair that grows around the finger which follows the curve and the seam of the hair just at the head, then gathers the remaining in the root of the arm to the entire subtle and small forces, and leaves the natural skin or arm, so that by the incision does not disturb the body's accustomed flow; and never holds the finger to the nail solely, and to the thread, as we have said; then strips off all the subtle skin above where it is in the form.
And beware that the subtle skin does not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the seam is not perceived; and after the incision, put a little of warm broth in the oil, and make a collar of litargyrum, and leave it until the next day; then cure what needs to be cured so that it may be healthy.
And if the finger is not numb, and you cannot insert the needle, and the nails cannot enter, many times this type of finger is cured with medicines; and grows as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, then open the oil from the patient, and take the subtle skin a little gently according to this form:
And you raise the nail subtly, and if you see that it diminishes at no point and the reason is pressed upon, then distill from your mouth into the collyrium made of litargire and red collyrium, and stop up to the other eye; then recommence the other work according to this same method, until it is all restored.
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, so that an abscess does not form, then heal it first, and cure the hot abscess as much as it is healthy, then recommence the work as before, until it is healthy.
And if the appearance of the flesh shows pain in the eye during the night by great annoyance, then suspend it on the onion, and cover one part and not all, so that the flow of tears does not come; then distill into the red collyrium made of litargire.
of the flesh that grows on the eyelid
Here is the translation:
And when the incision is accomplished and all the flesh is removed, if you apply the oil of broiet or distill coliere rouge and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the oil a cotton with water of egg, so it may be assured of hot abscess; and if it remains nothing, and the blood flows upwards, and you doubt hot abscess, leave the oil and cure the abscess with soothing things that appease hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healthy, and thus you will often do for the characters affected in the eye by this means.
But always it is necessary that you adapt the treatment according to the natural weakness of each oil; and according to the accidental way, in work with iron; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is sufficiently strong for that work.
of the veins of the eyes
There are red veins that are covered on the oil, and they take away from the sight its work and afflict the oil for two years. It is necessary therefore at first that you examine the oil, in which there are, is strong, and there is no other malady besides the redness; then thus the coil in such manner: instruct the patient to put his head in a healthy place, then suspend those veins all around according to their wisdom, and let the subtle double onions be according to this form:
And let them be treated with a ninth-degree cautery, in the fourth sign of the zodiac according to this form:
Then you should subtly coil the forces of those veins, and extract the blood hour after hour, until you see that you are removing those veins from the eye; and be careful not to blotch the eye at the points of the spathules, and perform this work at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cope with anything but those veins; and when you have done this, distill into the eye a green and red collar to correct what is corrupting the corrupted seat.
And if you are not able to coil all that in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye with things that ease the pain of the eyes, and let it stay for some days until the pains are eased and are assured of a hot abscess, then resume according to this method which is presented beforehand so that it may be healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
of the fistula of the eye
Here is the translation:
And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and blackness, if it takes away all the instrument of which it is the form; and it is called "asper chief", and it should be made from iron into a chief straightening, and it should be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two, and press your hand a little so that you know that this corruption is removed; and do this several times, then restore the place with medicines having evacuating properties.
If the places are swollen, and there is no growth, and the body of the bowel is swollen, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not heal and is not apostemized, and bad accidents come, know that it is healthy; if not, if there is another way than to bring back the fistula to the pierced nostril according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time by iron, and by medicines waters, and when it is uncovered thus take .i. forest according to this form, and let the iron head be at three angles, and the fistula should be attenuated up to the chief as you see here:
Then put on the bone of the armier, and estrange your hand from the oil a little, then turn to all the forest until it pierces the bone and feels the patient through that which comes in if he holds his hand on his nose; and then restore the place with dry medicines, as I have signified to you, and when the flesh grows and endures the places, thus goes the matter to the nose; thus it is a lighter thing for the patient.
from the exit of the eye
When the eyes are open everywhere, and there is no disturbance in the nose or diminution, it means that you should treat the patient; then apply a healthy poultice, then put on warm dressings or heated plaster to suck out the infection, then apply it to the eye. Make a mixture of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolle, and then hold the eye steady, and cover it with bandages and drapery; the way to arrange the drapery is that you should take moderately soft ones, and double each in three, then place one on top of the other according to the quantity needed by the eyes; then hold it firm above a hard bandage, and reapply the warm dressings to suck out the infection; then remove the warm dressings and leave the eye steady day and night, and if it becomes inflamed, it means that you should tighten it strongly; then remove the dressing after the day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, it is good; if not, reapply the poultice and drapery and the warm dressings until it is healthy.
because of the tearing of the web-like membrane
When disruptions occur in the web-like membrane, then open, and come from papers like grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see; then if you cover the view, the operations are such that you put a needle at the root of the affected part just below, then put another needle where there is a double thread on the affected part of the eyelid; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cover the eye with the double thread and tie one part of the membrane around, and hold it well, then remove the needle and apply it to the eye, already moistened with abundance of egg whites; and let it be until the threads adhere with the membrane, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healthy; and many times the wound is held back by the membrane each part of a circle of drapery, until it is healthy.
And if the eyes take on a great appearance, if they pierce with a subtle spatula which comes from the front of the eye, and corrects the moist albuginea and descends to the eyes, and inserts itself in this way; then it is extracted until it is healthy.
from the socket of the eye
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but the socket of the eye, appearing to be inflamed and swollen, but it's not inflammation; and the manner of appearance of the wound is that you make the patient sit on a .i. prepared seat and straight, then take the head between your hands in two parts, and move it so that you see the socket coming into view beneath your eyes; then be steady, and don't let the light shine through, and look at the patient's things as they should; and if it doesn't settle down, know that it's inflammation, and if the settling of the socket is not prepared as we have said. Make the patient sit between your hands, then take a subtle spatula and make an incision on the horny tissue .i. point by the continuation of the conjunctive with the horny tissue and the cornea, until the socket is opened; and when it is opened, distill into the eye warm honey mixed with milk, or warm or fenugreic honey, then be cured by another treatment until it is healthy.
from the inflamations of the eye
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And if the maggots cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", whose shape is this:
And then pierce the conjunctiva slightly, and do not go too deep in fear, but make a subtle wound, then put in the maggots, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, the patient will appear to be sleeping, for he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be aware of all movements, and take light food, and do not move their head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to their disposition until the third day; then unbind them in that same dark house, and test their vision, and make them see certain things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day; and it is necessary not to do this during the time of treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary to do this, for the water mounts quickly.
if abscesses come, that you unbind the eye before the seventh day, and address what soothes the abscess; and when it is appeased, then unbind the vision and put on its frame .i. a golden ring to cover for some days, and be still in that dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and convert into his cases; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
And one came to us who was from Iraq, who told us that in his country they made alum salt, which draws out the water, but however I never saw any of it in our land, nor did I read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the similarities of the forms of alumga, because those who do not know them go astray; and they are of arain properly.
And they are the head of water of this same subtlety, and the last in four angles aague.
of the flesh over the nail
No time do nails or flesh arise with diverse wounds, because there are some that seem like scorpions on the foot; and if it has flesh stained with a dark color, and if it has flesh of a pale color. In this case of those wounds which is pale, and not stained, you must hold the patient between your hands against the sun; and open their nostrils, and throw the onion at those wounds, and treat them with fire; then take what you have placed to sustain on the subtle spatula of one part, until you know that this wound is completely opened.
And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, open everything, i.e. subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without swelling, or an abscess forms, drain it as it ought; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten to cauterize until the blood is stagnant and all the flesh is burnt away, then apply a poultice or ointment of water or wine.
If the nostrils are open, and moisture comes up to the palate, it means they are healthy; and if moisture does not pass as it ought, it means there is a blockage in the upper passage, because the instruments cannot reach: then you must take a thread of linen, somewhat thick, and be careful with our hands, and have an interval of about a span or less; and put the patient's head near the filament in their nose, and draw it through the nostrils so that it comes out through the mouth; and many times children are taught thus as a lesson, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it; then hold one end with one hand and the other end with the other hand, and pull them alternately like us who have the thread. Do this until you see that the nostrils have cleared that blockage, then draw out the thread, suck out the blood, and wrap the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nostril as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of blockage; and then put a small cane into the nostrils for some days until it is healthy, and if there is need of medicines afterwards, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, where they distill oils and medicines into the nostrils.
And let it be of silver or copper, resembling a covered lamp, like a cane, and the conduits are thus; and if you see, make a closed cane, and let the instruments be plain for purging the head; and have a handle at the head to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquor.
of the flesh over the nose
Many times a disease called "telul" appears on the head near the nose, and grows and becomes large, so it is visible to behold; and therefore you must apply a cautery or burning medicine at the beginning, and burn all around, then place over it a hot cautery or medicine; and if it delays in healing until it is large, take care if it is hard, of fixed color, of poor sense: if you do not touch it with iron for it is an enchanted abscess, for when one applies it many times, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of fixed color, and you see that one can apply everything, then the patient sees and feels no fear, and cures the dry and withering things.
when the nose is touched and wounded
Be aware that when continuous flux comes into one of these cartilaginous joints, it benefits little, for in some homes. Therefore, you must consider this when it happens to no one, if you see that the wound is fresh and full of blood; and then add the .ij. levers to a bandage, and cure until it is healthy; and if the levers are already dislocated on one side and the other, you must scrape all parts of their skin until they are healthy, then assemble the .ij. levers into a bandage, and tighten, and sprinkle with powder of dragon's blood, and incense burned; and put on the powders a piece of strong or other plaster, and let it stick by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healthy.
The method of the treatment is that you prepare the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the treatment of the belly wound; or by thread, as I have made you know.
of abscesses of the lips
At the hands of men who have dense abscesses on their lips, similar to grains of veal, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut into each node, and take them with pincers and cover in each part; then apply the liquid after the incision of vitriol broth, so much that the blood is staunched; and then leave it to heal, and cure the lip of dry things until it is healthy.
of the decay of the gums
Here is the translation:
the filthinesses
Sometimes they are gathered at the top of the teeth, deep in the mouth between the gums, scurfy things that are ugly and bitter; and sometimes they are black and yellowish and green, until the corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth are foul-smelling; if it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands, and their head be in your lap, and you remove the teeth or the scurfy things that appear, until nothing remains; and do the same for blackness and greenness and yellowness and other stains, until they are cleared; and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good; if not, then restart on the second day and the third, until you have everything removed; and know that teeth have need of various forms of instruments to remove, according to what the work demonstrates, because the rasps with which one removes the teeth have other forms than those with which one removes between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay doing so as much as you can, because this should not be done hastily; for it is a very high substance just up to then, so one has no excuse for removing it. Then when the patient is constrained from removing it, it is necessary that you are certain of the painful tooth. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is a healthy tooth, and have the good tooth removed; and all the while the bad tooth remains, for we have often wanted to do this with these healthy ones; and when you are well certain of the painful tooth, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth everywhere; then hold it with your two fingers or subtle pincers at the first joint and joint, so that it is well held; and then fix the pincers firmly; and let the patient's head be in your lap between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And let them be of large limbs so they do not bend in the drawing, and let them be of iron well made, and let them be toothed to hold fast.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains in the drawing, then it is necessary that you put on the cotton cloth moistened with burr.i. a day or two., until the limbs are softened, then you remove the tongs which are called "algefri", from which the head seems to be in the shape of a beak; and let them be made thus like a file, and that is their form:
And if the roots do not want to issue from all these tongs, then it is necessary that you uncover the flesh totally around the root, and you put the instrument which is called "althali", it is to know plainness, from which this is their form:
And it should be strong and large so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out by itself, that is good; if not, then you aid with all the instruments, from which the forms come hereafter.
And if one aids with this instrument which has many grooves, from which it is the form:
and other iron instruments that are presented in the arrangement of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pincers, from which it is the form:
And it should be these instruments strong so that they do not break, and know that many of the teeth's instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtly find their own instrument, according to what their works and the patient shows them, for there are certain illnesses where the ancients did not teach a point of instrument for the diversity of wounds; and it does not break at all in the cartilage or in the other bones, or it decays, if one seeks the instruments that they need, as I have told you, and you aid with gestures, from which it is the form: And be thick and well holding to hold the bone, so it does not dislodge, but it can hold and ostrude; and then restore the limb with suitable medicines, and if there is porosity in the bone, and it is small, if you take all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not in accordance with the natural body, and its shape is ugly, and especially in delicate women, if it is necessary that you know if the teeth are not aligned after the tooth, and it is not in its right place, and one cannot make it straight or smooth: then take the file; and if it is sharpened with the tooth, take this instrument which has a similar shape, and is like a small beak, and is made of iron and is sharply pointed.
And the jaw closes little by little every day due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file a part of the tooth as it is in its shape.
and it is thus like the file of which one makes the needles; and in filing the tooth little by little every day lightly, so that it does not move until it settles; then smooth it out at the end without any roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, then it is necessary to file the asperity until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
when the tooth locks
Here is the translation:
And when the tooth falls out, set it back in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said; and do not interfere with it who is not wise and suffers, and never make the form of a tooth of cow's bone, and set it back in its place where the defect is, and hold it steady as we have said, and stay there for a long time.
of covering the lien of the tongue
Never is it the lien that comes from under the tongue or naturally, which we are born with; or by accident of a wounded palate; and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold their head in your healthy one, and lift the tongue; then cover the nervous lien of the large one, so that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is hardness or numbness, and it is suddenly wounded, if you remove the uncleanness and cover the large liement; and beware that the fissure is not too deep, for the artery which is underneath; and when you have done, lift up the place of hot rose water and of hazel, then put under the tongue a thread of linen; and apply to the patient each night, so that the places cannot become sore. And if a flow of blood comes, then put on the place vitriol bruised; and if the wound does not heal, then cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for this; then cure with another cure until it is healthy.
and if you see that it is of a fouled color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is chancre; and if it is declining to blenchor, and there is moisture, then remove the uncleanness, and make a subtle spatula, and remove from one part and another; and if the wound does not heal according to your operation, then put on vitriol bruised so that it is stained, then return to your operation until you treat everything fully; then lift up the place of hazel and of seed, and cure with other cures until it is healthy.
of the abscesses of the throat
Sometimes there come abscesses in the throat called "godath", and they are properly called "ij. amandres". When you treat them, as we have said in the division, they are not healthy, so beware: if it is a hard abscess of little sense and dark color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, likewise for fear of bleeding; but let it be until it ripens, and then you will operate on it, or it would rupture by itself; and if it is of white color and the root is subtle, have the instrument ready to cover, but first check if the abscess has calmed down and is pacified. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and their head be healthy, and open their mouth and take hold of the tongue between their hands, and press the tongue beneath all the instruments, so that it takes its form; and let it be of silver or thin copper, as one makes a pipe.
You cannot press the tongue against all this instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the oncin and fix it in the amandre, and pull it upwards more than you can; and pull nothing from the tiles with it, then cover it with the instrument, so that it takes its form, which seems a force; and all the veins are curved, and one end to another, and are very sharp, and are made of iron or steel.
And if you do not have this instrument present, then cover it with tongs, so that it takes its form.
And be careful on one side and name on the other; and when you have cut into one of the arteries, if you cut the other in the same manner, and after incision gargle the patient with lukewarm water, and lukewarm and gentle, and if there is evacuation of blood, if you gargle the patient with lukewarm water, or remove the pomegranate cores which are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is closed; then heal it so it becomes healthy; and never again grow other abscesses in the throat except for those .ij. arteries, if you cut them thus like the .ij. arteries together.
Here is the translation:
of the egg
When the humor descends to the egg, and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is very thick and round, it is called an "egg". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit, and you see that the aposteme is appeased, and it is subtle; then you must take it. And the one which is round and assembled and not long; and it is sanguine or of fuse color or black, then you must cut into it. For there is great danger to the patient.
Here is the translation:
This cure is safer than incision, nor cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calendula and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put it thus, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and in the pot has an instrument that cuts in this manner: And it is of silver or copper, and one of the heads is inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, so that the eye is mortified; afterwards, you often repeat this, until the eye dries out, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the onset of a hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not do this unless at the decline of the hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put in its head a crumb of egg, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; for the crumb of egg does not let the vapor pass through the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether, healthy.
Many times it happens at the throat or spine of a fish, or something else; so it is necessary that you try what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing clearly; and what does not appear to you and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit thus, so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by chance the thing will be dislodged by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and tie the thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will stick, and then you will draw it out again; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take an instrument with a hook according to this form:
And let the curved instruments be at the top of the head so that they can more lightly enter the throat, and hold the head high up; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest it does not go well, nor does it get stuck inside; and it is good that the patient inserts the instrument, because it is inserted or the thing is easier; if they insert it below, where it draws out all the instrument equally, as long as it is drawn out.
from the swelling of the throat
No medicine is suitable for the swelling, as I said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when it does not benefit, then look at the throat of the patient in the sun, then press the tongue against the instrument that I told you. And if you see the swelling, draw it out with a small hook, or subtle tenaculum that is suitable for this. And if it is not successful, take a hooked needle, and insert it into the throat of the patient, then pull out or cut away with the hooked needle, iron hot, and make it bleed often. And if you hold the patient's arm all day, take full sight of the cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in, swallowing deeply, and move it with his hand often; and if the swelling feels the cold, shout.
And if it does not bleed as we have said, then suffumigate the patient with asphaltide, using the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, for it will soon become less painful. And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are visible coals, and let it be covered by a perforated cloth in the middle, and in that perforation let the head of the instrument be; then pour out the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane into his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not issue forth, but goes just to the swelling; and the swelling will now subside, and if it does not bleed, then recommence the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink any water; and then it is necessary that it be purged by this government.
And the form of the instrument to which one treats the blood, it is, when one can see it, similar to curved tongs for entering into the gorge; and it has resemblance to a beak, and it has roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and see here the form:
the surgeons of abscesses
Many similarities of abscesses are, according to what the remembrance comes here after one and another in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and in size; and it is in .ij. manners where one is in its own resemblance, and because of what it holds moisture. And the second manner is through the veins or they are in the body. for the abscesses of the head are other than those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the flesh are other than those that come into joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if an abscess does not need to be pierced, as long as the swelling is mild according to its accomplishment; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are crude, and do not die according to their accomplishment, like an abscess that are of the joints. For when abscesses come from the joints, and one leaves them so long as they are porous inside, by chance they corrupt the ligament and nerve of the joint, because it is a cause of contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is of the principal member, and you delay the perforation so long as it becomes mild, it will harm the principal member; or if it is of the foundation, one pierces it in such a way that it becomes mild; and it is not necessary to pierce an abscess crude without complete digestion, unless it is of the foundation, which does not putrefy inside, and becomes long and fistulous; and one cannot heal it in a short time.
And it is necessary that you know the sign of the perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to accomplishment, and it is when the pain is appeased, and the departure from fever, and the diminishing of pain and of redness, and the debate and arrangement of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation or more depending on the abscess, and where it opens mouths; and be the perforation of the long body, and if the abscesses are in hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal things where there is no putridity.
In these cases, according to the member. And when abscesses are in the flesh of the body, it is worth more that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce beforehand, it hurts the body with venom, and is full of much ordure; and by chance they harden the skin and the underlying part of it. And if there are abscesses that are pierced according to the size of the body, according to which members they have mastery.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And it is necessary to recognize universally in treatments of abscesses: for you have said how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and see here this chapter.
of ulcers
Where the wounds of the head come from small abscesses, and are ways for us to be in tiles, like a gouty swelling, and many have similarities. There is fat and suchlike where there is moisture, like poultices; and if there is something hard and piercing at the cutting, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act contrary. And the operations of the incision are so that you experience all .i. instrument which is called "entromissoire", from which the form comes afterwards, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, then make it flow downwards from the length. And when the moisture is evacuated, then scrape without leaving any peel that contains that moisture, for it returns again when you leave nothing; then apply cotton in Egyptian fashion, if it is present; if not, in water and in oil, and in employing the poultice, and leave it until another day; and this corrodes what remains of the nit. And then reapply the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain any longer of the nit; then cure the wound of incision in a suitable way, so that it may be healthy. And if the abscess contains .i. much fat, then cut according to this form, from the length; and apply your onguents, and scrape everywhere, and put all your care into treating the area where it lies; and if the artery acts contrary, then do what I have told you afterwards. And also do with the abscess if it is piercing, and of cutting and of treating as I have told you.
And the incision on the piercing abscess and moisture, is lighter, for they are of little blood. And if there are any of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and of these were .i. abscesses that I treated on an old woman's head; and found the abscess like a crusty stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if one had made a hole in it, one would have made a wound as of a stone. In other abscesses coming from heads, because they are those that come from children's ears, the operation should be done within three days at most, depending on the swelling; and the treatment should be done as is necessary.
of the scabs
Many times apostemes occur on the neck, and beneath the arms, and in the groin, and sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body, and are numerous, and are connected to each other. And each scab is properly located on its side, just like the knot and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities of these scabs are many. There are those that contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not want to obey health. In this case, you see good disposition in the body, and it is similar in color to the body, and changes from one part to another, and does not stray far; so it must be that you cut above, and scrape each part, and open the two lips of the heart as once, if you are skilled, as we have said about abscesses on the head; and pull gently, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve or the vein, and do not spread too far, so you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut into the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to operate, then put on the wound a vitriol ointment, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound; and let it be until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to heal. And when the blood is stanched, return to your work, so you can complete it; then seek with your finger if there remain small scabs, if you cut them and clean them. And if there is a large vein at the root of the scab, do not think that you should cut into this scab at its root, but tie it off with a double strong thread, and let it fall away by itself, without harm; then fill the wound with much cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
And if you cut out the entire scab, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, so there is no more superfluous matter from the size of the scab. It is necessary that you understand how to cut into its root, and pull forth, and sew as we have said. Those scabs that hold superfluous matter, pierce it where it appears rotten; and pierce thus as before mentioned, in dependence, then you will mix with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with ointment that charms, so it may be healthy.
of bruising
The old people told and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and that is the writing of their words.
For those who have bruising, it is necessary that the cutting of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be avoided; and one should not help by this, because all the veins and the arm of the patient are at risk of having an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the mandibles. When the disease is in the channel of the arm, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Here is the translation:
and they are accustomed to being cautious at the incision of the epiglottis so there is no point of bleeding, and the vessels are long in inquiry.
And if the masters are afraid, it is necessary that they stretch the skin of the throat to the entire tonsil, then cut the kernel as far as it reaches the uvula; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see nothing, and then cauterize the syphac, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the incision of the phlegm of the uvula which falls out through the broken tone, and by the lack of voice.
and let the wound open up a little piece.
And when the hour has passed in which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with care, and sew all together beneath the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, so that it may be healthy.
One must not delay until the throat is entirely obstructed, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, and lacks breath. Then one covers the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death.
and for this reason the doctor orders to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four days. And then they command to touch the wound and treat it until it is cured.
and I will tell you what I have seen. I saw that a young woman took a knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the sinews of her arm.
and I was called to cure her, and I found her almost dead.
I discovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and saw well that it had not been properly covered, nor did a vein flow further than the throat, and the veins were flowing through the wound.
I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and cured it so that it was healthy.
and I did not have any difficulty with the young woman for she was rough of voice, and recovered afterwards to her condition;
because I saw that in the cutting of the epiglottis there was no fear.
of the large throat
These abscesses are called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the colour of a jaundice, and it is very common in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural and accidental; or the natural does not have any impediment.
And the accidental is according to two manners, of which one is similar to a thick node, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery. and he has fear, and it is not suitable to work with fiery fervor except in the one who is small, and he tries and searches throughout the entire interior. if you find it thus as I do not grasp, and it does not penetrate at any vein, if it stops, if as one stops the nouns, and draws to its entire coffin, if there is a point. and search well everywhere, and heal it so that it is perfectly healthy.
of the nouns
Many ways are ours, of which I will describe all the similarities;
and it is fitting that I tell all the differences that exist between us and them.
I say that the evacuation is heat and fever, as long as the inflammation has passed, and it completes the purification; then restore the fever and the heat.
With the disease there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains .i. syphac, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins thus like a jaundice, and becomes large;
and they are according to six similarities, whether gray, or moist, and much of the color is as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the wound, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to what its shape will be or the chapter that follows.
And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of the nails is that you take hold of or more moist spot that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, so that you know that the instruments have penetrated to the heart, then according to the size of the abscess.
then extract the entromissoire, and take care that it does not break.
Here is the translation:
and after the swelling has gone down, it knows that it is fat, if they make an incision in a cross, and take hold with pincers, and lightly scrape each part and wrap around the hip where you will find it healthy with the noult;
and if you cannot straighten it healthily, then pull it back by pieces so that there remains nothing.
For if it remains nothing, then it returns to us many times;
and if it stays a little, and the wound does not grieve you, then apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and hold the wound steady, and put on soothing things that calm the hot abscess, and treat with other treatments until it is healthy;
and if it is great to us, then cut the .ij. lips of the wound, and treat what injures the flesh.
and if you find it contrary or otherwise, hasten and employ the virtue of vitriol broiet, and let it lie .ij. days or .iij., until the wound suppurates, and restore the ebullition of blood; then return to the copper that it is demoreit from the night.
Behold the forms of inward instruments, and they are in three ways: large, medium, and small; and there are four squares that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are three ways: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula.
and they are also like the needles with which one cuts the sorcels, and they are of citrin iron, or of iron, or of silver, and those that are yellow are more experienced in piercing the abscesses of fistula.
and they are in three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
The forms of the onions are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if an onion has three corrugations in three manners thus;
and if an onion has three corrugations, and are thus of three manners; and if an onion has two corrugations, and onions with a single corrugation only, and are of three manners; and all this is necessary in their place.
The head of those who are operated on is cutting, and of such there are some who do not cut more than one part, from which one scrapes the nails, because one does not cut the vein nor the nerve;
and of these inward-growing things are the almonds placed in bandages, so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of the abscesses;
and they are of three kinds: great, small, and moderate, as you see;
and do not make use of it more than in the flesh of the body, such as legs, and arms, and limbs, and similar things;
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, similar to the scrapings of fistulae, according to this form, by which one bleeds blood;
and one puts it sometimes in the body that is connected to the gathering of veins, and arteries, and sometimes returns according to this great form;
Never inflame the limbs of certain men when they begin to be corrupted, as much as they seem like feminine limbs;
and they remain lazy and swollen, and those who want to cure them, if it is necessary to soothe according to this form of this line up to .g.: then scrape off the fat, and apply the medicinal ointment in the form of a charm, then bring together the .ij. lips of the wound to suture, and care for it until it is healthy;
and the limb falls downwards, and is ameliorated by its greatness if it has happened to women, if they make a .ij. stitch above, through .ij. similar fissures; of one being held to the other at the end of one and of the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g. then remove the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and I will show you what we have said about dressings and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, so that it may be healthy.
and if it is not healthy, or the incision has not been fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the corruption of blood, then you should fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment. and let it be until it rejects the remainder and the fat, then treat it until it is healthy.
of the abscesses of the seats
These abscesses that form under the seats are kinds of hard scrofula sores where there are ribs, and if there is only moisture in them.
Those that contain moisture must be treated according to this form, from line b to line g. And when the entire tumor that is in the abscess is evacuated, then fill the wound with much cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and cure by applying ointment to the extent that it becomes healthy.
And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, then they do as we have said in cases of scrofula, and if the wound is open, then apply fire cautery as we have said before.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is swollen which is above, then many abscesses occur, and also it happens to have an inflamed and abscessed vein.
and if one recognizes this as being due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep. and when you feel it with your fingers, if you feel estrangement; and when it is by the vein, then there are reasons for apparent fear;
and it is foolish to touch this abscess, and similarly when it is under the arms and in the groin and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is necessary then to choose the iron cure, and he who is at the head must choose also, and in him who is swollen with artery disease, it is done above the skin of the loin.
It is necessary then to choose the iron cure, and he who is at the head must choose also, and in him who is swollen with artery disease, it is done above the skin of the loin. then open the incision at the ankles, and carefully separate the artery from the tendons, until it is discovered.
Then thrust the needle underneath, and make it penetrate just to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have instructed you in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
then puncture the spot which is between the two ligaments of an intramuscular vein as much as the blood flows out from it, and thus be freed from the abscess;
then apply the treatment that injects a potion, until the ligament heals; then treat this joint injury approaching it, until it is healthy;
and if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, it is necessary that you hold with your hand what you can from the abscess to all the skin. then insert the needle beneath the skin that you hold with your hand, and make it pierce, and have two threads, so that you draw it from the other side. then touch the abscess, as I have told you, or bind it with one of those threads, a double thread of a single strand.
and if you doubt that the thread will not be strong enough, then rebury another needle under all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in three layers.
Then cauterize the abscess until the superficial parts are drained, then cauterize the superficial layer of the crust and let go what is attached.
Then put on a dressing made of millet in wine and oil, then apply remedies of tents and ointments until he is healthy.
of abscesses of the kidneys
Also, how abscesses come into the arteries and veins, they come into the kidneys when they are fermented, or by too great a labor, and similar things.
And it happens more often in the joints and the two toes or where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color appears like the color of bad flesh, and it is in many dispositions without pain;
and when it is strained forcefully, the patient feels pain, and it is not like the deep flesh, but beneath the skin;
and it must be examined well from all parts, and it does not go forward or backward, nor beneath nor above, and he who is in joints cannot be treated with iron: perhaps there will be a contraction;
and he who is at the head or forehead, makes the skin stretch to the spatula. If the abscess is small, hold it with a ligature, and cut into its root;
and if it is large, hold it with an onion, and scrape it, then clean the bone and assemble the wound at the suture, and treat it until it is healthy.
of the large hanging lumps It never happens in the belly and not in another part of the body, and it is an illness called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots, and large lumps; and there are small and very large ones.
and I saw a man who had a wound on his belly that was more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and it was white, and had a small root, and it was completely split, and it corroded from excessive moisture.
I touched them and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6 ounces, and the work of the incision is such that you examine if the patient's humor is moist, and the color of the artifact is whitish and moist with a subtle root;
if you touch the spatula broadly, and be in its presence with the fire cautery. For when cutting often comes too great a flow of blood, and if you do not take it quickly, then hurry to give the cautery;
and if you see the patient fainting and fearful of the incision with the iron, then take a well-made thread of flax, and tie the artifact as we have said, and leave it 8 days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease from restraining the flow of pus until it touches the joint, and cut through it without effort; and if the roots are thick, fear not to cover the navel simultaneously with the belly, but you can well cover half of it.
then cauterize so it does not return; then heal the wound, and beware that you do not cover the ulcer that is of foul color and of poor sense and of lazy regard.
For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted chancre afterwards.
when the swelling is full
If the appearance of the swelling comes from cautery of a wound or a break in the skin, and it is on the belly and in some of the veins, as if it had happened in other ruptures, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is in front, or of windiness;
and if it is through the rupture of the skin and through the outlet of the belly, then the color of the abscess appears like the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens to various outlets. And if it is through the outlet of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses on it with their fingers if it recedes, and then returns, and by chance if it is constricted, and greatly increases at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press on it with your hand, it does not constrain at all; and if it is due to blood, it opens through these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a certain quantity.
and if it is for windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the works are that you examine whether the appearance is due to blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. It is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in this chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his belly, and be stretched out straight, then sign from below around the navel; then instruct him to sit between your hands, then go within to the place that you have signed to all the spine. then stop the majority of the abscess above all the large ulcer;
then open the majority of the abscess extended above the nail, and you should put your index finger, and examine the intestine; If you take hold of the limb, if it slips away, and insert the intestine through the weakness of the belly;
and if you take hold of the bowel, if it takes to the navel, and in cutting off the excess flesh;
and if the artery is made opposite, or the vein, if it goes badly inward, then return to your work and take nine needles, and insert nine forces of thread, and insert the nine needles inward so that you have crossed what you did in order to make it perceptible;
then extract the abscess in three layers beneath the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the limb putrefy as long as it can, and separate the dead flesh by itself; where you take care to subtily lift it up and clean it, then heal what needs healing, and shave around the abscess as we have said;
where you take care to subtily lift it up and clean it, then heal what needs healing, and shave around the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the limb of what needs healing, and sew up the limb.
because of a tumor
We have spoken in the division about the signs of a tumor, and how one must operate with medicines, and how one must eschew the cure with iron; and we say that a tumor is engendered in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its cure, and the ancients said that when a tumor is in the limb or where it can be reached if it is like a tumor which is in the veins, and in similar limbs, and one must remove everything when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and ancient, then it does not seem to me that you should approach it, for I have never seen anyone healthy from it; nor has anyone ever been healed before me.
And the treatments, when it is in place or can be opened, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile; then make them healthier if they show obvious fullness, then make the patient ready for the treatment by opening all parts, and pour out all the humors, and shave all the hair from all parts without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, and hold the limb well in your hand or with anything, and if the contraction of blood makes you act contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize until the blood is stanched; then treat with another treatment until they are healthy.
of dropsy We have already said in the division about the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of the water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment which is done with medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is only touched upon; and one should not touch iron for these similarities: it is to know, tympanites and yposarche, because it is a deadly thing; therefore when you treat this similarity of dropsy called "touched" by medicines, and the treatment does not benefit, if you see that the patient is weak, or if they have another disease besides dropsy, as in distension and solution of the belly and similar things; if you do not touch iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient has great virtue, and they have no other disease but dropsy only, and they are not too young nor too old, then you should operate thusly. Here is the translation:
Then look if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you make an incision above the navel .iij. two fingers directly below the pubic bone; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then make the incision on the left side of the navel .iij. two fingers; and if it's for the spleen, then it should be on the right, and it does not matter that the patient lies on the incision so the superfluous fluids do not flow towards the weak spot;
Here is the translation:
at the head above is the almond, if it happens that the struments come to the water, then descend now upon the instrument; remove there the half or the third part, for if you remove more than it does not suit at that hour, perhaps the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit by the arm, either he falls into a swoon, or approaches death.
but remove according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses; then touch the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now by the cord that stops up the passage which is on the syphac, as I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then return the instrument the other day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and remove from the water a small quantity.
do it no day, and guard against fooling yourself until there remains only a little water. And if you doubt the patient, and you leave much water, if the cure of the sepulcher or sablon heats up, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and take care to drink; and the cure of desiccative medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
from the stopping of the flow Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
And the manner of treatment is that the patient lies on his back, placing the head of the rod and the cope thus as the size of a pen, if it pierces in the middle, so it should be; and beware of the flow of blood which comes often, and if it happens, stop the bleeding of what bleeds, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
the blisters on the rod Many times cysts come on the rod, and it is an appearance of ugly wounds; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so it is necessary that you take them with a subtle onion-like application, and cover and bind all, then put on a cotton cloth in Egyptian ointment; then cure with diafinicon ointment until it is healthy. And if the wound is malignant, of bad color and festering, it is necessary that you apply cautery. When you have covered it, and the wound is on the rod, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the wound that is inside first; and when it is cleansed, then cure the outside. For when you cure them together, it is not assured that the place of the rod will not be perceived, and blackness and corruption come in its place, and in the surrounding area; so it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice made of honey and flour which is made from the juice of green plants and of veal, then cure with other cures until it is healthy.
And if the blood flow is disturbed, then prepare the lunar cautery according to this method: The cauteries aid in nine dispositions together: it's known that at the disturbance of blood and at the corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must bore or conduct a tube from the penis, and inject into the patient; and when the skin is torn away from the head of the penis which occurs in those who have not been circumcised, either due to injury or abscess, then you must scrape it with an instrument that has a notch, so that the veins are released, and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
and if it's a severe case of designing this, then you must scrape with a spatula at the head of the penis and testicle; then separate it gently between nine, and I put a subtle drapery of linen on the tender wound in cold water, so that it doesn't become inflamed again.
of circumcision
Here is the translation:
I say that the ancient ones did not practice circumcision on their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the greater part of my masters and surgeons who performed circumcision with a branding iron, and with force, and all at once; if the skin was rough, it had two layers, and by chance, one would cut on top and delay that below.
Then the wound closes over, and the pain is double, and in the mending which is done from the top, it is not assured of the point of the limb; and in the mending of the ankle by chance, the iron slips, and corrupts the vein, and many times it happens that they have no need of mending and I have seen it.
From the mending which is done with force all along the thread of the vein I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, if you cut evenly in the entire soul; but let the thread be well stretched over the skin; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the infant think, if he understands, that you do not make him suffer more than tying the thread around the rod as much as possible, and then make it slide in all the ways that you can. Then make it stay straight between your hands, and hold the forces between your hands or beneath your feet so the infant does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or strike, and pull it up as high as the head of the rod is in; then anoint well with the ordure that is assembled there, then tie it with a double thread, then tie it beneath another lien; and hold it as you should by the second ligature at the pouchet and the index finger, and unite between the liens, then hold back the keur above hastily and pull the head of the rod.
Then make it stay straight between your hands, and hold the forces between your hands or beneath your feet so the infant does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or strike, and pull it up as high as the head of the rod is in; then anoint well with the ordure that is assembled there, then tie it with a double thread, then tie it beneath another lien; and hold it as you should by the second ligature at the pouchet and the index finger, and unite between the liens, then hold back the keur above hastily and pull the head of the rod. Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the mothers; and put powder on top and on the powder a drapil of glue made from a mixture of egg cooked in rose water, confectioned with oil of rose and fresh, and leave it on until the next day, and cure another wound as much as it can be healthy.
The shape of the forces at the mundification is this: the two heads should be turned and should be trenching, and the heads should be as large as the main equally measured.
Here is the translation:
And if they surpass three days, and that which is below the rod is inflamed, let it be so long as the apostemes are calmed, and the scabbing dries lightly; if you cut thus as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, this will not harm him.
Heal then the wound with powder, which we have said or treated with powders, and if you cut too deep beyond measure, it will not harm; heal then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
due to retention of urine
Retention of urine is from obstruction of stone, or from congealed blood, or from bowel, or from new flesh, or similar things, which we have said in the division.
and if the urine does not flow, and you see that it is retained by the stone which is in the bladder or neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over his knees; and place his feet on his back, and stretch out his belly from the upper part of the back, and hold the patient steady as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted at the expression of the stone above, because the urine does not flow;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instrument called "syringe", which is of this form: and let it be made of subtle silver wire, like a bird's feather; and let its cane be a palm long and a half, and let it be subtle at the head.
And the manner of the flow of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head of the instrument, or to a piece of wool or cotton, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe; and stop the superfluity of the wool and insert it just at the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a chair, and raise the bladder and the rod with moist olive oil and oil of olives and water tided;
then gently insert the syringe into the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then bend the rod above towards the bowl; then insert the syringe just before the bladder, and feel the patient coming to the voided thing, and this is not done according to this order unless because the conduit or it was twisted; then stretch the thread throughout the entire wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then it flows freely, and makes the urine flow.
and recommend the syringe as long as the bladder is empty, and be gentle with the patient.
of bladder diseases
When scorching or blood comes into the bladder, where putrefaction is assembled, and you see distilling waters and medicines, if you do all the instrument called "clyster", and this is its form:
It is closed, and if it has two holes: one on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the jugular veins are arranged so that the medicine can flow well through the rod without obstruction, so that moisture can be drawn out, and pushed back in when necessary.
and when you see the medicine in the bladder, put the head of the cauterizer in the moisture, and pull out the pulling tool that is inside; if you pull the moisture to the cauterizer, and then strongly pull back the pulling tool inside; if the moisture enters inside, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and it is the subtle form of theclyster instrument with which one clysters the bladder: if it is so:
And it is of silver or copper, and the instrument is higher; and below there is a .i. vein or the veins are clear; then take a bladder of a sheep and put the moisture in which you see to clysterize the bladder, then tie it between the .ij. breasts in the form of a double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire; then put the head of theclyster instrument into the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has come out, so that the patient feels that this moisture has now entered the bladder;
and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle with it, and pierce it roundly throughout; then put a strong thread through these holes, and assemble the circle as one assembles a dial, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already said in the division the methods of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone in the kidney as it rains, and all the signs, and in which stone one must operate with a cut; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is in the bladder often affects children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder with subtlety; and it appears suddenly, and gravely hurts the patient's penis, and they often faint, and then become swollen; and many of these jumps are the foundation; and it is easy to cure children until they are 3 years old, and it is very grievous in old people, and it is as if in the middle, for those who are between youth and old age; and it is easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to clean the patient with a cluster, in order to remove all the filth that is in the intestines. For it often hinders seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and gently bend and move them downward, so that the foot descends to the front of the bladder, and does not rise above at all; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downwards; then touch and feel from inside.
If you feel the stone in the cavity, hasten to cut into the stone now. And if it does not fall at the touch of everything, moisten your right index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is old, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and accomplished; and feel its foundation, and examine the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, anoint the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger, and cut into the depth where you see to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with their hand, and command them to extend their right hand above the loins, and with their left hand hold the skin that is beneath the loins in the part where the cutting is done; then they place the spatula-like instrument, of which this is the form:
And make an incision between what is between the loins and the foundation, not in the middle but on the side of the left kidney; and be straight above the stone, and your two fingers should be as wide as the foundation, and the cutting should traverse so that it is large enough to remove, and inside is constricted, according to the quantity of the stone, not too great.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And if there are more than one stone, first remove the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then extract the flow, and the small ones afterwards if there are many. And if it is very large, you must operate, and make a bigger wound. For these things happen to the patient: where they die, or the urine comes back through the bed that the kidneys cannot hold; but however you try to remove, or to break up the tangles, as much as you remove piece by piece.
and when you have completed your work, apply the plaster of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put on a dressing of millet oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to calm the hot abscess; then soothe the patient on their neck, and do not loosen the bandage just until the third day.
And when you remove it, rub in the oil and water very well, then apply the ointment of diyafinicon and ointment of basilicon, until it is healthy.
And if hot abscesses come in the wound and corrode, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this means that without a sound with the urine: therefore put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and putrefy.
then lift the wound of water and of ash and of seed, and aid it in all the ways that you know, until it is healthy; and it is necessary that all the wounds that you cure, that you bind the hips, and assemble the medicines on the skin.
And if the bladder is small, and it is conducted by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot exit; if you cure this as I say, that you cut many times, it is excused from the cutting per this cure. I have already proved it thus.
Take a rod of iron in this form and it will be at three angled points fixed in the thigh.
Then take a thread and wind it around the rod beneath the bladder, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the rod into the bladder gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the rod with your hand in the bladder little by little, until you can feel the stone from another part; if soon the urine comes, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the bladder. If it is thus broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
and if you cannot do this because of any obstacle that prevents it, then tie the thread beneath the bladder and another above, then make the rod straight in the bladder between the three ligaments, then extract it out, and untie the ligament, and cleanse the congealed blood which is in the wound; and cure until it is healthy.
of the stone of women
It sometimes happens that the stone is in the womb of women, and if it happens at some time, the cure is grievous, and is defended by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well acquainted with herself who discovers herself as mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well acquainted with herself in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is deeper than the stone of man, because it covers more deeply, and has great fear there.
And if you need to ascend to that, it is necessary that you take a wise woman knowing well, and at the points where you find it, and if you do not find it, then ask a subtle and chaste mirror; and it presents a wise and healthy life for women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands that she does what you command her to do in the inquiry of the stone.
and look well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to apply her finger or foundation and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, she should constrain beneath her finger, and recommend that she applies her finger or with the patient, and presses her left hand firmly on the bladder in a forming manner.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it little by little from the entrance of the bladder to beneath, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then feel on the stone at the root of the thigh against the tender spot, there where it has been misplaced, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above the stone or beneath, and let it be seized at the first small size.
then put the rule in the seizure, if you feel the stone if it grows the wound so that the stone may issue forth, and know that there are many kinds of stones: it is to know, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have roots. know the similarities to know the issue.
And if the stone does not come out, then put on the vitriol ointment, and hold it for an hour so that the stone is stained; then return to your work, so that the stone may be extracted, and have the instruments that I have told you about in the extraction of the stone as homes to aid you in your operation.
and if he has no sense, and it's about the artery that is cut, so put powder on the wound and bind it with tents and bandages, and do not start again, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it, lest by chance the patient may die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the limbs are at rest, so return to your work, until the stone is firm.
of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquous is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white syfac, which is beneath the skin of the thighs, where it contains the humor; and it is called "syfac", and often appears in the membrane of the humor, if one thinks that it is another humor; and it's the skin of the thigh between the white syfac that we have said; and this has not happened little.
And the generation of this remedy is from a weakness that comes to the joints, and it spreads that matter.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the joints, and this moisture has many colors: either it's a declining color to yellow, or it's without red, or black, or watery pale, and this happens more.
and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white or swollen as we have said, the abscesses are ripe, .i. not long thus like the figure of an egg, and do not open the joints, for it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in its own fabric, the abscesses are ripe with a part of the egg, and therefore one thinks that it's another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the thighs and the white sifac, if it feels very well; then when you want to know the color of the moisture, examine all the internal quarter, because its form is seen before. Accordingly, judge from what comes after the internal quarter, of what is inside.
Accordingly, judge from what comes after the internal quarter, of what is inside. And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the replenishment of his body; then place him on his back, on a somewhat high thing, and put much of a cloth under him.
then sit on his left, and instruct the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the ribs of the thigh near the hollow of the thighs.
Then take the spatula-like instrument, and cut the skin of the joints within the length just up to the white spot where it pricks, and let your incision be entirely straight while cutting the skin of the joints up to the white spot, and carefully remove the scab according to your power.
Then pierce the white spot plainly with a large perforator, and remove all the water, and then put in your anvil, and let the white spot be above; and do not touch the heart of the joints, but only the white spot should be touched; cut out the entire or piecemeal the costal part of it subtly, so that if you do not cut it wisely, the water will return.
and let the swelling subside for a while, if you reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white spot; then assemble the joints of the heart of the joints into a single structure, and treat them like other wounds, until they are healthy.
And if you find the swelling corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you lift the veins that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood; then cut the joint at all the suspensions, and remove the swelling, and treat it as we have said.
And if it is assembled in two parties together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part as you did the first equalization, then let out the blood, and put into the wounded place a soft oil rosat.
and put besides another soft liniment in wine and oil, and put on the two sides, and put above double sheets, and bind it all together with a lien that is according to this form.
Then take two sheets, and fill the soft liniment with pieces of torn linen according to this resemblance and be assembled by sewing in the throat of the arm, and one of the heads takes hold at the base just up to the back, and the other at the part of the thigh; and another two heads on the two angles, and so is all assembled the restraint in the loop of the arm.
and no time is medicine made with this branch of fire cautery in the length of iron, and it is that you take a subtle fire cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the sides, and be heated as we have said, so that the white sap that contains the water is discovered.
If you take the fire cautery in this form, and pierce it thus with fine points, and strip it to this subtle burning heat.
And take the cup in all the ways that you can, so that you scrape everything; and beware that the fires do not touch the egg; and know that this work is more healthy; and beware of the deterioration of blood, and worse than the operations of the butcher.
and if nothing makes you do the opposite, or abscesses burst or deteriorations of blood or other things, so heal what makes you do the opposite, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this operation due to its horror, so hasten perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain through the signs that we have said that the watery discharge is there.
Here is the translation:
Then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let it absorb the remaining water, then treat it until the wound is healthy.
and if you wash the wound with water that does not let it issue out of the mouth of the wound, thus it is necessary that you insert a tube or instrument through which one drains the watery discharge of hydrops, because its form is thus before; and enlarge the wound a little, and know that the water returns, and it is reassembled after 22 months or a year, and when it is reassembled as before, then the patient will pass their days.
of the abscess of the intestines
Know that in the treatment of this disease, there is fear in many more dispositions, because it seems to me that many things are worth leaving;
and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come from corruption, and likewise from bad congealments; and it is often the case.
It is to know by excessive sharpness and anguish, which is spread through bad congealments, or from percussion;
and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the bad body; and there is no finding of pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
and by chance there are painful abscesses green and pierced, and of a faulty color, and sometimes it comes from the narrowing of an artery, or from the inflammation of a vein.
When it is due to the narrowing of an artery, it is known by the appearance of a hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers. and do not think that you touch it.
That which is made from the inflammation of a vein is known by its appearance at the expression of tender touching with the fingers.
and one can well perform surgery on this appearance, and on the other wounds. and it is that you cut the skin of the joints, then sew up the wound from top to bottom, and remove the suspension from all parts of the wound.
If the wound is already sewn up with these new wounds, then it is necessary that you treat the wound and cut it.
and if it is attached to the skin, or in that which is inside the veins, then it is necessary that you remove all of this enclosure, and cut around it again.
And if the birth of the flesh is where the skin is behind, it is necessary that you cut all of it, and extract the humor, as we have said.
And when your operations are accomplished, apply the poultice of mild lime oil and rose oil, then treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
of the abscesses of the groin
These are abscesses enveloped in an envelope resembling a .i. swelling, with softening of the groin, and the patient should be warned to cry out when it hurts;
and the treatment of this disease is well and very nearly as painful as this one before.
and we will direct the work of it, according to what the old ones did.
It is necessary that you seat the patient on a high chair, then bind them with a suspension of ropes from the ceiling to your two fingers, to all the vessels which are near the edge, and they sting the masters, and they stretch out strongly;
then cut to the spatula-like instrument deeply through to where the vessels are, until they are discovered;
and then scrape off each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
then I fix a needle where it has a double thread, and tie it to the first joint where the vein is come, and tie it again to the other head; then they take the cupped hands directly, according to the length of the body, and in drawing out the corrupt humors;
then heal the wound as if it were others or an injured bowel, so that no vessel bursts which would nourish one of the intestines;
for by this there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come together, then it is necessary to treat the intestines with all the vessels; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot be helped.
of the treatment of the Syphac The occurrences of this ulcer are by the cutting that comes from Syphac, or the extension onto the belly in the region of the angles, because the intestines descend from that treatment to one of the cavities;
and this treatment is from Syphac, or from the extension of it, and these two manners of many causes come: either from percussion, or from a fall, or from a blow, or from the lifting of a heavy weight, and similar things;
and the signs when it is from the extension of Syphac, are that it comes gradually and slowly, in long tension, and does not come suddenly; and they are the abscesses equal just to the fontanelle, because the swelling presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is from the swelling of the intestine, which brings sudden severe pain at its beginning, and they are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin, close by, and it is because of the issue of the intestine and the body's decay due to the swelling.
And sometimes it descends beneath the ribs with the intestine, and is held back, and causes great pain to suffer in the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these treatments of iron with fear, because he thinks of escaping from it.
And the manner of the operation is that you instruct the patient to reintroduce their intestine into their hand within the wound, if they can re-enter it. then be supported on his neck between your hands, and lift the hips.
then stretch out the cord above, and cut all the skin of the conjunctions for a long distance. then put inside the leaves of the waistband according to what you have mastered for opening the wound, and be such that the eyes can issue forth.
Then scrape the scaly skin that is under the skin of the joints, so that the white scaly skin beneath becomes uncovered on all parts.
then put your finger index in the one that guides the joint, in the one that is between the white scaly skin that is under the skin of the vein, and between the second scaly skin,
and separate the one that is behind the vein, and between the second scaly skin; and then move the vein to the right hand within the curve of the joints, and hold the white scaly skin high with your left hand, and lift the vein above all the scaly skin towards the waist; and instruct the minister to stretch the vein high up, and dislocate what is behind the ligament;
and if you find that the intestine is wrapped around or white and hard, and if you do not find anything, then it bursts in the belly below;
then take a needle or one with a large thread made of six threads, and sew up the rear part of the hard skin, which is behind the skin of the intestines; after the waist, then stitch the heads that appear as threads, until there are three threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the hard skin, which we have said is behind the skin of the intestines, with a strong thread of two strands; then wrap the heads of the threads, and tie them firmly with two strands, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter into them, lest an abscess forms and does not heal; and put the thread according to the first long thread, which is two inches of that, and after these two inches leave enough space which is beneath the heart of the joints a large finger-width;
and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part which is beneath the skin of the joints, until the vein runs, and the bud, as we have said before;
then mix the millstone in oil, and put it in places, and I mix the thread that we have said. And no time is it cauterized with a thread as we have said, after the incision, by fear of deterioration of blood.
For it often happens, and let the vein be so long as it chooses for itself; and if it delays in healing, so be it raised with warm water, and put on it what we have said, until it heals.
then heal the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healthy.
of a fleshy hernia
In this case, I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
And the old ones said that it is done as the one who puts together the face, in such a way that you bind the veins, after cutting slightly beneath the skin.
then cut into me, and treat the abscess of those who have an egg, until the veins heal; and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
No time does a rupture occur in the entrails, as we have said, and open the loins; and do not descend into the intestines to the coils, and if they descend, it is little, and repair all hours.
and always, if it stays too long at this point, the wound or syphilis will grow, until the intestines descend.
and it happens through the extension of the swollen vein which is like an anchor, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then becomes softened and inflates the limbs and opens.
and the cure is by cauterization, as we have said before; and no time is it cured by iron in this manner:
and it is that the patient places himself on his back between your hands, then takes hold of the limb of the swollen vein according to the quantity of two fingers.
and then extract the vein that is under the skin where it hurts, then take hold of the handle and place it on the limb appearing from the vein.
and hold the press on the fontanel of the belly, then cut the illusions appearing on the face above the straight line of the head, and cut one and the other;
then extract the head from the straight line, and do not cover a point on the face that does not extend to one eye or another, just as I have made you aware in the treatment of the curvature of the intestines;
then heal by healing the wounds. And when you cover the filaments, if it is swollen and heal the wound, so that it may be healthy.
The face is constricted, and has no appearance in the rut, and the cauteries are moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
from the softening of the skin of the thighs
Many times the skin of the thighs is softened in some men, because the flesh that is within becomes mollified, and it is difficult to see; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure, to make the patient sit on his back, and cover the mollified skin with natural skin; then assemble the .ij. lips at a suture, and if you see, cut first the superfluousness of the mollified skin at .iij. sutures or .iiij. firmly; then cover between the sutures, and cure as for other wounds, until it is healthy, and touches the thread.
of punishment
Know that punishments are established in our law, and for this reason I preferred not to speak of them in this book; and it is necessary to do so by .ij. methods: one is that the mirrors respond when asked, and in their cure; and another, because we often need help from punishment of some beasts to aid us, such as goat and sheep and cattle and other beasts. I say then that punishments are made according to .ij. methods: either by attraction or by cutting. In the one that we do by attraction, make the beast sit in warm water, so long as the skin is mollified and pendant; then take it with your hand, so long as it is reset and you no longer feel them. From the punishment of size: it is necessary to hold the beast, and press the skin of the thighs with your left hand, then suspend it, and cover each opening with a .i. stopper, when you have well cleansed them; and leave none of the subtle subtlety of the skin and the subtle subtlety which is above the vessels; and this method of punishment is more cruel than that done by attraction, because at attraction something remains by chance in the thighs, by which the beast desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healthy.
and the hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are in two ways as follows: one is when they appear between the thighs like the figure of a woman's nature, with hair, and sometimes they obstruct the flow of urine.  And the other way is in women, and it appears on the pubic area like a rod with two ends.  And the cure for men and women is that you cauterize all the affected flesh, and treat them as other wounds; in the second way, for those whose urine passes through the skin of the thighs, there is no cure.
of the tendonitis
Tendonitis is an affected flesh on the natural part, so much that it is too ugly to behold; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that is the cure. It is necessary that you treat the superfluousness of the tendonitis with your hand or with onions, and cauterize lightly; and do not apply too much pressure, lest you remove blood, then the cure of another cure until it is healthy; and at another time a boil appears at the mouth of the marrow, and the abscess, and by chance it bursts forth, and it is according to the likeness of a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease". If it is necessary that you cauterize it, then as we have said about tendonitis, and the cure until it is healthy.
of burnings
Here is the translation:
of hemorrhoids
Here is the translation:
of the abscesses of the chest
Many types of abscesses come to the chest, such as cancer and abscesses that pierce and herpes and estiomenes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have said in the division. It is necessary then that I speak in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes to the chest, which is not among the abscesses that collect pus; and if you want to know the work of iron, look how the abscess is agitated at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red you can see. Then do not hasten to pierce, but let it mature until the pain is appeased; and then make the patient sit on a seat, and have two small seats or he leans, and supports himself on his back and assembles his feet as parts of the leg; and are his thighs spread out, and puts his arms beneath his knees, and binds them well with a linen thread; then sucks up the pus from the right side, and you will find the instrument by which one opens the mouth of the chest, so that afterwards it takes form; and it is necessary that when you have found this instrument, that you fix the rule first in order to know the depth of the chest, so that what enters through the instrument does not go too far and does not harm the patient; and if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the chest with drapels, so that the instruments do not grieve; and it is necessary that he puts the horn of the instrument above, and holds the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one feels it with the hand in a gentle manner, then you must touch the top, at the spatumile level; and when the pus is evacuated, then you must put tentes moillies in oil rose or green oil; and put the tent beneath the chest and beneath the patient's clean and neat skin so that it cures; then treat afterwards for two days of ointment, until it is healthy; and many times lift up the chest and the wound by cleaning with water and honey, and then with water or roots of lilies and aristologe long, so that they are cured; then return to the ointment. And if the wound is repeated in the chest, then you must beware of burning with iron, but treat as we have said in the division.
of the swelling
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: Here is the translation:
from the issue of the child on its feet When the infant comes onto its feet, if it is necessary to push upwards. and then turn it little by little, until it is even.
then take hold of the feet and stretch them little by little.
When it jumps just as knees, if you command to grasp, and make them steady with condition; If it jumps far, God wills it.
And if it does not jump far as we have said, turn it little by little, until it is according to the natural shape. For then it will be lighter.
And if it does not come forth as we have said, take a muscular poultice of lofty height, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and crush everything in the mortar. and put it on the natural woman inwardly and remove this ointment, then have her sit in warm water up to the ribs;
and when she is moistened below, have her wear a girdle of myrrh, and put it below, and leave it for an hour; Then make them sit on the seat, then make them stretch out and hold their mouth and nose, and take a lighter hold on the belly, for the infant now jumps. from the exit of the child onto its knees When the infant comes in this form, then you put the basin under its hands little by little.
from the exit of the child who comes out with a wide hand meanwhile One must skillfully return the hand: if one cannot return it, then make the woman lift up and go;
if she cannot walk, then make her sit on a bed, and stretch out her legs in a straight form;
then manipulate the muscle that I have mentioned;
and if it does not swell, let it sit on a stool, then study how to reintegrate the hand; and examine the child according to its natural shape, and make it stretch, and instruct it to take hold as much as the veins are loose.
from the release of the child on its neck, and it has expanded its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back I think that you should hold its hand, then turn it little by little, and lift it gently.
and when it is even, place on the natural muscle of the thigh and oil, as we have said, then command that it moves little by little;
and when you will have done this, make him sit on a seat, and command that he take hold; and make him steady. in the same manner for all the secondary ones
in the same manner for all the secondary ones When it comes to doing this in the same manner for all the secondary ones, clear the secondary one from your finger, so that the moisture is voided;
and he puts his fingers on his face and on his neck, if the blow of the stick, so it is not retained, and kills the infant;
then put the infant inside, as long as you have placed it as it should be, and instruct the woman that she not grasp it at all times:
of the issue of twins Here is the translation: They are strange things, and do not live much, if they have a little name;
I know that, which should be multiplied, and are separated by the syllable which divides them, which is tied to the bud;
and never do they go naturally as one beneath, as we have said.
And if they are grievously injured, then the treatment is as we have said, and let the subtle remedy be applied, and make it light and gentle as it does. and do thus as he values his health. of many children
of many children None are formed in the marrow, i.e. or ii or iii or iv or v or vi or vii, or more up to xv, and all are fully formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the wise and glorious sage,
and it is fitting that the wise man knows all this, for by chance it seems that these things have happened; Here is the translation:
of the dead child
When you treat a woman with a dead fetus or womb, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained by hand operation; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of healthy virtue, and has not had an accident or fear of death;
it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back, and her legs bent downwards, and her thighs lifted;
and the nurse holds the tether by two fingers, where it is tied to the bed so that it does not fall under the child's bedstead;
then rub the mouth of the nurse with moist olive oil and an ointment made of aloes and fenugreek, and seed of flax, then anoint her hands with these oils and ointments; then gently put them in the nurse's hands, then wants her to hold the onions that should be cooked for that;
and take care that the infants are well swaddled so they descend onto their head; if he touches the nails on his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the forehead or near the ribs,
and if the descent is on his feet, he touches or pricks and has trouble with his sides;
and it is necessary to hold the nail with his right hand, and put the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and bend all his hand lightly, and touch the nail in none of these places that we have said, until he comes to the desired thing;
Then set the file against another ulcer, where the third finger is in the master, so that the extractions are even;
and then it is set in motion equally on one side and the other, to extract the pus, and let the onions be held by the teeth, if it is in this form:
And if it remains in one part, anoint the boil with some of its own oil, and apply it to that part, and treat the other part;
and if it does not remain at all, place this onion or higher on the joint, and do thus until it has issued forth entirely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be reset due to the straining, it is necessary that you envelop it with a bandage, so that it becomes entirely still;
then apply the cup to the joint of the sole or to the heel, and thus it is necessary that you do in the other hand, and to the feet.
And if the head of the infant's arm is large and it is twisted in the elbow, or if it has an assembled acute angle, it is necessary that you place the spinal spatula between the two, and make the head straight and extract the angle. where you apply the instrument called "almidach", which is fitted with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and thus in this way it makes the veins open naturally to a great extent; and then treat the bones as if they were held by tongs,
and the head of the shoulder is lifted with force, and it is held in place, if it be broken, as much as the moisture that is or issues from there;
and if it cannot exit, then cut into the muscles by parts so you can.
and if it is inflamed in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce them as much as the moisture flows.
And if the swelling is on its feet, then it is light attraction, and the remedies at the mouth of the marrow are lighter.
And if it is strained in the belly or in the chest, then it is necessary that you stretch it with a cloth wrapped around the hand. and touch the belly or the thigh, as much as the humors that are there running;
and if the other members are numb, and the head remains, if he puts his hand in front of the marrow, and pulls it just up to the mouth of the marrow; then he puts an onion or two, and pulls them forth;
and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come, then it does not need to be operated on, then it is necessary to administer moist and greasy things; and apply poultices, and use soothing, softening, and moisturizing remedies.
And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it in a straight position, then administer what we have said about the living infant;
and one must not have power, if one treats fiercely by parts, and does not leave anything of the secondary.
And when you have done this, remind him of what we have said about abscesses that come in the marrow;
and if blood comes out, it should be put in a tight bandage, and remind him of other treatments.
And I saw a woman whose womb an infant had been dead, then she conceived another on top of that one, and rejected the dead one. After long tension the wind came into the belly, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to great portent.
I was called to the cure, and I thought long tension, and could not soothe the wound.
I put on a strong plaster of attraction, and an bone came out, and after some days another one. I was greatly amazed, because it seemed that the belly had no bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I touched the wound and inserted my hands so far that the woman was in a better state; and the woman felt better soon after, and immediately spat out a little bubble of air from her body;
and I didn't record this chapter further because, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put it aside.
to return the marrow to its place
Hereafter comes the form of the pressor, where one presses the books; and at each turning as each head of the ligaments. In every way, let the horns be more subtle in the constrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the shaft be of a certain size, and the margin of the trees be thus, and of a length of one palm and a half; and in the meantime the ligaments should be of the same thickness as this fist, which is closed at one end and the other, about half a palm's length or a bit more;
and this thickness of ligaments is placed in the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the corns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in its resemblance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of the clamps. and it should have ligaments, as you see, of a palm's length, and two fingers wide.
and when you want to open the marrow of the entire instrument, then make the woman sit on a seat, her feet pendant and legs uncovered, then put the two adjustments adjusted together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument down between her thighs; then open your hand to the entire instrument, so that you have made the tenons equally, according to the quantity that you want to open the mouth of the marrow, until the bile does what it wants.
These instruments are all mounted above, and are multiplied in their similarities; and when the miry ones have appeared to them, so much more hasty is the opening, and higher are the men because of their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for their necessities are not excusable.
When the secondine is retained in the childhood, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his arm, and then make him stretch out his condition, and hold your hands at the mouth and nose; and let it burst through the skin, it is good.
If the skin does not burst, take a pot, and make a poultice or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia lignea, and centaurie;
all these herbs, or some of them, are cut or put in water over the fire; then put a cane or perforated tube in the mouth of the mare, and another end in the mouth of the patient.
and the tin so that the vapors come from within the mare; then it makes them expectorate, as we have said. If the secondary symptom appears quickly. And if it remains after this treatment, and does not go away, then instruct the patient to put their left hand in a poultice of sesame or in a musculature of alto, and then apply it to the affected area.
and hold the second one; and when it has been found, take it and stretch it little by little straightly, so that the muscles do not snap at the extraction; but it must be moved gently to the right and to the left, and then pulled; if it comes out and disentangles itself.
And if the mouth of the muscle is constricted there, we have described the treatment of sternum, and of fumigation with herbs;
and if it is not all that we have said, beware that you do not foolishly pull on the traction;
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the vein, you apply it to the hip of the woman, then the cleansing of the four-humor treatment;
if you purge and apply it again, and comes forth foul matter; but at all costs, when it purges thus, a bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
It is necessary then to make fumigations convenient for this: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation with fresh and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument by which one fumigates the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the secondine is this:
And it is to make a similar thing to a candle, and place a subtle head in the nature, and large heads above the fire;
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the tar until it is exhausted, and recommend another one.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, thus it is stopped up by subtle syrup. then it is necessary to apply the poultice so that it penetrates to his finger, and does not touch the surrounding area of swollen flesh, and clears the lesion so it does not touch it;
then put on a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until he is healthy.
And if you doubt that it will not rest, then put or insert a piece of lead, and leave it there for days, and be careful when the infants want to go to their chambers.
And sometimes these sudden swellings come from wounds or abscesses; it is necessary to cover that sudden swelling: if it is treated, then as we have said about the piece of lead.
of the fistula at the bottom Fistulas that come from beneath the bottom are nodulation, and larger than those that come from beneath the bottom of the body, or in the space of the two parties,
if there is a fistula or several; and when that nodulation is ancient, if it works, and encounters moisture, which makes the white or subtle boil,
and these fistulas are often persistent; and they are known by the fact that there is indigestion or flatulence when the patient makes indigestion, and sometimes suddenly jumps towards it.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the rod; and they reach just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the hip.
And thus one recognizes the fistula penetrating to the foundation, and not piercing. And it is that you apply your index finger to the foundation, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
And if there is tortuosity, you insert a subtle probe of lead, or a horsehair, as long as you feel the probe or hair at your finger.
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come from outside through digestion or flatulence, as we have said: know that it does not penetrate further; then hurry to cure it.
And when the fistula is close to the bladder or near the urinary tract, if it affects the urine, and cannot be soothed by medicines.
If it is close to the joint of the hip, then the tendon comes close to the place; If there is no twisting and the invention of pain inward, it is that he has bowed in, and there is no medicine that can be applied suddenly by anointing;
and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except through labor, and the foolish doctors who intervene are useless.
In one that is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced.
and it is that the patient places himself between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his hips, and have his hips inclined towards his stomach; then apply a tent of thread, or of lead if there is twisting, until you know where the tent goes.
If the patient feels it at the bottom, then it is necessary that you apply your finger index.
then feel whether the thread has penetrated; and so discover where you feel between your finger the siphac or the flesh, then know that it is pierced. if you do not work on it, one cannot heal it.
One does not thoroughly heal all wounds, but it happens rarely;
and the help that one does, if it is that one heats the subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it was said before; and the entire hot iron is inserted into the fistula, until it reaches the bottom; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these cauterized wounds are scorched, which resemble a bird's feather pen.
and then treat the moist wounds with burdock, as long as those wounds are open, then treat the joints with ointment, softening and soothing.
If he is thus healthy, it's good. If he is not otherwise, he cannot be healthy;
and hold it between, and do not pierce just to the finger that is at the foundation, and between your finger and the holding a thick covering of flesh or of skin, and you see the fistula at that which teaches the covering of the vein; if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and apply beforehand to the holding, and then use the cautery, until it reaches the head of the holding;
and the holding will be freed, and it will fall away; then I will show you those withered skin flakes that resemble a bird's feather, and none of them will remain.
And if you feel faint, and shorten between you and the vein, then cautery with fire or medicine is necessary.
For the fire cautery assembles in this way: it is to know that it counteracts the effects of bad humors, and the drying of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
then the treatment of swollen limbs in bath or with broken bread, as long as the juices flow freely, and it makes the bad humors flee from the bowels.
then heal the wound of the joints suddenly inflamed with dry charcoal, and these are the dry medicines.
Because when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not relapse again.
And if a fistula comes almost to the font of the foundation, and is separated from the body, then cut off your finger or foundation, and inquire about that.
If you feel the tension, and between two is the membrane or the syphac or veins, or it is near to piercing, if there are no other ways than the way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods:
where you cauterize as we have said, or you cut almost to the bottom, or if you can put tenses and cure as before.
and do not go too much into depth, that you do not cope with the tenderness which holds the foundation, and come back to the sensations by way of the voluntary senses; then the treatment, as we have said;
then the treatment, as we have said; perhaps it will be healthy, or you will remove that covering and the bandage then, since it is held by the foundation, either by tension or by another appointed instrument; then define that faulty flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can;
Then study how to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part that is above the foundation: if it is lighter for the patient.
And sometimes they are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is where it touches the bottom of the foundation beneath the skin above. if you take a perforated tent according to this form at the head: And you push the twisted thread into it, and push the tent onto all the threads in the fistula until it reaches the head.
If she is pressed on the edge of the foundation within, then extract the thread of that which is pierced, so that you touch your finger or foundation;
and draw the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and hold one to the other, and let it be a day or two;
and restrain it no more, until the thread cuts through the flesh that is between the two, and heals;
then cure the wound so that it is sewn and healthy.
If the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in all ways that you can, unless it is too deep inside.
For it does not suit to make a copper plate for the dressing wound if it is deep inside, and then the cure, as we have said, until it is healthy.
The shape of the spine-like instrument that one makes for the fistula, if it is very pointed at one end and cutting. and not on the other side, because one should not cut where one should not cut, as you see here.
Bruises are of two kinds: either they are deep in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they cut short the blood flow. and there is one or several, and they are far from the foundation and at the end of the foundation; but those that are far away have little moisture,
and they cut short either a little citrine water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body.
and the treatment of those who have them in the foundation, if it is that you instruct the patient to strain themselves to go into chambers, so long as the foundations issue forth, and they appear the threads; if you hurry, and you hold it as with pincers, or you hold it at your finger, then you cut it in its roots;
and if the uncle cannot hold them due to moisture, then take them with a drapil, or a cushion, or a piece of chamelot; and stretch them to your fingers, then cut, and sprinkle above some hot powders that are in the vein of cautery; where you cauterize as it is said or chapter of cautery, then you heal with other treatments until they are healthy;
and if the foundations cannot issue, then you cleanse the patient of biting and harsh cluster with water that is at the foundation, so that it can issue openly;
when the patient cannot urinate, and if the thread is pulled from the bottom, then it is a light treatment; and it is that you take them with your finger or nails, and grasp them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear not the incision by iron;
Here is the translation: and it should be of a large size; and hold the thread firmly, then touch the thread, and remove the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave it alone to correct the excessive bleeding of blood.
then put on the dressing, a soft cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate, and put it on the dressing, and instruct the patient that he should rest.
and then let it be until it heals, and when they will be healed, if you treat with ointment and other treatments, until he is healthy.
to dry the wounds or dressing Often it happens that there is a burning of fevers in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
It is necessary that you make a point of a small lancet or a single claw which does not allow it to become moist. then heal it as long as it is swollen, just as it is necessary.
and if it cannot be healed, then recommence the rubbing more forcefully than before, so that it bleeds much and becomes scarred. then heal them as long as they are healthy.
two fremits A formica is a small false appearance under the body, and it goes much deeper in.
and sometimes the cold reaches the frost, and one feels it as if dead from frostbite, and it comes into all the body, and more in the hands than any other part.
And the treatment is that you take a thread of a bird's feather, or a strong thread from a voltur, and place that thread on the patient's arm, so that the circles completely encircle the arm. then turn your hand all around the thread so that you grasp everything around the arm, and put it in the background, and strip the arm of its roots.
And if you see, make a frame of a cord or iron in this form, and be subtle underneath and draw above.
do not pierce, because you must hold at the finger, and press; And if you see, then cauterize the arm, as it is before or in a chapter of cautery.
of the form of the cluster Never make a cluster of silver or copper, or of tin alloy or mesh; and never make these small and large instruments, according to those for whom they are prepared.
Those therefore which one prepares in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, are small.
The form of the cluster, small and large, is above large, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
and there is a separation where the intestines should be tied, as you see, and the chest should be perceived from within; and it has one of the sides perforated, and on the other side.
and let the intestines be where you put the medicine in a bladder of beast or parchment, and let it be perceived all around with small perforations,
and have between each perforation a thread of space, then put in these perforations a strong twisted thread of cord or hemp, and assemble the intestines as if it were a bag; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then clusterize; and that's the form of a circle:
And the medicine should not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with a gentle touch of oil or albumen of egg, or similar thing, then apply it lightly.
Then sprinkle the ministers with his two hands together, so that it is all visible, then extract the ointment, and lift the patient's legs to the pallet.
And if the medicine wants to exit, let it come out as much as it can; and if he sleeps one night completely, it is a greater aid.
And if you treat the illness of decay of the stomach, and the medicine hastens to exit, then recommend it as much as it is healthy.
And if the morbid matters are at the bottom, or an abscess, so be the cluster as subtle as for a child.
and it is the shape of the subtle cluster above where the skin should be held in constraint:
of wounds
We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the division; now we will tell you about the cures of hands and of medicine, according to the accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or locations where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Here is the translation:
where they are made according to the laws of the body, so that it falls on the neck, or on the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come back to its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if you take care it's not a matter of stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is great, and you doubt the appearance of an abscess: if you make it thus healthier on the cephalic side, meanwhile as blood comes from the wound, and the healing is contrary to the naval part;
and abstain the patient from repletion of wine and of coarse meats.
And if he does not want to recover, let his meat be diminished, and drink no wine, nor eat any flesh.
and apply to the wound, a poultice of warm oil rose water treatment, or in wine steeped.
and if there is no hot abscess, apply to the wound, so that it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will tell a little later.
and he has been burned, if you put him on some ointments, so that he may be healthy.
And if the wound is large, like a sword's cut and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by tending, if they are assembled by stitching, as I will say about wounds of the belly, from the stitching.
If the wound is uncovered from the bone, and it festers, and only holds for a little, if you cover it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard skin in place of leather. and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as tested and roasted meat, and also like poultry, and similar things.
And if you find a wounded skin, and it does not adhere to the bone, so scrape off the entire wound, and pour on water, then heal.
and if it has formed an artery in the wound or vein, which without crust, and it cannot be staunched by medicines, so seek out the artery, and if you find it displaced, then tie it off with a thread. and if that does not benefit at all, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which absorbs in such a way that the wound closes up.
And the manner of the powder is this: take incense, one part; dragon's blood, two parts; living chalk, three parts, and subtle powder. and apply the poultice, and hold it firmly in place, until it adheres well and joins with all its sap.
and then bind it well, and leave it without loosening, so it does not become inflamed; for one does not stop the medicine until it is healthy.
And at no time does one make a poultice of living chalk solely, when one has not incense nor dragon's blood, but rather the arsenic has not moved the wound.
And if the artery has moved away from the wound, meanwhile in this state, if you do not put this powder;
but instead apply some digestive ointments, or poultices made of wheat flour mixed with water and honey, until it throws off the pus; then heal other wounds as long as they are healthy.
And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pinches;
and I will tell you about the breaks of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it's the nerves, there is no other remedy than to let them heal, and not to put anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract. and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the essence of nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but let the medicine be soothing, as you wash it in warm water, and mix it with rose oil, and cook it in warm water also, and other wounds of mine according to this method, and apply moist unguents.
And if the wound is large, sew it up with thread, then treat it until it is healthy.
And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, then pierce or lance below the level.
and if the artery is cut, and as a result blood flows out, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize, this is the task.
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the veins, and the conduits are guarded, because that's where the nourishment goes, if you cut the vein on the side of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then hold it firmly, and let it be for some days, then treat the wounds with ointments until they are healthy;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, seek the one that is; and if there are pieces of bone, seek those that you can remove, and those that you cannot have, let them be until the wound festers; and let it be disinfected and aligned with the outlet;
and if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on the powder that I mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then make the treatment thus as I said in its chapter.
from a wound of a spear or dagger
If it is a blow of a spear or dagger, and the wound is very deep, then consider whether the wound is venomous, as soon as the patient becomes weary: know then that the wound is mortal.
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put the powder at the first hour, nor bind it with a bandage that does not press deeply into the wound. and return to the body, and relieve the patient; but I put an attractive ointment on it, and bind it with a strip of cloth twice a day;
and if you have no ointment, put much cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture,
and make the patient sleep on the wound for two or three days, or more. if he does not come to spasm, nor bad trembling of heart and there are no signs of alteration; and when you see good dispositions, know that the wound is saved. Heal then with tents and other treatments, until he be healthy;
and if she cannot heal, and operate, then it is known that there is a fistula; if the treatment is as one must.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, or in the front or back, then treat what is in front.
if it is large, with stitches; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has caught pieces, thus cure the wound, and remove foreign bodies if they are dislodged. and if they are not dislodged, then let the wound putrefy, thus loosen the extractions.
and of other wounds the judgments of other members are so as we have said.
because of the rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are great and mild and small;
from the great wound sometimes the intestine, or the knots of the intestines, because of the intromission of the auspices;
and the stitching is more troublesome, and sometimes it is worse than the small wound that the great one;
because one puts back the intestines in, so one does not put them back from hot to hot; because the intestines swell so much that they feel cold, if they return again to the points,
and because it makes the putrid wound worse, because one puts back the intestines in their place that is theirs.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to three manners:
the common stitches have a stitch in the belly wound,
and the stitches of other wounds on the body and these proper stitches are common to other wounds;
and however they are more suitable with the belly wound, and I will describe each one and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine is outside, and this thing is to reset, it is by one of the two manners: for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
And when it is chilled, warm it up in such a manner: wrap an esponge or a cloth in warm water and apply it gently, or you cook in warm water and sprinkle and splash, and raise the intestine until the inflammation is removed;
and often make these remedies restraining, and it is necessary that they be soluted to remove the inflammation.
And when you see the inflammation depart, if you moisten the intestine with water or wine, and may it be cooked. for by that is loosened the entry to a little thing;
and if it cannot enter, then make a little wound at the instrument with which one gathers the blood clots;
and the first treatment is to reduce the swelling that is the size. that we must not cut without great necessity there is;
and it's the instruments for the wound:
if you cut within the curve and do not dig in, and see there the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine bursts forth, if you reset it according to its natural form in its proper place see thou in power, for this is worth many.
When the wound is large, and it is on the lower part beneath the belly, if it is necessary that you make the patient sit up on their back, and place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part beneath the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the aforementioned parts Here is the translation:
and thus it is necessary to administer what I say for large wounds and injuries.
For small wounds, use what has been prepared for you,
then put it between your hands, I mean minister gently so that you hold the entire wound in your hand, and bring the lips together; and it's the common manner of stitches,
and it's the common manner of stitches, and it is that you prick with a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound, I mean a thread of space, and fix a needle or it has a strong twisted thread; and pierce the joints of the skin with the joints of the underlying tissue,
then strain with a double thread within the needle of the vein, then join the joints of the wound together gradually,
and then let it cool down for a while, and he should stick another needle; then thread the wire as you did with the first needle, and do not cease from doing so according to how you have mastered the needles, until the whole wound is restrained;
and let the thin needles be between subtle and thick, for the thin needles take in all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well: because it is necessary that they be moderate;
and it is not necessary to push the needles too far into the flesh and tender skin,
that they do not touch and open the wound before the suture;
and then touch the heads of the needles, so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and I hold tight or wrap a cloth around the heads of the needles to keep them steady, and let them be until the wound is sutured;
and this manner of cauterizing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for it suffices to introduce a needle or two.
The second cauterizing is common, and it is that you assemble the two heads of leather and the two heads of silk together at a needle or where there is a strong twisted thread; and when you will have perceived these wounds thus: three. together,
and when you will have perceived these wounds thus: three. together, if you reset the needle at the part where you started, in the manner that one cuts the threads;
and put space between each stitch the thickness of a smaller finger;
this stitch follows the bone,
and I treat a wound one of my men had in his belly,
who was wounded by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm's width in size, and it was deep into the intestines, well nigh .ij. palms of size,
and it was the wound in the midst of the belly. I returned the intestine then, for it had been that way 23 hours before.
and the wound was sewn up to the 15th day, and it was cured, and it was healthy.
And the doctor had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and do not cure with ointment, for I was standing in a place where one could not find any, nor any medicines; and I treated it with cotton very gently many times a day, and I washed it with honey water until he was healthy.
Now I will tell you the proper ways of suturing:
take the needle, and sew up the part that is injured just up to the place where it is deeply wounded;
when she has pierced the right vein correctly, if you have placed the head of the syringe or costumed or thrust in the needle,
and make a hole in another part of the inner section up to the point of failure;
and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew thus as the pelletier makes the pellets, and let the syringe flow from one part, and take it back from another, until the stitching is completely accomplished.
The second way of cauterizing, which Galen properly described,
if it is like a spring, which naturally assembles the broken parts together, and apply one head to the other head, in such a way:
fix a needle or a pointed instrument near the mirror, and make it pierce the joint just enough, and let the heads of the joints swell up; then turn the needle and make it pierce through the weak part just to the inner depths, as the heads of the joints swell up;
then pierce one and the other through the weak part just to the inner depths, in the other joints that are swollen with mirrors that are on the other side;
and it's the worst manner of fracture and the most common.
Galien says this in his book, and none of them testify to it,
one should cauterize the belly with .ij. needles, or have a thread in each one;
and one should push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew up wounds;
and knows that when the rupture is within the belly, if it is the seam more grievous than the other seams of the belly.
The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of the other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound in all its blood, thus that the arrow has moved, Here is the translation:
Here is the translation: and if it has moved, set a bandage on some joint that is affected, so the wound does not swell. and cut the thread, and sew up the stitches, and the seam. then heal the wound as with the others, so that it be healthy.
and if you have no medicines, set on, as soon as it begins to gather pus, much cotton. and remove it often every day so that it may be healthy.
For you have no need of other medicine in many dispositions except when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not affect the principal members, if it is necessary to soften the tendon lightly in oil of tempered heat, or in oil of rose; and put it between the fingers, and beneath the soles;
and if he feels pain or pruritus in the belly, and many times it happens, if they give a clusters of red wine tempered, and meanwhile the pruritus reaches just to the intestine;
and pierce deeply, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine that is called "fasting" cannot heal when it is wounded. and it's because of the weakness of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the approach to its natural constitution.
And if the scar heals from the wound, it resets similarly as the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it becomes old and turns to black or green, then it's necessary that you lift the black skin, which is removed from the blood that comes from it. because there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligament, and put the joints in a position below the wound until it befits to align the extraction when the nerves are cut, and the wound is swollen.
from the rupture of the loose bone
When the intestine is relaxed, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in some ways,
because I saw that a man was wounded or pierced by a spear in the belly;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and was swollen and became fistulous, and thus he lost his digestion and windiness.
I put a treatment in accordance with what I was able to do, and did not cease from subtling until he was healthy, and the limbs were sound.
And when I saw him sound, I doubted that the patient had a bad thing in his belly; and he had no pain, but remained in better disposition, and eating and drinking;
and they direct certain experimenters that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied up in such a manner: take firm hold of large sutures, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the sutures have covered the mouth, then place them on the two lips,
then set another fracture in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed;
and sew the wound. If the head sticks in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient,
and one can bind the intestine with a subtle thread that is taken from the intestine of a beast,
in such a manner: take the head of this intestine thread that is very delicate, and then attach it to the head of this subtle twisted flaxen thread, Then put the thread in the needle, and sew up the intestine, and reset it in its route.
and this manner of stitching the intestines is not forced except according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, similarly when it is in one of the gut intestines, so there is no ingenious remedy, except for subtlety.
of a fistula or wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it is swollen, is commonly called a "fistula". and similarly when it is bearded and has a hollow bowl.
And a fistula is according to the truth a hard, dry, and white nodulation, where one does not feel pain, and it is also bearded like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes in clear ulceration, and sometimes dense; and sometimes little, and sometimes enough;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not clean, and there is no flesh; this is not done except by one of the eight causes:
it is to know, by the small passage of blood or flow; or through its wickedness; or because there is hard flesh within, and on the lips, which does not let anything be born; or where there is too much swelling; where the juices are rotten, and the material is of bad quality; where the medicine is not good in the treatment; where because the corruption is a kind of plague; where the property in the region is slow in digestion, and slow in health, and feeble by nature; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the medical treatments in the division.
Or it is necessary that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula which is done by hand operation.
Know that fistula occurs in all tender parts of the body; because there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the spleen, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or at the spine of the back, or at any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are grievous wounds, and there is no remedy but labor, and ignorance.
and if there is any fistula that does not heal quickly up to the place I have told, and you have confidence in the cure, and you consider the view, if you take a probe of iron or steel, the fistula is straight, if it seeks;
and if the fistula is twisted, seek it with a subtle probe of lead, because the fullness is compressed within the twistedness;
and it forms a fistula in perforated hands and you cannot search for it well by palpation, if you cleanse it through one of the perforations,
because the moisture flows from one perforation to another, and it becomes putrid;
then you should examine your power to know if it has bone or nerve, and it is shaved in the foreground
and ask the patient well about the pain they feel when pressing with your hand, and the place where they feel it
and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is near a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, cut according to what I have told you,
or in any of the places that I have told you, cut according to what I have told you, and let the putrid flesh and rotten humors that are within; and then the treatment so that it be healthy,
and if the fistula is well perforated in the right place, it is necessary that you cut in deeply, as much as you can, then I apply soothing remedies in medicine for fever, and the poultices just at the head of the fistula,
then I apply soothing remedies in medicine for fever, and the poultices just at the head of the fistula, as long as the medicine corrodes the surplus which is accumulated at the bottom;
and then I put ointments on the wounds, so that they be healthy;
and if it is not healthy through this, then cauterize as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it. If a vein or nerve does not bother you in your principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is decay and blackness, so let the king remove as much as the decay is entirely gone, then heal the things that are injured in the flesh as much as it may be healthy;
and if it is not healthy, and render void what was before, You know that you are not a lazy doctor just until now:
if you uncover and seek as long as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healthy, that's good. Here is the translation: if there is no other remedy than to let nature do its work;
and if it has a small corrupted bone, and you can treat it with tourniquets, if the instrument is suitable for that purpose,
and if it has many bones, then remove them completely, do not leave even one;
and if you make him contrary moisture, there is no error or fear, if you bind and moisten and warm, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot dislodge them for an hour, then place on the wound a poultice made with rotten matter, and let it be until the pus is rotten among the bones,
and then if they have lighter bones;
and if it's a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, if you extract so much of the corrupted material that the blackness is completely removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of the body corrupted, it reaches just below the shoulder bone; if it is necessary to open and uncover everything up to the corruption, and then treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so take this example and help with your work.
He was a young man of around 30 years, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within his body,
until the materials came to the leg, and it was inflamed with a large abscess, and there was no way to evacuate by opening;
but the physician, in their foolishness, operated so much that the abscess opened, and they corrupted many materials, and it became a fistula, and there were many perforations that all gathered together in a wound and moisture of the body;
and many a mirror mirrored cure within these ten years, and there is no wisdom in the art of hands,
until I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they cured him, and those that corrupt through the openings of a large body; and the body of the young boy became red, and had a citrus color.
I thrust a tent in one of these perforations, and then I sought out all the perforations.
and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I hastened then, and cut into one of the perforations as far as I discovered a part of the bone. and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came just to the bone within;
I saw that which appeared to me from the corrupt bone, and I believed that there was no other corruption, except for that which I removed.
and I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines, applying them gently over a long period, and could not suppurate;
and then I recommenced, and discovered the bone as it was beforehand,
and found the continued corruption in the bone, and I saw it, and then I removed it, and I thought about suppurating the wound;
but I could not do as much as I grasped around a palm of the bone, and it drew to all its mole. then I restored the administration of medicines; and he was quickly healed and suddenly.
and it was no longer necessary to start the work again because of the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer. and for the fear of death that I had concerning him. For the evacuation of blood often happens, but it was completely healthy.
For the evacuation of blood often happens, but it was completely healthy. and a hard crust formed on the bone, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction in anything, neither to go nor to come.
and stretch the head, so that you draw out the corrupt flesh from below, and uncover the flesh above the bone where you see the ulcer, so that the ulcer does not spread to the flesh; and apply a firebrand or a hot tile below the bone to cauterize the corrupted flesh; and it is necessary to search how one can see and feel the corruption, and search again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, if it reveals the whole flesh; then apply a firebrand below,
and then the decay spreads from one part to another, and is the putrefaction of the length of the decay; for it is a small thing, as we have said.
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut off the corrupted joint, and decay spreads from one part to another.
and if the corruption is in the continuity of the joints, then there is no other remedy than to amputate.
and if the corruption is in the grasp of the hand or in the grasp of the foot, then it is very strong that thing. but however it is necessary that you inquire about this decay, how it appears to you; and examine it in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve does not contradict you;
and know that the incisors and the teeth are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the mouth, and their thickness and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to prepare each similar appearance of work with his instrument;
and know that the work will show you the instrument about which you have mastery, according to the knowledge of this art, and it will testify to the methods of the diseases; if you prepare the instrument about which you have mastery, according to what is necessary for it.
for fire They burst out either because of an internal cause or because of a fever;
and when you will have medicated that corruption through the treatment with medicines, and it does not improve at all, then you must amputate that limb up to the place where the corrosion comes from, if the patient is crippled by fear of death, or by wickedness, which is greater, from the defect of the limb;
if the patient is crippled by fear of death, or by wickedness, which is greater, from the defect of the limb; and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire, and afterwards there is decay following the blackening, then there goes that corrosion of limb to limb, and it takes over the whole body; if you hasten to copper,
and if it is by the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as a sea scorpion and viper and similar ones,
the corrosion is at the head of the finger, thus the cope, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, thus the cope at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, thus the cope at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death. and it is not worth mentioning the few strengths of its virtue;
and so then do when the corroding comes or falls: if it comes at the first joint, then the head afterwards at another joint;
and whether it comes or falls, then the whole foot is affected; and if it rises to the leg, then it affects the joint of the knee;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the patient die of it;
and the manner of coping with or saving the limb is that you bind it above and below, and stretch out one minister below, and another minister above, and you detach the flesh that is between the two ligaments at a spacious interval, so that the bone may be uncovered;
Then take the scoop or silk, and place a piece of linen there, so that the silk does not touch the healthy skin. and bring to the patient another lesion and abscess wound.
And if a flow of blood comes when you operate, then cauterize the skin hastily. where you apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is accomplished,
Then lay the injured limb at a convenient angle, and care for it until it is healthy.
and I will tell you that it had to do with a man whose foot was paralyzed:
he had a black spot that seemed to be burned by fire,
and that corrosion went first into his toe of the foot, so much that it consumed the entire foot;
and when the man sees the decay, if he hastens to cover the foot, and was healthy;
and long afterwards the decay returns or the pain of the hand, and it comes to me,
and I put him on things rebounding after the purification of the body, and could not stop the decays;
and he saw that I bound his hand, and I did not want, that I had hope of rebounding the material; and I doubt also that if he cuts his hand, it does not die, for the strength of the man was weak; and he despaired entirely, and returned to his land, and he stopped from cutting his hand, and was healthy;
and I have not found it stated anywhere that because of this, one makes another treatment, so one has mastery.
A boil sometimes comes to a head of charcoal, and stays for as long as it makes a large collection of pus. and then it bursts and pierces, and the pus jumps out, and the dirty juices flow, just like a vase. and the skin that is above is as subtle as the thin sheets of a delicate cloth. and it does not corrode only to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy".
but if it is so prolonged that it reaches almost to the bone in the front, then it is called "fistula";
and the skin is so thin that you can see the whole core, and similarly when it is subtle, just like a delicate cloth; and it does not differ due to its corruption.
And if you have seen that the skin is hardened, and the decay is not in the surface, and the skin is thick with flesh, if the treatment of clustering thus:
look if the ulcers are large, and the discharge that comes from them is of foul smell, then the clustering of Egyptian medicine which is thus made: Here is the translation: as long as the medicine is red, and designates thus thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your necessity, and make it into water and into honey, and cleanse the wound with it, and hold back the pus; and let the medicine stay there for two hours, then extract it in sprinkling;
Do this many times, until the chest is exhausted, and the pus is removed.
and no time is it cleansed with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes from the wood of a vine, and throw water on top,
then boil, and cleanse, until you know that the chest is well purged;
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither does Egyptian medicine nor the powder of ashes, if they are to be treated with a mixture of water and honey or if there is a little bit of litharge ground into a powder; where you treat it with a mixture of honey and wine, so that the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the wound dry;
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wound is well cleaned, if you clear away what makes the flesh grow in it,
and it is that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with oil of rose and wine; or you clear away some medicines and ointments, whose properties I have described in the treatment of ointments;
and if the small hole of the sinus is narrow, and the cane of the lancet cannot enter, if it widens by a finger's breadth, and inserts a tent of the Egyptian ointment, or ointment of basilicon, so that it may be widened;
and if the wound is too large, then cut and let it heal thus, so that the cane of the lancet can enter,
and if it pierces where the bow of the shoulder is above, whether it collects or further below the joint that it is. For when the bow is in the front, then do not let it bend downwards; and if you cannot cope with the joint below, just as you have seen, if it appears in such a way that the bow runs to the lowest place that it is,
and if you cannot cover the wound beneath just as you have seen, it appears in such a manner: that the bowel collapses gradually downward, and they leave nothing of the bowel; and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound,
and stand straight on the drapery of the linen that covers the whole breast; then place the forces exactly at the nipple of the breast, a little larger than the first, then adjust the bandage softly on the other drapery according to the quantity of the nipple, and put it on the nipple of the breast to align the bandage, and do not remove the large drapery unless after many days, one time;
and he who is above the perforated breast, often opens the bowel, and knows that which runs from the bowel, whether it is venom or a little or enough, or digested, or undigested;
and takes into account whether the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has been extended in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps above the perforated breast, Here is the translation:
and then dislocate it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you open the wound, if it changes, I give another dressing, and renew the bandage.
And if the senses are upset by indigestion after many days, know that the senses are not yet clear. And if you take subtle remedies often after a long time, do not despair of your health.
because the saints are near. Because there are men who take long to heal their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
and it becomes indigestible that which is poured into the belly after many days, it knows that the breasts do not nourish anymore;
and if the breasts take long to digest, and it is delayed, then apply medicines which are moist in substance and dry in virtue; as we know definitively, because there is a great part of vitriol, and it is the last medicine;
Take a definite application, and they make it with rose oil, and the aroma of old wine equally in substance;
then they concoct it and put it to use; and this same mixture makes honey cooked into a thick paste, when definite applications are not present,
where you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and powder them on the honey when it is on the fire; and then apply glue, and spread it over the breast, and at no time does he administer an Aristolochy longer, and roots of the celestial, which is as fine as flour of vezes and a hundred;
and roots of the celestial, which is as fine as flour of vezes and a hundred; and in use of simples or of compounds: crush them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have mentioned, and use; and if the wound is elongated, and it is not cured by this treatment,
and if the wound is elongated, and it is not cured by this treatment, then know that corruption is deep-seated, and makes an impression on the bone, or in the hard parts, or in the sinews; if you treat a fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the finger
Panarice is an abscess that grows beneath the fingernail, near the joint of the hand, where you tread, or by chance grow on other fingers;
and when it is inflamed, and one does not take care, if an abscess occurs in the foot, and they run and pour forth a burst as far as it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance it reaches the whole;
and there come ulcers up to the bone, so that a putrid pain comes, and it is the sign of a large wound, and the color is dark red.
When you treat them as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not profit them, you must cut away all the excess flesh that remains on the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauteries are great aids if the bone is sound, and the finger is healthy;
and he approaches the flesh then, and begins to prick, and the blister. it is necessary that you put the straight edge underneath the nail that does not touch the flesh, and the end above, and cut the subtle and delicate flesh, and apply to the remaining flesh medications that are burning and corrosive to remove everything;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then scrape it, and extract fiercely, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed;
and if you see the decayed tooth, then scrape it in the name of us, just as it has been said before, then the treatment so that it is healthy;
and if he is wounded, and bruised, and he feels great pain, it is necessary that you heal him first; then cut the corner of the spatula-shaped instrument, expertly cutting across,
and beware that the cutting does not reach just to the flesh which is under the corner, for the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it happens, then put something on it that soothes.
The two fingers that are born in the hands of some men by chance are entirely numb, and by chance there is a piece where it has bones, and sometimes it has a nail,
and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or their birth is in some of us of the two. He who grows in some new finger does not move himself, and he who grows at the joint of the finger, perhaps moves;
the size of one who is withered is light, in such a manner: he measures it at its root by a large span.
Here is the translation:
In one who is born or has a curvature of the spine, it is necessary that you first correct the round flesh up to the bone. then correct the bone to a suitable joint for that, then heal until it is healthy.
The sudden swellings that come together at the joints arise from birth, or from a sudden wound, or from a burn by fire, or from similar things.
It is necessary that you correct the swelling, so that the joint returns to its natural shape. Then place between two warm tents or oil-soaked cloths, so they do not stick together; or you place between two subtle pieces of lead, so that the joints are joined, as it is suitable.
They stick to one of these two with the palm, if you strike that joint as it is suitable.
Of wounds
You see gross swollen veins full of superfluous melancholic humors that come into many parts of the body;
and they especially occur in the legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, rather than others.
It is necessary then that you administer sometimes a purging of the colon, and then the juice of the basil plant.
The treatment of iron is in two ways: one is that they are struck, and then the black blood is drawn out. and another way is that you open the vein, and pull out all the strength.
The cutting should be done in this manner: raise the first leg to a warm and very hot temperature, so that the gross sinew is made subtle. then stretch the leg of the patient downwards from the hip to the part below the knee; then cut into the vein in one place, or in two, or in three, with a broad incision.
Then he lifts and draws the black blood to his hand, from one vein to the other, as much as it flows out like the virtue of the patient can suffer;
and then he lies down, and instructs him to abstain from eating black bile-inducing foods;
and recommences the evacuation and the blood-letting when the veins are full, and annoys the patient.
The elevations of it are according to this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, Then put him in a bath, and let the limb of warm water swell as much as it becomes red, and inflates the veins;
and if you have no bath, heat it with fire, and then apply it to the vein at the bottom of the thigh near the knee, or in the part below the joint;
then open the skin at the ankle, and scrape the vein of that part, as much as it appears when one feels it;
and you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems like a white cord;
Then apply the rule below, so long as it is lifted from the raw skin, and then attach it to the lighter ancone.
Then shape in another way following the two joints; then scrape the skin on the vein as long as it appears, Then leave it to settle, as you have done, and attach it to another uncinate bone, as you had previously done.
Then shape another size, or more if you are a master of it, then leave it, and shape it to the toe of the foot.
then burn by fire cautery up to the second joint; then strip the fat from joint to joint, until it is entirely free, then the scab.
and if you cannot burn by fire cautery and lift, if you prick with a strong double-threaded needle everywhere. and lift and burn by fire cautery, and prick from beneath, and turn your hand on one side and the other, until it is entirely freed. and beware that it does not form a scab, for if it forms a scab, you cannot burn by fire cautery or lift, and it causes harm to the patient.
and when you have treated it all, put on the place of the wounded limb a millennial wine and rose oil ointment; and care for it until it is healthy.
And if the twisted and crooked and bandaged together, and it is not straight, as we have said, so you must bend it gently, but do not cut it; and treat it as we have previously stated.
so you must bend it gently, but do not cut it; and treat it as we have previously stated. The shape of the iron instrument with which one cuts the twisted limb is curved, and does not cut too deeply, so that it does not cut into the vein;
and it is of thick curvature, for if it was subtle, it would seize the vein, but be large as we have said, and this is the form:
Of the civil vein
This vein is located in the legs, in warm areas where there are no herbs nor trees, and in earth where there is no moisture;
and perhaps grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that arises beneath the skin,
as it comes within the body snakes and worms, placing between skin and flesh.
And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then it changes the veins, and begins to bud forth, just like a root of a plant.
When the head is open, it is necessary that you envelop with a piece of cloth one and a half inches up to the elbow, and the nail.
and let the splint stay on the leg, and every time it is not in default, if the swelling surrounds the splint, and the tumor; and if it is too long, cut a part of it, and surround the remainder, and do not cut it in its root, until it is completely removed; for if you cut it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess and putridity or pus, and a bad illness;
because that is why it is necessary to treat it little by little up to the head, and leave nothing behind in the body;
and it is not at all this vein when it is treated with 5 or 10 blows of a long handle, or of 10. and one hand comes to me, from which it issued 10 blows of a long handle, and when you touch it, if you feel a bone or a perforation, and pierce just up to the bottom,
if it all issues out; and let the matter that is within be evacuated, and mix in the medicine injected through the pores without putting any more, then cure it as with abscesses.
And not at all this vein often moves, and likewise when it opens in the joint of the foot, or where the foot. and many come from wounds, and where it jumps quickly; heal the wound thus as we have said before.
From abscesses that grow between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "cow disease", because it often has cows,
and it's a small abscess that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the whole body, ascending and descending, and he feels well along the length of the limb from limb to limb, as long as it straightens the skin or where it goes, and jumps forcefully;
and it is affected by an abundance of certain humors, if they come forth as worms and snakes and lice and ascarides or belly;
and doubt not of its evil, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, perhaps returning, and destroying the eye; and this has happened many times.
When you want to cure and treat, if one cannot be strong except when it goes:
it is necessary then that you lift the limb above and below with a strong, well-tightened bandage,
then cut above and the tract force, and if the vein is deeply in the flesh, and you do not find it, if you cautery with fire above, until it mortifies;
and the greatest harm that it does, if it runs to the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the eye, hold the eyebrow firmly, then cover above, and pull back;
and it is suitable to use the patient's purification of body by soluble medicines for the bad humidors pores,
and beware of rotten meats that cause putridity.
From the pain that comes from flatulence This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes into some members, and then moves from member to member; and I saw what I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm;
and immediately after, his veins appear as if a worm at the shoulder, more stiff than anything, as if living silver when it runs from one place to another;
the pain departs from that place, and settles in the shoulder,
and then a little afterwards it runs throughout the whole body, until it reaches the other arm;
then I account for her that she turns again within the body, as if I see it.
I was very amazed how she moved thus from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner. However, I had seen that many had wanted to move the pain from one place to another, but I had not seen it, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins. and because of this it appears that the constricted veins are wind-swept;
and I did not appear to be according to this reason among those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and restored veins.
And when you want to cure this disease, and the patients feel that pain, it appears thus as we have said. Here is the translation: and burn the limb; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
if you treat those who have wind in the stomach, as if making foul pills, and serpent's pills, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the limbs of the body where they strike.
The diversity of them is that they have large points, and small ones, and curly, and swollen. and those that have sharp angles, and those that have lengths, and those where there are fragments; and those that fall in no member if they fall in several ways: either in a principal member it breaks,
like brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then into no place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you about later, appears. it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many cases; and when this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
And the signs of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and swells the soft tissue which is on the brain, Here is the translation: and perhaps it is without strength from the nostrils, or the ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and jumps from the white moist wound appearing like a pouch, and it bursts out also like charcoal;
and this is a sign that appears, if you keep to the treatment, and extract the arrow if it is not inside.
The signs of the arrow when it falls or pierces, are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in a hard thing, not soft. and by chance the sieve moves also like the poultice, and in short black blood, and cold sweats come, and fainting: it is then without doubt that death descends.
And the signs of the arrow wound that never leaves a bruise on the skin are that without pus flowing from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs deeply and feels cold.
And if the arrow wound reaches into the covering of the piss, it is beneath the small ribs; and throws great anguish and great pain and sighs; and moves all the members of the loins.
And if the arrowhead or stomach, by chance jumps from the wound some undigested thing of the flesh.
And if the arrowhead or belly, and it jumps into a point of feces through the intestine route, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrowhead reaches the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out forcibly, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other limb, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the forearm and the elbow and the legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to several more dispositions. When the vein is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, thus I will tell you what happened to me, because you should do otherwise.
It happened to a certain man whose vein was cut or punctured at the root of the nail: I touched it, and drew it out from under the fat of the ear, and it was healed without any harm.
And I drew out a vein that was cut in the fat of the eye under the skin, under the papery layer. and the arrow was removed, and one cannot reach except for the tip towards the hollow. and it was a large arrow from a Turkish bow, with a very light iron spear without ears; the game was healthy, and no bad accidents happened to him.
And it extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears:
I seized the barbs, and subtle as I was, I extracted it, and the Christian was healthy.
And he pulls out an arrow from the man, which was stuck in his belly, and thought that he would die;
and then when it had passed xxx days, it did not change its condition; I cut around the arrow, and extracted it, and pulled it out strongly, and had no bad accident.
And I saw a man whose arrow fell out of his back, and the wound was sewn up above;
and he keeps the arrow inside him, and does not change his natural disposition. he finds no harm in any of his natural works.
And you see another man, who had an arrow shot into his face, and the wound was swollen;
and he remained thus, suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
And it happens to a vein at the man of the prince, the king, which was injured between his nails. and it was a little declining towards the right side; and it was the entire vein that was reset.
I was called to the treatment after it had been injured for three days. If I found the wound very constricted.
I felt it with a subtle touch, and did not hurt it; and he felt aching and pain beneath his right ear. I thought it was from the point of the arrow.
I put on the wounded limb a plaster made with attractive and digestive ingredients, because the limbs do not swell. and it appeared to me that the limbs were affected by the arrow.
and it appeared to me that the limbs were affected by the arrow. I put the cautery fire in the usual place, and reopen the wound immediately, and delay thus the patient's long treatment.
until he feels the arrowhead, that is, a day within his nose; and it told me so. I put medicine on the wound, a corrosive medicine by usual means, until it was covered over.
and probed, and felt the head of the arrow which had stuck to the bone; Then I apply to the opening of the wound by that medicated ointment, so that the head of the arrow appears visibly.
and passes well the limits within three months,
and then I relax if the wound that I touched with the tongs, and my hand on one side and the other, and cannot issue.
then I did not cease to subtily and ingeniously make devices, until I took it with well-made tongs on that day. according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, as much as I trace it, and restore the wound.
And the mirror shows that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I will restore it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was entirely healed.
Now I have told you about the quality of the extraction of some arrows, if you put your treatment on those whom I do not mention, for the books cannot take everything.
but wise masters compare well a little great thing, and on those who are present and failing, find a new work, and a new instrument, in the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that the arrows do not issue from the limbs where they are fixed except according to certain manners. where they enter through the skin, or through another part;
and the one that jumps forth where it enters, this is an arrow entering into their flesh, and it has jumped forth many times now.
And if it does not jump forth now, let it be until the flesh is purified around it, and the exit is eased;
and thus if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, let it be so for several days, and the swelling will decrease each day;
and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, one pierces everywhere with a subtle finger, as long as the eyes in every direction are enlarged, and then the treatment.
And if the arrow is replaced in the body of the corpse so that one cannot see it, then it seeks to have all its tension. and if you feel, if the sensation draws to no convenient instrument;
and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound, and due to the depth of the arrow; and there is no bone or vein, if the wound is so large that the wound is great; and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow where it holds;
and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow where it holds; if you remove the skin which is stuck with ulcers so that you can cleanse, and then break or bend the wings of the arrow, so that you can extract it;
and then break or bend the wings of the arrow, so that you can extract it; and subtly take care not to break the arrow, so that you extract it more gently.
And if you cannot at one time, let it stay until the surrounding tissue is purified, then extract it, for the extraction will be easier. And if you remove blood that does harm, then amend what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of the incision near the nerve and the vein, and set in motion a device so you can safely extract the arrow without danger;
whether it is hot or cold, whether firm or gentle; and place the patient according to the position he was in when the arrow fell on him; for it is the greatest aid that it can be, and if you cannot, then place it according to what the signs show you;
The arrow that comes from another direction, where it appears as if nothing of it is there, or the skin is inflamed in this spot if one sees or feels it somehow:
Cut then thus, so that the tendons can take hold, and then extract: if it bursts out now.
And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly, so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then extract it.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then recommence the extraction until it comes out;
and if it is the fault of the arrow, it is, he cuts all the fault;
and if it is a chest wound, and you want to administer a treatment, if he administers. It is a cutting instrument; if the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument; and then cuts forcefully,
and if the arrow is cut, he cuts the instrument to a point entering in, to ease the extraction.
And if the vein is touched, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can. then heal the wound as it covers.
And if the vein is in the hand or foot or belly or bladder or side, and it is nearby, and you can cut above, so you cut.
and be careful not to cut the vein and the nerve, and then extract, and then sew the wound, so that is the task. and the treatment as long as it is healthy.
The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
And there are many ways of doing so: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
of the veins of the common body Of the veins from which one bleeds are 21, where it has or the head 16.
it is to know: it is a type of wounds that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech". and the wounds arteries that are in the temples appearing; and the veins that are in the eyelids of the eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose; and the damaged sinews which are at the neck; and the damaged veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and the damaged veins that are beneath the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
One is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the head, and people commonly call it "vein of the head"; and the vein called "fast" is composed of the cephalic and the basilic; and people commonly call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is on the right side, and people commonly call it "vein of the belly", and it is located near the pubic area, and it is the one which we bleed, which appears manifestly above the pouch.
And the saphena vein is the one that is between the auricular and anular, and if it has two roots;
and in the leg and where the feet are, there are three veins: one is below the curvature of the left pouch side, and the second saphena vein which is at the junction of the right side; and the vein called "nesse" which is at the junction of the other side;
and on the other leg are 3 veins below those.
The wisdom of the veins that are behind the ears helps with ancient cathartics and migraines; and the qualities of the vein, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the qualities of the vein, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are of a rough cloth; then bind the patient's neck to a vice. as long as the veins appear behind the ears in the same way the dependencies of the head: where the hammers strike your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, it is a sign of an inch;
then take the lancet, and insert it beneath the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand above the entire vein above, and cut and open the skin and the vein well, you should have two passages to traverse, and make the blood flow out as much as you see;
Then hold it steady and lift it, until it is healthy;
and I have already said about incision and cautery in the first book.
The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is worth migrating to an ancient one, and swollen, and accustomed to opthalmia, and at the course of the bitter tears that flow from the eyes;
and the quality of the healthy person is thus as I say: and it is that the patient strains his neck, so much that the two veins appear openly; and feel the pulse beneath your finger, and then make a sign of inching;
then raise the heart onto the vein above your finger's tip, and insert the lancet below; and elevate the vein high up, and the cupping, just as you have done with other veins, and correct the flow of blood according to your need;
then lower the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place on cotton;
and then form it firmly, and let it be until it is healthy; and we have already spoken of their cupping and their extraction, where the book begins.
The health of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the health of the cephalic veins for ancient diseases of the face, and for migraines, and for redness;
and the quality is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting, so much that the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", of which this is the shape:
And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or with something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; then release the patient's neck, and hold the vein until it is healthy and never again affected by a large flame.
Here is the translation:
The health of the 10 veins that are in 10 vessels helps the eyes, and the tongue, and the nose, and the little finger in the oil, and for diseases of the face;
and the quality of their health is that the patients stretch their neck by twisting some ligament, as before;
then the health, and let the healthy part of the crossing, a little bit of the long, a little bit of the broad, for there is no point of flesh.
And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they break; then make a correction of the blood, as much as you have mastery, and then place it on the cushion, and bind it well.
The sanity of the vein where it doesn't get to the aque, and to strong foresight, and to facial diseases. as if it migrates and reddens when it comes into the face, and similarly when it is ancient;
and the quality of the sanity is that the patient contracts his neck, then stretches his nose to his left hand. and take the subtle flame long, and fix it in the empty space which is between the two nostrils. because the vein does not open well enough, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and do not let it flow too much in depth, and make the blood flow according to necessity, then leave it a night, for it is nearly fully restored;
The knowledge of .ij. wounds helps with the treatment of anemia, and at the beginning of messleria, and many illnesses, and impetigo, and corroding, and herpes, and similar things;
and the quality of the health is such that the patient stretches his neck now one way and then another, as we have said; and let the master stand above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a seat,
then let the vein of the loin be opened somewhat widely, then draw out the blood moderately, or as much as the master is able;
then make another incision in the other vein, then loosen the ligament, and hold the veins together moderately; that the patient does not strangle; and let it just until morning, so that the wound be healthy.
About the health of the livers The health of the veins above the liver is affected by gathering at the mouth, and corruption of gums, and cracks in the lips, and painful nostrils and within.
And the quality of health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold their neck steady as I have said; Then turn the lever, and examine the two veins, one of which is on the right vein and the other on the left. and they are recognized by this, that they are black, and by this, that around them there are small black veins: touch one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
touch one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, if you touch the largest of each part, and thus make the two veins that are above and below, because it is a similar manner.
About the health of the tongue The health of the veins that are beneath the tongue aids after the health of the head, and it's in the constriction of the throat, and in the diseases of the lips, and in the diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the veins is such that the patient's saliva falls between your hands before the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks beneath each side for a black vein:
examine one and the other, and do not go too deep in the font, because beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the skin which are commonly sained are sained in two ways:
where we prick all over, it is a flame-like burning, or subtle olive-like if the cuts are deep, and is called "anesil"; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the flame-like burning is very renowned, and it is wide as you see:
And it is necessary to open the veins with a scalpel showing large amounts of blood appearing, and that they contain much blood and turmoil; and it's the form of the flame of olive oil:
and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for clarifying the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrine blood.
The purification of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with the illnesses that are under the throat, and in the neck, and in the feet, and in the belly;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to make a gentle incision, and to beware of the artery that lies beneath. And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and one must not be touching the flame, but rather cutting as if with an anvil.
And if the basilic vein does not open clearly, it is necessary to extract it, and change to another; where you want no vein of it, or you feel in its place the vein within the arm: it appears manifestly; and the coping with the flame anesthetized, as we have said.
And if you want to examine the place of the wound, it is necessary that you stretch out the arm, so that you touch the place as much as you feel the pulse; then mark the place of the incision, and then stretch out the arm, and cope with the vein of the flame anesthetized;
and beware that you do not strike into the artery when you see the limb swollen, because it is of the artery: avoid it then.
And if you see it swell up high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is not from the artery: wait then, and place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the blood is stagnant, which often happens;
let the arm be still, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and be on guard against fear, and do not move them until they are healthy.
And if the vein is not stanched, and it fails, and the medicine does not present itself to you, then cut the artery so it opens, for the head of the retreats; and stanch the vein.
And take a layer of plaster, and make it, and take one of the halves and lay it well just next to the other joint;
If the vein is stanched, that's good; if not, then heal it, as we have said, with powders that stanch blood.
and the stanched veins are not grievously harmed in many dispositions by the small opening of the wound, and the possibility of good alignment of the arm.
The vein's health is in a thousand ways helpful if it draws blood from above the head and below the body. because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the healer to beware of the nerve that is below, and if he presses too much in the wrong place, and he finds the nerve, and it becomes inflamed and the health is grievously harmed, and by chance it cannot be healed;
and it is necessary to open many times, and if it does not open in any homes due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you loosen the instrument's joints with ease; and avoid touching the nerve at your power.
And if it has a vein between the muscles, then they make a scar far from it.
The suture of the cephalic (head) helps, which draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
and it is necessary to suture in pricking at the olive flame or at the mirty flame, because it is the safest of all the veins, for it has neither nerve nor artery.
Here is the translation: and by chance he inflames the eyes of some men, when it fails at first, but it does not harm anything. The quality of the health is according to your thinking.
The first thing you must know about healing is that health is not maintained except by preserving sanity.
and to avoid future diseases; and let the healthy vein be made in one of the three veins that are on the outer side: it is to know, cephalic, fasting, and basile. and one should bleed in the beginning of taking precautions in the summer, and in autumn and in winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear;
and one should bleed on the first day or the third, after 8 hours or 10 days.
The bleeding that is administered for the illnesses has no fixed hour determined, but rather whenever need befalls, whether by day or night, at all hours and in every tense;
and it is not advisable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying a fetus for less than four months until the seventh month. Nor should they cauterize the old who have passed 60 years.
And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever way it may be, then it is necessary to purge the intestines with a gentle clyster. if he has much retained filth, then the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful humors from the intestines to the principal members.
One does not heal quickly who is too full of meats, nor who is drunk, as long as they are furious or dropical.
and it worsens on the healthier one after passionate colic, and vomiting, and decay of the belly, and multiplying of the habit in a woman, and of travail, of watching and of juning, and this which destroys all virtue, or through some thing of the arm or of the body;
then refine the humors, if the blood is gross, through meats and through beverages and through medicines, if you have not the pure power;
then enter into a bath, since nothing will deflect it, to refine the blood;
and you should suck on the vein of the foot below the third, as we have said;
and you guard against that day of labor, and of pointing, and of luxury, and of similar things;
and be joyful and happy, and let the veins be higher than those from which one bleeds, and rub the arm two or three times;
then stretch the ligament above moderately, for when it is too stretched or short, it cannot correct the sense;
and then rub the limbs with your hands until the veins swell, and feel them;
then anoint the sinewy areas with a little warm oil, then place your left hand on that vein beneath the limb a little where it wants to heal; so that the vein does not flee and fails to be pierced. For there are veins that flee as if they were cords in the sinewy area, and if there are those that are full of windiness; if one puts on the flame, if one draws back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of those;
and if one opens the vein, if the wound is too narrow, because it is necessary that the surgeons be advised in these things.
And if the vein opens for the first time, it is good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or near the skin, so that the veins are not inflamed.
And if the veins are inflamed, and the patient is in distress, let them be for a day or two, and do not bind the arm: by chance you will come across abscesses wounds; do not enter or bathe, then resume the health as it pleases them;
and if the wound is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not issue as much blood as you see, then cauterize the very wound itself straight away;
and burn it a little hastily, so that the eyes are inflamed; for this often happens, when the wound is small.
If you see the eyes inflamed, do not restart the bleeding, and put a little of warm oil on it, for it alleviates the pain of the blood, and is moderated in this eye by the oil;
and thus administer the warm oil to each wound that you bleed, in order to staunch the flow of blood;
and this same process makes it triangular and bowed, when one puts it on the limb; if one subtly feels the sinew and separates it when it is too large.
And if there come big abscesses, which often occur, especially when it is not healthy enough to be cured except at the time when the opening of the vein is small, if you hasten, and put on the limb a sponge moistened with water and a little hot oil, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if it remains on the limb for a few days without any blackness or greenness, it does not harm; and if you see, put among none of those things of aloe or myrrh remedy in juice of calendula, master, or similar.
And many times there occurs an abscess and appearance at the health of the basilica: put your hand on it then, and if you find the soft spot at the compression of the hand, it is that bad appearance. Avoid then that you do not put on anything of those things we have said, for it may happen in court without an artery; but the fat .i. emplaster sec to harden the spot, then treat with another treatment, until it is healthy.
And take each one according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Because the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it suits the one who is full and strong, and has mastery of blood extraction, so that one makes a larger wound, and so the flames are larger;
and to the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits them healthier and more often, and one must heal them by cutting across, not by pricking;
and this method of healing is free from blood decay and nerve damage, and is worth more than a long or large wound.
And to the one whose body fails in health, it is necessary to give a soft poultice made from juice of green apples; if it is inflamed, then draw out three or four times the blood.
And if it is of cold complexion, then anoint in front of the health a soft poultice made from musky syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and well-fragrant syrup.
And if it festers at the health, after the evacuation of much blood, then it is necessary that he drink broth of beef, and subtle fragrant syrup.
and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of a vein.
And if he wants to restore his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when it is afflicted by great pain, that he be healed little by little, according to the quantity of its continuous virtue.
And he who wants to restore his arm after the first healing, and it has a strong course, if he is healed in twenty-four hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
And he who wants to heal from another part, if he must heal on the second day or the third.
For he has much blood within the body that is already heated, and brings on fever; if it is necessary to treat a great quantity, and to enlarge the opening as much as it bursts into a sweat. Then you examine all the conditions of health, and put your hand on his pulse when he is healthy, so that death does not come from the palm of his hand. and this happens often, when the healers are negligent;
and it is not suitable when you see the arm dislocated, and you make blood flow out a second time, and the perforation is closed, so that you press firmly upon; not if it is curved, as he stretches the arm hastily, for this would be bad;
but let it be until it bleeds for the second time; or you prick at the tip of the flame, until the blood that is congealed at the opening of the vein flows out. and put it on the spot where the serum was removed from the water, and press lightly.
And if the vein is inflamed, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is calmed.
And if you need to bleed twice, then let it bleed in the same spot, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is healthy in the place of the vein at the head because it is composed.
And the method of the healthiness is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so that the fingers become red;
then should be wrapped moderately, so that the vein appears good, then the healthy part now of the crossing, not too wide nor too long;
and let the openings be wide, and be healthy close to the joint of the hand, and if it cannot issue forth, then put the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough;
and if it is so, do not reinsert the hand into cold water, for they put it more in winter than in summer;
and the health of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The health of the little finger of the right hand is good for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
stretch the hand, and put it in cold water, until the vein becomes swollen, if you see it; and if the vein is across, and if you cut it all at once, do not touch anything;
and do not insert too much in the fontanel, for the nerves are beneath, separated from the flesh,
and then put the hand in warm water, if the wound is frozen, and it cannot issue.
And when you have drawn out the blood as much as is necessary for you, then put oil on the vein and sew it up hastily, and do this for each vein.
The sanity of the left hand is worth more than the disease of the right, and do everything just as I told you about the right.
The sanity of the spleen is worth more than all the diseases that are under the body, like diseases of the liver, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its sanity is that the patient's pain is relieved as if in warm water, and it pricks on the vein so much that it bursts. and he puts it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they go many roots;
sound where the finger or more large root, or at the ankle, which moves quickly.
And if you sound above the foot, then guard against the nerves that are below, and the sound of traversing as in copying; and so the flames anesthetize.
And if the sans cannot issue from it, then put the foot in water, and let the vein well empty itself.
And if the wounds do not heal at first, recommence the second time above a little, because the joints are salty; Do not doubt of nerve, as we have said, and thus make equal the wisdom of one foot to the other;
The joints of the sciatic vein are at the junction of the thigh, and its wound is worth the pain of the hip, when it's due to hot blood.
And the quality of its wound is that the patients either bathe or strain above the thigh, and extract three drops while twisting.
because otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then you should examine it in all ways that you can, and by crossing over; and it is necessary that you touch it, because the blood is healthy, and it is much restored to many homes.
and it is necessary that you touch it, because the blood is healthy, and it is much restored to many homes. And if you do not find it, then there is no rule about which one opens or gives a finger's width, and towards the small finger, and beware of the veins;
and make a correction of the blood that you see, and then release the bond, and put on cotton and tighten; it is now healthy.
The signs of empyema
Ventouses are made of horns, or of reed, or of glass; and the ventousation is done in two ways: either by striking and attracting blood, or without striking.
And this ventousation that is without striking is done in two ways: either it is with full fire, or without fire;
and others in the sides of the neck; and the swelling beneath the chin; and the swelling of the shoulders; and the swelling above the knees; and the swellings in the arms; and the swellings of the legs; and the cuppings of the small veins; and the cupping does not draw blood, except for a few small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
and because of this, one should not be afraid to take it, as one does when bloodletting from a vein; and it is not necessary that it be administered, nor at all by fire or sensation of fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, as long as the body is evacuated.
And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to bleed, or through habit, then let us administer it at each hour in the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in each tension;
for there are those who, when they have the task of bloodletting, have heavy hands;
and there are those who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and spit out blood; and there are those who sigh, and see by night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we command to wait for three hours of the day.
The health of the nose helps with the greatness of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not suitable unless it be after the evacuation of all the body.
and this waiting period is in accordance with the health of the cephalic (head).
and it does not suit those who are of a cold complexation in use, or who have catarrh, because this causes them great harm.
and because of this it is not suitable for the old man to use, nor for those who have cold heads or evil diseases.
And he who often uses it, becomes oblique, and therefore it is suitable to put the cupping glass a little lower due to the doubt of obliqueness.
Cupping on the neck is in place of the healthy head and the basilica, and therefore it is suitable for the stretching of the foot. and at the fracture of the channel of the forearm, and at the tumor, and at the replenishment;
and it is necessary to poultice, for it holds too firmly, if there is obstruction of the bowel or stomach or heart.
The windings are like ribs of the neck if they make pain in the head, and obstructions, and migrations, and strangulations, and pain at the roots of the teeth.
and it is in the place of the health of the basilica; and it is necessary that you command the healthy one to express his hand in placing, so he does not touch the artery, and does not see the flowing of blood.
The windings beneath the mouth if they make a disease of the mouth, and a corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the health of the .ij. lips.
Here is the translation:
The ventilations of the seams are worth as much as the three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins;
and instruct the surgeon to not make too many perforations, for the flesh is nourished by blood, and it knows of veins and arteries.
The cupping that is on the back is worth as much as the remedies of the foundation, and the diseases beneath, and it is necessary for the cupping to be large, and to be of a reasonable size, so that it may be able to treat well; and if by chance, it was subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
The blisters on the legs open widely, for they draw blood from the entire body, and alleviate ancient pains of the kidneys, and of the liver, and of the bladder, and reset the flowers; and are in the hands of two wise men, and of two skilled surgeons, and everywhere they restore the body after long use, and bring about improvement in many conditions.
The method of applying the blister is that you apply it first gently, and suck strongly at once, and apply it quickly, and remove it evenly, and do not cease from doing this until you see the body red and swollen, and open the flow of blood; then firm, and reapply the blisters, and take heed in the disposition of the bodies, for there are those who have tender skin, and clear pores: if it is necessary to strike once only, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deep ones; and suck lightly.
And if the blood is abundant, it is necessary to strike two times: the first time to subtly open the way for the abundant blood.
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike three times; and when we want to draw out a little blood at a time, then we suffice with striking only once.
And if we want to remove a lot of blood, we often recommend it; and if the patient is weak, we hasten by making a fontanel, and the end result is that the cure should be perceived suddenly.
and it is suitable for one who has thick and hard skin, and whose pores are open, that you apply the oils of opening and dissolving apertures. if it is in this case, of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil;
and if it is in ivy, of cress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar one.
And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or balsamite, or oil of aniseed, and similar things.
And if it is the skin that has tender flesh and large pores, it does not need to be anointed with oil.
but it needs to be washed after the infusion of rose water, or cold water, or water of Morella, or water of Cucurbita, or water of Porcelain, or other similar things.
And he who has much moisture, take away the essence of ivy, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
And those who have thick superfluities lift themselves with wine vinegar, or water of sage, or decoction of anet or chamomile, or other similar things;
and it is not suitable to apply a cupping glass before the bath, but rather after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the cupping treatment,
and it is necessary that he be warned, when he should be cupped and when he is being cupped. And beware of those who are healthy being choleric, and their blood is too sharp and inflamed; if it is necessary to take cold things, such as pomegranates, endives, and lettuce in the axle, and similar things;
and avoid small peas, and flesh of a castrated animal, and moist meats.
And he who has a cold temperament, should take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine moderately, which is between old and new, and avoid little peas, and avoid small peas and little birds and pigeons;
and on the day when he is ventilated, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give to some men three or four drops of theriac or muscat before the venesection, or afterwards, to comfort the main limbs; and let the blood be subtle, but it is not suitable for those who are hot when they drink it.
The cupping glasses that are placed without piercing are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagre, and on the belly and the bowel and the kidneys and the thighs, because these members cannot bear to be pierced in their veins.
and do not perform it often, lest you attract blood from member to member, as we set upon the shoulders when they are not healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we set ventouses on the belly and on the bowels to thin out the member;
and stop the pain when there is swelling or stone, if it stops by its attractive virtue through adventure the swelling, or clears the stone from its place;
and thus it does when one puts it on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained windiness,
and these windinesses are administered void of blood by sucking so much; and no time are they administered together with fire, and no times full of stagnant water,
if thus in bad illnesses of fullness, and in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with warm water or with water where herbs of convenable have been cooked;
The shape of the cupping administered by fire is thus:
And it has two fingers' width and half a palm's breadth from the front, and it has on its side a small hole, just as if to put an needle through,
and be of iron, soft in front so that it does not harm the patient when putting it on the limb;
and have in the middle a crossbar of iron or steel, to hold a candle in place,
and they are large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
for the veins of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin ones from the fat ones.
And one must thus put this veinousness on the limb:
take the candle of wax or linen thread, and put it in the veinousness across the rod which is in the veinousness, It is necessary for the brightness to be at the bottom of the cupping glass so it does not burn the patient.
and then place it on the limb, and let the two be on the orifice that we have mentioned, so that when one looks, the vapour goes out, and remove the cupping glass.
and take hold of the limb as before, and you will often repeat it, if you have mastery.
In the cupping glass, which is administered in diseases of the lungs, to all who are suffering, there is no vein or orifice, and it is not administered except when it is full of water, and is placed on the limb as a remedy.
and it's the form:
Veins are not familiar with being in members where one cannot put cupping glasses due to their smallness, like lips and cheeks, and similar places; and in the naked flesh of the skin, like fingers or toes, and other similar things;
and the quality of the use is that when you find veins that are in tender sweet spots without roughness, then take them;
and apply a gentle poultice, as long as they are familiar with it, and have no wind in the belly; and then be free from vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply ointments;
and when they are swollen, and painful, see if it is the place where a cupping can be applied, apply it, for it is very useful afterwards.
If not, lift the place of the vein, and then of the water, very well, and then sprinkle;
and he will have healthy eyes soon after the course of the blood, if many. I wrap him in a cold wet cloth, and put it on, so that the blood is congealed;
and if the blood is multiple, I put on a broken vitriol ointment, or galena, and similar things, so that it is congealed;
or you put on the eye a poultice of peas, and let them stay until they adhere to the eye, if it will staunch now;
and if you have more mastery, take other bloods.
And if the sinews do not want to take, you scrub the spot of fresh blood well, or you fix a needle so that the sanew goes out, and then he puts them on, and soon as they feel the blood, if it hardens;
and when you see that they are falling, if you powder them with a little of aloe and of dried brookweed, or of cinders, they will cling now.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Know, dear son, that the foolish mirror lies about this chapter, for they did not find anything in the ancient books, nor did they read a letter about it.
and for this reason, the science is strange in our land, because I did not find any good book.
and I know nothing, except for the science from ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the experience of my life.
and I have described for you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are needed, as I did in those three chapters before.
It is necessary then that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where the wise men place their understanding, and stay on the truth, so that those who have experienced it know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when break or dislocation or twist or bruise comes to someone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, so that nothing hurts them completely, just as a frail body, or infants, or old people.
or if the tendons are not very warm, or too cold; and avoid cold foods, it is to know cold joints, and flesh of birds and goats, and do not drink wine, nor eat raw fish, and do not fill oneself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, so that you do not doubt about hot abscess, nor expansion of matter in the limb; if the patient returns to their first government that they had used.
And when the broken bones begin to restore, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or they have viscosity, just as if they were cooking in water, and rice, and bread, and feet, and stomach of a calf, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For a broken nose, representation makes sores and most quickly the break.
And know that broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well reset or rejoined according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, like the bones of small children;
but there is no cure, reset the broken bone, i.e. thick tendons which are torn and join the limb together, so that it becomes strong as it was before; and do not touch any part of its work, and therefore it is necessary to nourish with thick foods, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Because the break of the head is different from the break of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manners of breaks. For there is a break that goes to the elbow, and another in bending, as when one holds a pen for writing.
For there is a break that goes to the elbow, and another in bending, as when one holds a pen for writing. And if it breaks with a wound, and breaks into a small crack.
And in each manner it has its engine, and its own instrument for restoration, according to what the memory brings back to its place;
and it is known that the fracture of the bone occurs because the bones are twisted, and it appears well by palpation, and sounds to the pressure of the hand;
and when there is no twistedness in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture;
but it can well have twistedness, or crack, or small fracture. If you do not want to move your hand, but rather apply medicines that come hereafter, and then gently restrain it now.
And it is necessary that the breaks that come in a fall, and are the disjoined parts, they must now be put back together evenly, so that abscesses do not come to life.
and if abscesses come to life, he should not leave it for a day, until the abscesses are calmed down; then put it evenly in the muscles so that you can lift lightly and easily, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of that which has pieces; then hold steady, as it will be afterwards.
And if there are broken pieces in the bone, whether it is many parts, or a hand or foot, or a small limb, or a few cords, or a cord and a hand;
and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are disjoined, you reset them by all means in their proper places, and take care that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient;
and adjust well the joints of the bones according to their best forms.
And feel well with the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if you straighten it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who make them come through their work on abscessed and contracted limbs, as we have wanted many times.
And when the limb is at rest, carefully repress the patient so that they do not move it, neither while awake nor while asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and take care that the limb is so well-aligned that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, it's not at all points, and you must put it in such a position that it feels no pain;
For when it feels no pain, it's not at all points, and you must put it in such a position that it feels no pain; and take care that it is set straight, so that twisting does not come when it is restored;
and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
And those that are large, such as thigh and leg: it is necessary to enclose with a broad and sturdy bandage, for the broad bandages embrace the entire limb, and hold it steady on all sides equally, so that there is no unevenness.
Then the bandages are lightly wrapped, three or four times according to the limb, and hold the hand a little on all the bandage, then go above the fracture and hold it less, so that the fracture is slightly separated.
and soften the bandage a little and a little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy skin, then take another bandage, and turn it again above the broken limb;
Then return to the part below the fracture, and hold it moderately, not too tight nor too loose, as we have said in the first rule above;
Then put between the swollen veins of flax or drapery, so they are all equal, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made stitches on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
And if there is inflammation or abscess, then put on top something that soothes the hot abscess, and which removes the inflammation, and leaves it thus for some days;
Then stretch on your stitches, and be of a moderate size, a large cane reed or a stick made from a tree, or a palm branch, and be according to this shape:
But it is necessary that the stitch which one puts on the bruise be a little thicker and larger than the others;
and let it be as long as it needs to fit the limb, whether small or large;
then hold it steady against the stiles just as you did at the first bandage, then tie above with a thread conveniently, just as at the first bandage on the fracture;
the more tightly it is held, the less; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too large nor too small, and be of soft flax;
for if the threads are large, as I have seen the efforts of foolish people who make their bandages with twisted flax cords, and it is a great error, for the bandage cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it does not matter that it has between each stile less than two fingers' breadth.
And if the patient is injured by the heads of the stars after the straining in their sound limbs, then put beneath them poultices of linen, or a piece of flesh, so that they do not become bruised.
When the wound is with the fracture, and the course is broken, I will tell you the treatment hereafter.
And beware that it is not suitable to strain the stars (joints) all at once, lest the broken limbs be injured further on the first day. For when the limb is large, it is not suitable to put the joints together before five or six days, or more according to the severity of the abscess which supervenes.
and you will see the manner of ancient plasterers to restore breaks, dislocations, and twists: and it is that you take flour that holds as by the walls of a mill, and mix it with abundant egg white, and make this confection, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of plasterers restoring breaks in many dispositions, and likewise for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of plasterers restoring breaks and dislocations and twists: take abrasives and ladanum and enula and asafoetida and gum arabic and myrrh, in the amount of .x. 3.; myrrh and aloe, in the amount of .v. 3.; and alechil .viiij. 3.; and make into powder, and mix with abundant egg white; if the complexion of the man is warm, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is good for many men.
Another manner of plaster that is good for twists: take myrrh and vismalve, in the amount of .x. 3.; myrrh and aloe, in the amount of .viiij. 3.; acacia .vi. 3.; Armenian bole .x. 3., and grind well, and mix with water or abundant egg white, and apply it.
Here is the translation:
Another way to restore broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and earthy peony leaves, and crush them together, and make a poultice.
Another way to restore the broken bone and to reduce the remaining abscess. Take root of violets, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of vezes, one part each; and crush, and mix with wine, and if the limb is cold, mix it with moist coriander water, or water, and use it.
Another way to restore even stronger than the first, when hard abscess comes to limb restoration. Take roots of violets, and seeds of flax, balaustrum, melilot, and sansuce, and flowers of violets and chamomile, one part each; and crush, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the warmth of the limb, and its rest.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on a broken limb for restoration more than a certain amount of wax and oil, and nothing else besides, and says it should be between two extremes, not too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that one should apply warm dry cupping to the broken member, to restore it, with slightly hot things, like mirrors and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to treat lesions and pain: take mugwort and decapitate the heads of humans, or wings of birds, and visnaga, and equalize them, and the broths, and make an emplaster with it and the lie.
And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is his bone out of its place; if you do not loosen it by many hours.
And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, without rest or inflammation, if you hurry, and loosen it, and remove the emplaster now; and take a lighter dressing, and a sea sponge moistened, and dip in water, and lift up the limb, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is appeased. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply a dry, smooth cloth, moistened with water or rose oil, and place it on a nut, so that you are sure of a hot abscess.
and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then restart the subtle treatment, and a bit of emplastering, and do not constrict it too strongly as before; and subtly until it is healthy.
And if you see that the abscess has cooled and reduced and pain and swelling are gone from everything, and you have mastery of emplastering and bandaging, then restart it, just as you did initially.
And if it does not come to the limb anything of what we have said, then do not dislocate it further than after 8 days or 12 days or 5 days or 6 days; and never leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the fracture is solidified, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh on the bone.
then hold back more than at first, and the swelling of his flesh, as I have said before; and if you see that the limb dries up more than it should, know that it cannot be nourished. apply the warm water therapy often, every time you dislocate it, and let it be so each day, and loosen a little the bandage.
by this work, then, the nourishments are cut off from the limb, and quickly mend what the foolish mirror shows, that the limb is twisted: it's bad, and if it's a painful operation, and I don't see anything else but to soothe and open it correctly.
of various ways of breaking There are many types of fractures, and diverse shapes, and the causes are determined.
for there are fractures that are made by percussion of a spear, and the neck of the bone is broken all the way to the knee joint which is beneath the bone, just like a hatch or a fork; and for this reason this type of fracture is called "hatchure".
Where the spear cuts the bone from above, piercing senselessly, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two great or small fractures.
And if there is embedded percussion, or fissure or break in the neck of the stone, or fall on the stone, or other similar things.
And if he has a persistent bruise, which approaches just near the membrane that is beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is the wound whether large or small.
And if there is a wound that is embedded in the bone as subtly as a small notch, and it is a small fissure, and for this reason it is called this bruise "capillary".
And if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by similar things, and makes the piece of bone go down, and it is as if they were making a cast like a craftsman when they strike on the molds; so within the bone.
And this happens more to those who have or had moist bones, as if they were children's bones.
and it has all these ways of breaking that small pieces are disjoined as if they were like this; and I will speak of them in their place.
And we recognize all ways of breaks by the subtraction from them, and the inquiry with tension, and by the corrupt flesh that is on.
The similarity of the hairline is known by this, that when one has uncovered the bone, and one rubs against it, then the black break appears.
In the cure of the break, beware of these accidents that harm the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and numbness, and ague fever, and the eyes issue forth and redden, and other similar things in worse dispositions, so that one cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see an accidental wound, and you expect healing, then begin the treatment.
And when the nave comes to you first, and it is winter, then you should open the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to open the bone before the seventh day, so that the membrane under the bone does not become corrupted, and come the accidents that we have mentioned.
And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then you should split the fractured part thus: and it is that you take hold of the chief of the ailing nerve, and uncover on the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more softly than you can.
and if the flow of blood comes to discover the bone, or a ripe abscess, he is helped by what is suitable, and it is that you fill the hole with soft, milky oil. and make the wound rest until the ripe abscess is appeased, and be assured of the flow of blood; then begin to cut into the bone with skill, and it is done according to seven modes of work: one mode is that you cut with a narrow, sharp point in front, and that is the form.
And then I use another larger cutting instrument than the first one.
And the second mode is that you have a number of diverse cutting instruments, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron indeed; and in working lightly, so you do not blunt the head.
And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce around it, thus you must administer gentle touches with tarers, not too deeply so they do not pierce beyond the bone of the whole test, and must have a margin or circle above, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you need to have more, if each one returns to its place on the side of the bone, if you have tarers for every test; and this is the form of the three manners of tarers:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put a tarer on the bone, and turn your fingers so you know that the bone is pierced; then replace the tarer elsewhere a little afterwards, and do it all around, then cut into the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone with your hand, or with any of the instruments you have, such as forceps; and beware that you do not touch the brain or the vital organs.
And when you have pierced the bone and extracted it, it is necessary that you prepare the instrument which is remaining from the bone to all other instruments similar to an incisor, but it must be more delicate and more subtle than the other incisors.
and if he lingers with nothing of small bones, no nails, if the bones are lightly touched by the instruments; then heal the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
And another manner of surgery is what Galien says, which is more wise; and he praises it highly, and that's his word. It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, there where the break appears, so when you have discovered that part, then put below the head of this curved incision, which is its form.
And do not cut from one part, and the affected part is in the .ij. rib, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently cut around the entire bone, and take good care of the membrane that is below.
If it is numb at the bone, lift the bone lightly, for one feels no harm, and feels no fear.
And if the break in the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is covered so much by above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and to clear the scales with a subtle rasp, which you must have in different quantities, to prepare each location most conveniently, according to the work and shape of the break.
If you rasp with large rasps, and then with more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing this until it is well.
In each of the other hair-like fractures and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you prepare the cause according to its adjustment; and this is a thing that is not easily responded to by one who has placed their study in this art.
And if the wound is deep, it is necessary that you take a bandage of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and anoint it with oil rose, and put it on the wound; then take another doubled bandage of two or three layers, and anoint it with wine and oil rose, and put it on the first bandage; and do this more lightly than you can, so that you do not irritate the wound, then administer from above another string, and do not constrict it further than necessary to hold the wound in place;
and let it be so for a day or two, until the aposteme's heat is alleviated, then disperse it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and powder of violets, and powder of incense, and aristologe, and similar things; and make powder from these things, and put it on the wound, and administer again medicines without harshness or biting;
and take care that the wound is properly cleaned, so you do not leave any inflammation, nor let it gather pus, for when pus gathers on the fabric of the brain, it corrodes and putrefies, and causes the patient great harm; for when one puts on the wound something biting, it increases by gathering above.
Take warnings therefore, no bad accidents come to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without a doubt.
And if nothing better comes through the medicine that one has put on, which has virtue, if it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and two parts of rose oil and glue it in a drapnel, and place it on the wound site; then heal the wound in various ways that are necessary, until it is healthy.
Know that no time are the two parts of the nose broken above, or one part by the joint, for they are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, if it does not become swollen or twisted, and then heals.
And if one of the injured parties is broken, it is necessary that you put your small finger or index finger on the bruise, and match the break equally with your finger pointing to the indicator finger, and in the pouch by deficiency, until the finger regains its natural shape. and do this lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
And if the break is in the part above the finger, and cannot be brought to the joint, it is necessary that you put it equally at the head of a thick stick.
And if the break is in two parts, do it similarly, and hasten to restore the first joint, so you can.
Here is the translation:
Where you set bones from one another part, it is broken; and let the tents be as large as they fill the perforations of the nose.
And say that no restorer can soften the tents in broth, and move each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be softened with a concoction of egg white and powder of mill; then let the tent, until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
And at no time set bones in the nose with pens of egg white as tents, and if it has a soft dressing around, and holds the breakage, and soothes the patient within; or do what you have seen.
And abscesses that come to the nose while you are operating, if you put cerotate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a poultice of dyaculum.
And if abscesses appear, then put an emplaster made of flour of six herbs, and powder of incense, mixed with egg whites, then place light poultices on top, and do not bind too tightly.
and if the break in the nose is small, and it is broken into tiny pieces, then extract the broken parts with suitable instruments, then sew up the fracture, and treat things that are causing harm, and suddenly, just as suitable emplasters and ointments are applied to this.
and if there is no deep wound in the nose, then treat with tente, and apply a poultice of pounded plants, so that it may be healthy.
of the fracture of the jawbone
When the jaw is dislocated, and there is no point of injury outside, and the break is outside so much, and it is not broken in two, except that a little lump forms inside, if one recognizes it lightly.
It is necessary, if the break is on the right side, to put your right index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is on the left jaw, then put your right index finger, and gently feel the break inside, and steady it with the other hand from outside, and make it even.
And if the break of the jaw is dislocated inwardly, it is necessary that you administer extension of the jaw in that part, so much that it becomes even.
And if the movements of the teeth are uneven, or broken, you should strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw a cerote, and put on it a double bandage; and put on the bandage a large and well-made staple, or a piece of even and smooth leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and bind it to the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see that the figure changes, so dislocate it on the third day, and then put it back in place because it is changing; and apply a poultice made with powder from the mill with abundant water or flour of six-months-old, after you have removed the crust; and apply a light poultice, and if the poultices are bitter, and the patient's disposition does not change, let it be until it is healthy; many times it is healthy in twenty-two days.
And if abscesses or ulcers come, so manage them as we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, reset the broken bone in its place; if you subtly remove the extraneous parts with suitable instruments to that end.
And if the wound is constricted, so enlarge it with a flame according to the need.
And when you have gathered all these pieces, and there remains none, if the wound is large, and put on it suitable dressings to heal the flesh, so that it may be healthy.
of the strength The strength breaks many times beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the break is in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two places, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
And the operations are when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the broken strength; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put the break in your hands, so that the form be as it should be, and there is no appearance or movement.
And if you have a task to extend further, put a round sphere of cloth or linen under the shoulder of the patient, and let it be thick according to your need; and hold and lift the force with effort, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you set the fracture evenly, as it is necessary.
And if you cannot straighten the head of the fracture at the back, because it comes in front, it is necessary that the patient leans on his shoulder, and put underneath the shoulder a soft cushion, and bend the ministers below the shoulder, until the bone of the fracture is lifted.
And then adjust the fracture with your fingers, and if you feel the broken pieces, it is necessary that you bend over; and lift the lighter fragments, and if the bone cannot join due to any excess flesh, take one of the incision tools that you have; but put underneath the fracture this instrument, to ward off the swelling.
and it seems a spoon, and it is not too narrow, and let it be as wide as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the instrument; and have two handles, as you see, and let one be wide and the other narrow, just like the route of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut into the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt it is a hot abscess, fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
And if the hot abscesses come, apply a dressing with rose oil and in vinegar and wine, and put it on.
The treatment of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a plaster made from soft powder and egg whites, and apply light bandages on top, and put a splint underneath, if you are skilled in this. then take a very large bandage of a palm's width, then put a double layer of dressing on the bandages and the plaster; then take a subtle stick of two fingers' width and length, and wrap it around that bandaged area, so that the head of the bandage remains suspended. and set the staple on the bruise, and turn the bandage around the neck, and underneath the healthy skin, and underneath the affected skin; and the re-setting of each part, and when you see that the thread holds the bruise firmly, and you clearly see that the staple does not move above the broken bone, if you reward each day, and when the threads are loose, if it restrains;
and make the patient lie on their back, and you place when they sleep a small pillow beneath the shoulder blade, to raise the joint high; if you adjust the break of the clavicle by adjusting the alignment of the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the neck, and do not dislodge it so that bad accidents do not occur, until twenty days.
then reapply the poultice, if you see that it needs to be changed, and hold it in place and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is restored within twenty-eight days, and in less than any other remedies.
of the break of the shoulder
Before the shoulder breaks or becomes loose in its joint, and does not set properly except by touch; if you prepare according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can; then put on the joint powdered mill dust with plenty of egg white, and light bandages, and put on a double-layered cloth; then put on a wide and subtle strap, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the strap is not fastened at any point on the shoulder, attach it with linen threads, so that the strap is evenly aligned; and then bind it firmly with a strong bandage, so that the strap does not move from its place, and examine the ligament every day; and all the times it becomes loose, bind it again, and set the strap in its proper position, and ease the patient's side; and the shoulder is restored within twenty days or twenty-five. And when this number is accomplished, you will dislodge, and be certain, for it is not a thing that sets properly lightly.
And if a part of the bone protrudes beforehand, and not beneath the heart, if it swells up, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the force to appease an abscess hotly.
of the breaking of the foot
The foot is not always broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken within, it declines beneath, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks agility, and totters, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the fractures in the broken bone, and the sensation is not good.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and you put a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the sides of the ribs with your hands, and subtly adjust to make them even in all ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on emplasters and stoups of subtle salt, or another lighter dressing, and envelop it in a drapery, and tie it onto the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the round ligament to the back, and hold it firmly, and reward each hour the bandage, and if it relaxes, if it is dislocated; and if it wants to dislocate, by corrosion or by pruritus that comes to the limb, or pain or abscess, if you hasten, and remove the emplaster, and address what has come in ways of cures; then restore the emplaster, and hold it as long as it is healthy.
of the breaking of the ribs
Know that the breaking of the ribs only comes from great blows to the back, and at the inner chest, and do not feel it except through this, because they are slippery; and one feels it well in the interrogation of the two.
And the restorers are that you put even the breaking, as it is suitable. And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a bandage, so you have mastery of it.
And if the breaking of the ribs is declining inward, the patient feels great pain and prickling, just like from a blow, because the bone presses on the membrane; and it produces pointed pains, and all at once vomits a great deal of blood, and it is a grievous wound, and the old men have put great effort into it.
And if there are those who say that they can administer foods that inflate the belly, to soften the fracture by breaking.
We do not make this, because hot abscesses do not come to life, if they have not arrived. And if it has arrived, then it is healthy.
And some of them said that one puts ventouses on the limb, to suck out the excess matter, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the ventouse does not attract the surplus fluids from the limb due to the weakness of its placement.
And one must cover the limb with a warm oil in a hot bath, and place tents between the ribs to adjust the ligature inside, then it is cured of the treatment of pleurisy, of food and of medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot suffer by the vein which touches the fabric, and doubt is in the patient, then one must break into the broken rib area, and one must put an instrument to ward off the blood flow; and then one must cut into the vein, and treat lightly, and then cauterize the lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure with plasters, until they are healthy. And if aposteme chaus comes, then one puts warm drapels in rose oil, and puts them on the limb; and cures while the limb is healing from what needs to be cured, and applies soothing ointments on the rib area where it is needed, until they are healthy.
of the fracture of the neck
Sometimes a fracture comes to the bone of the neck, and soon it will swell; and also to the spine of the back. And when it happens to nobody, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take care to see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel. Know that it is mortally wounded in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when held firmly and steadily, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's wound is cured, as long as one takes care to cure it.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take care to see that the feet are softened, and if the accidents are which are in their hands, and on the back there is involuntary evacuation and ejection without consent; and when one has evacuated it from their belly, it ejects without consent. And when it is evacuated from their back and they want to sit, they cannot. Know that it is mortally wounded: do not labor in vain in their cure.
And if this accident does not come to them, it is the thing most lightly.
And the cure is that you apply if there is a hot abscess, if you put on the spine oil of roses or oil of Mayeu, as much as it may be appeased; then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and tie with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where they feel the pain, until they are healthy. And if some bone is dislocated, it must be covered on the heart; and take out the bone, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound, so that it is large, to a suture, then cure the wound by anointing with charcoal, until it is healthy; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the «head of the kowe», you put your pouchet in your left hand, and place it equally with your right hand on your power, then apply the emplaster and the staple above, so that you have mastery; then hold steady, and if there is a dislocated bone, make it thus, and take out, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Because the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it breaks, then there is a small amount of diminishment at the head; and make a long bandage, and decline to the parts, and comes to the patient's pain in the leg, and swelling, and inflames what is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, so that you are above the break; and know what is the break and the shape of it; and if the break is at the head solely, then place equally that break, so that it is in its natural shape.
And if the fracture is too long, or it declines inward, then make the patient sit on their belly, so that the restoration of this fracture may be facilitated. And when you have made it equal, put on the plaster, then put on a stick of wood or of oak, and hold the fracture steady so that it does not move; and apply the remedy beneath the ribs, until the binding is equal.
And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back.
And if the abscesses come to the surface, do not touch them, so that the abscesses may be calmed, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be held, so that there is no bad accident; and this is the method.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The joints are those which are between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of the methods: one of which is that you take a full fist of moderately-sized grasp, in this form:
And place the joints in their places, and lift them up high, and settle the patient on his seat; then put his broken arm on the stake, until it comes to the socket, and has a curve of wood, then place on some heavy thing or the ministers extend downwards; then put the mirrors to the breakage evenly with his hands together, so that the breakage returns as it should.
And the other method is that one supports the patient on his haunteril, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands the ministers that one should hold what is on the breakage with his hands, and the others should hold underneath all the joints, and extend each to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is too forceful, hold it. below the breakage, and on the breakage, and extend each of the ministrations to its part. And if the breakage is close to the head of the shoulder, then you must put. it. below the joint, and another towards the side, below the breakage; and also if the breakage is on the side, then you must put. it. lightly, without labor, until the breakage is even on the limb, and on the side; then set the breakage evenly, as it should be, and hold it steady, so that abscesses do not come.
And if abscesses come, do not hold it back just for seven days, and put a soft cloth in aisele and oil of rose, until the abscesses are appeased; then hold steady, and the manner of holding is that you put the plaster on the breakage, then assemble the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the dressing, and hold steady on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in a straight line, so nothing deflects it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use straight lines, and put on the breakage a straight line larger and stronger than the others, and have between each straight line two fingers of space, and let each straight line be so large that it passes over the breakage two fingers of each part; then hold steady on the straight lines, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter, more strongly and less in a circular motion.
And if you see the positioning of the stars and the constriction, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, if you leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each of two days, so that the swelling does not inflame and come to the place, or the nourishments cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted. If you address it, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, do not unbind it sooner than after two days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and place his hands on his stomach; and put under the joint a plain cushion of equal height, and look at each hour of the day or night, so that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or the bonds are not loosened; if you address it by the power of medicine, and give the food that we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food is of primary subtlety; and when it begins to recover, let it be abundant. And it is customary that the joint and leg should be recovered in 40 days or so; and then one must unbind and administer baths and medicines of ointments to heal the limb. And if the constriction is lazy and numb, let it stay bound for a day or two months.
of the breaking of the arm
Here is the translation:
When the small fracture is broken, the restorations are light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are broken and joined together. If it's the small fracture that's broken solely, then it needs to be extended lightly, and set evenly.
And if it's the large fracture, then it needs to be stretched more forcefully; and extend it on the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and let the small fingers lower than the others, and so the patient is crossed over himself, and the cushion is placed before him higher, so the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers like a arm to the part below his hand, or at the joint, and another minister above. And then set the mirrors evenly, according to its best form.
And if it's a break in pieces, then put each one in its place, and if there is no disordered part that can be grasped by the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make it like the bone, as we have said before.
And with the break in a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; take the care.
Here is the translation: And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, as prickly heat that happens to the limb, it is necessary that you apply warm water to the limb, so that the prickly heat may be alleviated; and let the limb not be tightly bandaged. And then resume the strapping, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones disunited, and similar things, if you address them.
And if you take heed that the nourishments cannot come to the limb, because it is too constricted, it is necessary that you soften them a little, and let thus some hours pass, until the nourishments can flow in, and then strap it.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not untie them until twenty days or so. Or meanwhile, then he puts his hands on his neck, and his neck is even, and beware of movement and degeneration, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or forty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Here is the translation:
And when the plant of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient be crossed, and stands straight in front of him equally; then he puts his hand on the extended toe, and extends the ministers the broken bones, and puts them equal with the mirrors, so they are well joined; and he puts the plaster and the stoups, so abscesses do not come, then he puts a staple according to the quantity of the blood; and it is enveloped in a linen cloth.
And if the break is in the palm of the hand towards the belly, make a sphere of linen cloth, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken hand; and then bind with a long piece of linen cloth, and let the staple be of soft skin as big as the hand, and bind, so it is necessary.
And if the break is in the finger, it is necessary that you put a staple above, and another below in the palm, so that the hand is covered and straight, then bind everything together around the hand, and tighten the bandage between the two.
And if the break comes to one of our fingers, it is a pouch, set it equal, as it is necessary; and bind with the palm, and see if you put a small straight staple to lift the break, and do not move; and if the break is in other fingers, like in the index or one of the others, set it equal, and bind with the healthy finger that is next; or you bind all together in a holder, which holds well, or you put on a staple, as in a pouch; and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of hot abscesses, and beware of what comes, as I have said.
of the broken hip
The bone of the hip is often broken, and it can be seen when it turns in front and behind; and the restoration is done by binding above the breakage, and another below. And the patient puts his face upwards, then each minister extends his bond to his equal part; and it's when the breakage is within the bone.
And if the breakage is close to the root of the hip, then one of the bonds should be towards the thigh, and the other bonds below the breakage. And also if it's close to the knee, then the bonds should be above the knee, and the extension downwards; then put the mirrors on the bone equally with its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, so that abscesses do not form there.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down then return to your work and your treatment; the book is made in such a manner. It is necessary that you bandage the fracture thus: bend a double bandage in two or three layers, and leave the surplus, then turn the leg so that the ankles come to the root of the nail, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg, from below the knee, and make the end of the thread above; then turn on the leg and on the thigh the bandage, then put it on the fracture thus, and place a stick on the bone of the leg; then fill in the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft drapery to equalize the constriction, then start to tighten strongly two or three turns around the fracture; and when you go above the fracture, and there is less constriction; then take away the end of the thread that you inserted between the leg and the thigh, and untie the sticks that are above, then return below to the head of the thread, until you come to the foot; and it will stay in place, so that it does not move from its place, then let it be thus, so that no abscess or swelling occurs.
And if it happens, then dislocate it, and address what comes next, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, then it is necessary to extract them, if one can; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to break the bone, and make a new route; and the treatment will be as we have said, until it is healthy.
And no time is the thigh broken thus as one puts sticks, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration made thus, it does not bother the patient.
And it is known that the pulse is restored at the same hour, or almost less or almost more, according to the diversity of complexions.
of the gutter of the knee
It is known that in the gutter of the knee there is almost a break, but it often splits apart. And if it breaks, then it's only a crack, or a perforation, and it has a complete wound, and feels a wound, and this feels very good.
And the restoration is when one puts back together what is broken at its joints, so that it is assembled as it should be; then put in the plaster, and you put a round stake, if you are skilled in this, and hold it steady as it should be, then reward all the dispositions that we have said about other breaks, like hot abscesses and similar things; then put to each accident what it needs, so that it is healthy.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "straight" and the other is called "fibula"; and all the same fracture comes as it does to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is just like that of the arm equally, and the operations are all alike.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns from all parts.
And if the slender bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, it feels great pain, and one sees it well; and turns afterwards. Then one must make an extension, and sets it evenly, and lays the staples evenly; but however, it happens that the break is ugly, and there are many pieces, so that the extension should be minor and lighter; and adjusts according to its virtue.
And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints that cover the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee to the foot; then wrap two linen bandages above and below, and lay them in the middle, and at this point do not allow the leg to decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one will hinder the length of the leg, which is of wood, and they put it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly make a cast for the break where there is a wound; and remove each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident; so heal until it is healthy.
of the break of the bones in the foot
At the villa, there is no break, but the bones in the foot sometimes break and sometimes two pieces, and it does not happen that they are shattered in many dispositions.
And if it happens that you have two broken bones, and you see the bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if they wanted to walk, and now place your foot on the joint where the bones are lifted, then press until they return to their places; then apply a plaster and bandages above, and place under the belly of the foot a small table with a plain surface, then hold the foot firmly in place, then you have enveloped drapels around, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days will have passed, release the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken, whether dislocated.
And if there are any of the two broken bones, restore them, just as we have said about the fingers of the hand; then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little larger, then place under the foot that small table I mentioned, and hold it firmly in place; and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, put on each finger a splint according to its quantity, enveloped in a linen drapel, and hold the small table under the foot; and let it be situated above the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, since we have spoken; and attend to each accident as it is necessary.
of the break of the bone one should prick
When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, if you make her sit enlarged, then incline it to the back part, and hold it from behind; then fill the bag with cotton, and put in it as large as .i. sto; then undress the woman, and lift the back little by little, and then jumps the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with the sto; and when she wants to urinate, if you remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and thus do seven or eight days: if the break will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of berries, and tie a string to the pertus, and pour all the bladder into the nature; then blow into the string forcibly, until the bladder is inflated inside: the nature will return the break; then fill it with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until it be sane.
And when the bone of the thumb of a man or woman is broken, if you restore it thus as we have said for the bone of the thigh; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study and use into my book. For the break signifies more dispositions in the right way of restoration: then give the donation.
In the rod, when it is broken, take an eye of a bird and put it on the rod; then wrap a cloth around, and leave it eight days or nine days, and it will be healthy soon.
from breaking with wound
It is necessary for one who has broken with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be healed now, so that the healings we have mentioned testify to this.
And if the wound is healthy, if you apply vitriol, and you have nothing else, then recommence to restore the break in the same hour, or that day, lest abscesses come.
And if abscesses come, let the restoration wait until the ninth day, so that the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, lest you cause a bad accident.
And if the broken bone appears above the uncovered skin of the heart, it is necessary that you put it in place gently with your hands, in slight extension.
And if the extensions do not appear suitable for putting in your hands, then take hold of this instrument which is made of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and it is necessary to grip it with three or four fingers, according to what is needed in each cure of fracture; and let it be strong and a little thick, so that it does not collapse under compression on the member during your operation, and let it be angled beforehand, and thick from the middle forward, thus.
And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved head be placed above the apparent bone; and it is bent once, so that it revolves, and let them be equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, it is necessary that you shape the head of the bone, so that the instruments have possession of it.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then take hold of an instrument suitable for this, or incision or sawing, according to your power; then remove what is stuck in the bone of rough prominences and small scales.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do so that it is in its place, then apply a black styptic wine, and properly if it is in this state; and do not put on the raw wound or anything else where oil is, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer these when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it completely around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the breakage; and many times fools have done this, and have brought death or corrosion to the patient.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that evil accidents may come, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then do not put these on it; but wrap around, in the place of these, thick dressings, and bind them. And when you see afterwards, either a day or two, to anoint the wound with a bow, then remove what you had put on at all cost, and apply gentle ointments, as we have applied tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
And it is necessary that you unbind the limb three times a day, in the morning and in the evening, so that it may be loose and healthy.
And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the bone is lightly touched.
And if it happens often, and it cannot be put back in place but repeatedly breaks the bone, because there are small pieces of bone, therefore it is necessary that you treat the wound with tension, and remove all these separated pieces that cause that pain.
And if fistula comes to the bone, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in this chapter beforehand. And when the bone is broken, and opens into the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not treat it lightly, because often death occurs, but let it ripen for a while; perhaps it will heal by itself after 20 days or 30 days, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it alone.
of the bruises that come onto the skin
They come many times after the health of the breakage, especially when it's near the joint, and the bad thing is to see the figure of the limb; and by chance they cannot make the limbs do their natural works.
Take warning then that it is fresh: if you administer medicines stippled, such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acaice, and similar others, so that you take none of these things, or all together, and confit them with wine stippled or with abundant water or with oil; and put them on the affected area in stupes, and hold it well, and do not loosen it for many days; and then remove it, and restart another, until the nodations are eliminated; or you hold onto a piece of well-made plaster; because the property of plaster is that it eliminates all inflammation from the limbs; and if the nodation is already converted into hardness like stone, and it needs to be removed, so scrape above, and make the superfluity apparent; or you take it to any rasp, until it is eliminated, and the cure until it is healthy.
When the breakage of the bone is restored, and remains after the limb is weak and subtle, it happens for many causes: because one is that it was tied too tightly, and not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many ligaments, and they could not bring nourishment to the limb; or because of multiple abscesses; or because of too great movements, not in their time; or because there is little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient lean, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath, and give joy and license; then put poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts to the great nourishment, and the rose water often tides, until the nourishment flows into the limb; and returns to its natural figure.
two limbs twisted after the healing
When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone opens, and the shape of the limb is ugly, it does not preserve its natural function: do not believe those fools who say that one must break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and these works are condemned, and great evils come from them, and sometimes death; however, if the nodations and torture are fresh, then it is necessary that they be aroused by warm water, or soft mollifying herbs are applied, such as leaves of vismalve, and roots, and mellilot, and similar things; and make a mollifying plaster, well done, and take the musculating of vismalve, and mix it with fat of geline or oil of sisament, and apply it thus; or take greasy figs, and crush them with fine flour of colon, and similar medicines that alleviate the swelling.
And no time is it necessary to remove the nodation by constantly and continuously rubbing with moist hands. And so adjust the movement of the limb at each hour.
And if the twisted part is wrapped and hardened, like a stone, and it needs to be opened with iron, if it is necessary to cover just up to the bone, in subtle and gentle incision; and apply compression and attention in the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to none, if it is necessary to now reposition the joint in its proper place.
Because delay causes the eyes to become inflamed, and sometimes they reset at a joint of the body; for this reason it is not suitable to move it at the hour when it is inflamed: often it brings spasms and other pains;
In every way, when it happens, make the patient healthier, then leave them, until the abscesses and ulcers are appeased; then raise the member with warm water and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each member as the treatment comes into its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the joints down to the feet.
of the jaws
Here is the translation:
When the dislocation is small, it returns through better arrangements.
And if it is entire and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
and in such a way that the minister touches the head of the patient, and inserts his fingers like a pouch into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is of .ij. parts; and the other two hands should be firm, to set evenly; and instruct the patient to relax their jaws, and move them in every direction.
And the fingers make it even, until it returns to its place.
And if the shoulder is injured, meanwhile it is the two jawbones together, if they are affected by warm water and oil, so that they reset lightly; do not delay in resetting, as we have said.
And when they are reset equally, and the patient's mouth closes well, not to soften, if you put on softened draplets made of rose oil and wax, then bind lightly with many ligatures;
and let the patient sleep on their back, and their arms are steady between two cushions, so that they do not move either to the right or to the left, nor overexert themselves in any way, but take light food, until the pains are alleviated, and the jaws are relaxed;
and then eat what they want lightly, and do not struggle to open their mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well relaxed and healthy.
And if the jaws cannot be reset to their place within an hour, and are not converted to their natural state, then fever and severe pain come, and perhaps a solution of stomach discomfort, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a prediction; and many times the one who has it dies in 8 days.
of the violence
The violence cannot dislodge the bone from its place within the continuity of the limb and the foot, and it is often dislocated at the joint, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and stretches out his arms; and then presses the place firmly with his palm, and it will return to its place; then put on the splint and bandage, and hold it in place.
and the head which is towards the side of the back cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it dislocates sometimes, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold steady, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healthy;
and thus the same is reset the head of the shoulder, when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in four ways: one is that it dislocates at the part of the joint below; and the second is at the part of the foot; and sometimes it dislocates above, and this happens rarely;
and do not dislocate behind the shoulder, and do not dislocate within the sinews; and often dislocate down towards the bones, especially to those who have little flesh, because to those who have little flesh, it quickly becomes numb; to those who have sufficient flesh, it becomes numb at the points, and returns to the points.
And sometimes it happens that some men have a blow or fracture, and the shoulder becomes inflamed with a hot abscess, and they believe it is dislocated by this.
It is necessary then that you test it, as long as you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that the dislocation occurs when it falls towards the bone, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a clear diversity. and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and beneath the axis the head of the shoulder, as if it were a single bone; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move with any movement;
and thus, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly at the axis;
and this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset, when it is recent, or if the patient is ill.
And the method is that the assistants lift the patient's hand up high, then place their fingers beneath the axis, and lift the joint with force upwards to the bone; and the assistants lift the hand, and stretch it upwards, then place it beneath; if it will come back into place quickly.
Here is the translation:
Then the patient should be placed on their back, and a straight stick of equal length is put underneath the shoulder blade, not too soft nor too hard, then the doctor's fingers are placed on the stick, and the top of the patient's shoulder is lifted gently, and the doctor treats the affected hand.
and another assistant holds the patient's head, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder will return to its proper place now, and if you see that it is reset in this manner.
and it is necessary that you make present a man who is stronger than the patient; and he should be straight towards the side, and push the shoulder blade underneath the patient's shoulder, and lift the shoulder high up, so that the patient hangs in the air. and another assistant treats the affected hand downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, then weigh him down with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And you reset it in another way: and it is that one fixes a long stick into the ground, so that the head of the shoulder is also adjusted like a pestle, and neither too large nor too slender. then it should be placed beneath the patient, but so that the drapery is softly spread above, and the patient is lying down in a long wooden bed; then his hand should be extended downward from the other side in a straight line, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then make this treatment: take a stick of two cubits and three fingers in length, which has the head bent to enter obliquely under the armpit, according to this form:
then place the stick of the bed with softly spread drapery, so that the bed does not touch the patient, then put it under the armpit of the patient; and extend one's arm on the stick of the bed, and place the shoulder on the stick, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on a small stool of a chair of suitable size, and extend the hands downward, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is in, however it may be, it is necessary that you put under the axle a sphere of equal wool, then put the plaster made of powder of soft millet, with incense and album of egg, on the entire shoulder and around, then hold underneath the axle firmly, and turn the ligature on the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let it remain thus.
And it is necessary that you feed him little by little, as much as the limb is comforted, for he will heal more quickly; and then feed more afterwards, five or six days, and move him; and if it is strengthened and not softened, then he is healthy.
And if the joint is weakened from its place due to moisture that has entered, or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cauterizations at three points, as it is shown before in the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after five or six days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is seized, stretched out, or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation which is towards the foot and the fingers, or behind, if it is done by impulse, and stretching of hands, and there is administered another treatment; and cure until it is healthy.
And if after the healing, stiffness comes to the limb, and slowly in movement, so the patient bathes many times, until that stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the neck
You know that the joint of the neck is dislocated at points, and at points it returns; and it is dislocated in all parts, and similarly before and behind, and the dislocation is not repeated, for one sees well and feels well; and it is alleviated according to each shape. And when you join the injured limb with the healthy one, then it can be seen openly. For the joint is crooked and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it thus so that the abscesses do not come to life, for if the abscesses come to life, it would be grievous to reset; and by chance it cannot be reset entirely, especially when it is at the back; if it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration is, when it is such that you can reset it, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and its arm be spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the injured limb, above and below, and put the joint together with its small pieces, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and fixes at the root of the palm the injured limb which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, strongly stretch it out; and it is that the two ministers extend the arm, and tighten the two ministers, so that it does not move at extension; then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer long and wide.
and when the mirror looks at the joint of his hand, if he anoints it with some oil to mollify the joint, then put the joint in its former shape, so that it recovers.
and when it is in its place, put a dry plaster on with an egg white, and hold it firmly, and bind the arm at the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then remove it.
And if the joint is closed in its place, remove the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, restart the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then remove it.
And if it is very painful after the relocation of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub well, and press until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a fat sheep's bladder, then let it be for a day and a night, then remove it, and make them enter into a bath. and when it sweats, rub the joint promptly, then put the bladder back on, and then enter into a bath; and do this two or three times, until it is healthy; and if you see, then put on a warm moist fomentation with butter, and hold it in place; if it returns to its proper disposition.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and its return is easy, more so than the other joints However, it must be reset promptly, at the same hour that it dislocated, so that the limb is not swollen, or an abscess forms there.
And the reminder is that you should put the injured hand on a table, and stretch out the little fingers, and direct them evenly, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and bends it until it regains shape.
However, it is necessary that you examine if it is well in its place; then put the injured part of his hand on a table at extension and at bending. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the injured part of his hand on the table, and direct it to the appearance of the joint. If it regains shape now, that's good.
If not, then hold the swelling of abscesses gently, and let it settle thus without recommencing.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot set it back in its place after several days, the twisted joint remains.
and do not annoy the patient further because as long as the hand is numb, and cannot grasp anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; if there is no other means of relief than to cauterize in this case, and by chance it may be worth nothing else.
And when the hand is in its place, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and leave it for five days, then remove it and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no swelling, then apply warm water, and rub it until it is healthy.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated in any direction, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the belly.
Then the fingers are stretched, and push the dislocation into its pouches as far as it returns, then support the head of the finger, and bend towards the part where it is disjoined.
and let it go in the morning, and then make it even that day; and do not leave it, as we have said, and loosen the joint from day to day, and make it move, and reattach it; and do this frequently, until it is straight.
and thus you do it, if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, so that it be healthy; and thus you do it, when it is dislocated elsewhere.
because of the dislocation of the spine of the back
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of healing, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations suddenly occur without consent, and cannot be held back, and many times some members are softened, or the hips or the two arms or joints.
And many times the shinbone is moved to four places; that which moves at the back is called "gilbositez":
The treatment is that you rewind where the gilbositez has come from childhood: if there is no treatment or healing of the entire tot.
And that which comes from a fall or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cures through grand words, where there is not much great benefit;
But I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gibbosity that comes to the worst before, nobody is healed;
and also that which comes straight into the ribs, and one cannot cure those except for that which properly comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient should be stretched out on his face in a straight line, and have someone holding him from behind, so he does not fall;
then fix the stick at the head on the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a bandage around the sick person's hips, and another around the thighs, and around the knees;
and a minister knows the bonds, one at the head and others at the feet, among the joints;
and be well fastened, the joint as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine forcefully, until it strengthens.
And if it does not strengthen through this cure, take a table of three long arms, and place it beneath the patient, and let the patient be on their side, and put the head of the table beneath the patient, then place the middle of the table on the spine; and place the mirrors their feet on the other head of the table, and press well, until it strengthens to its place; and if you see, make it turn with the turning device that turns by hand.
And it is that you place two splints on the head of the patient's arm, and towards the feet two others, and between each splint, above and below, a hand span of length.
and have in each splint a hole, where the turning rod passes, and the splints are firmly on the ground, so they do not move; and between each two splints have one turning splint, because the turning rod turns, and have in two turnings two small splints of a hand span of length, to turn the turning rod.
and then put the bandage that is among the splints on the turning rod towards the head, and the other bandage towards the feet on the other turning rod, and each of the ministers turns their turning rod to the whole bandage, and the masters set the spine even as we have said.
And when it is even, then put on the emplaster of desiccative with a lot of egg white, and then the poultices, and then the staple of a tablet of two inches of length, that grips the place of the gouty joint and the healthy part of the spine, then bind with a bandage, as we have said, and use the subtle nourishment of the patient, so that it may be healthy.
and if something comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer soothing and comforting medicines, with the steel that we mentioned before; and never do they administer in a piece of a poultice,
and never does the appearance come in the rear of the dorsal spine, and one believes that it is a dislocation; and it's the bone that opens, because one should not have any presumption: perhaps death may suddenly occur.
of the dislocations of the hip
You should know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come out of dislocations suddenly, not as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to .iii. parties: within and below, and in front and behind; and further within there are hollows, and a little dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation is that when one joins the injured leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens up more the injured knee than the healthy one, and the injured one cannot bend its knee to the fire. and it is the limbs that are afflicted with a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the signs of the one to whom it comes to the fainting, are that these accidents are contrary to those before.
And the signs of the one who has a dislocation in front, are that they stretch their leg according to the accomplishment; however, they do not bend their knee without pain, and if you try to make them walk, they cannot go forward, and retain their urine, and inflame the groin, and when they want to, it passes above the heel.
And the signs of the one who has it behind, it is that he cannot stretch his knee, nor bend, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is displaced beneath the ribs.
The reminders of this kind of dislocation are that you should recognize that dislocations are ancient, and they remain according to their disposition, if there is no effective remedy; and it does not seem that he has a presumption.
And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of three kinds of dislocation, you hasten that you turn the joint, and stretch inward and outward, and move to the right and left; by chance if it returns, and there is no need for another remedy.
And if it does not return in this manner, it seems that you should apply a strong minister, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee. and another minister stretches his hand above in such a way that he puts his hands beneath his haunches, then tightens with a soft bandage on the thigh; and another ties the top of the lien;
and they stretch above and below all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This manner of stretching is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, then one must put a cure on its similarity. When the dislocation is in the pardedens, then it is necessary to support the patient on his healthy side, then place the bandage at the root of the thigh, and the limb that is beneath the ankle, then stretch the bandage above towards the ankle, and towards the forcele;
Then take another minister by the arms and embrace the large joint of the hip patient, and extend it to its former shape: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft lien on the two heels, and on the two knees, so that the injured leg is extended two inches more than the others.
Then be suspended from the top of a pole, and be one arm's length above the ground; then command a minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let another minister be suspended with the patient, who embraces the shape of the hip, for the joint returns now quickly.
And when the dislocation is at the former shape, you should adjust the patient, as we have said in the one who has gibbosity, and extract the lien properly from the injured leg, and from the foot also.
then apply the cauterio to the head and another to the feet, then place the cauterio between the thighs of the patient in the shape; and have ready moist cloths around, so that they do not blister the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the doctors place equal to his hand the dislocation.
If it returns, that's good. If not, put on the table, and press thus as we have said in the gibbosity, and adjust the patient to the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, you must stretch out the affected leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and put the doctor's hand on the healthy side, then press with the other hand, and extend down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the lower part, it does not need to stretch the patient downwards, nor lift them up from the ground, but rather it needs to be as if the joint was dislocated at the lower part, just as we have said about lying on .ij. cushions; and it should be on his face, and the bandage is stretched out as we have said before, and one must press down on the joint at the table;
and it will be at a point when the patient stretches out his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hips, and put on the plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the joint does not move;
and rest for 2 or 3 days, then remove it, and put on the plaster; and if you see that they are even, bind it, as before, and leave it for 2 days; then remove it, and make them walk gently, until the limb is comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knees are dislocated in three ways: that is to say, within, forward, and backward; and they do not dislocate at all in front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg to their thigh, and if it does not adhere to their thigh, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend their leg as much as they can, and place your back against their face, and put your foot against theirs.
Here is the translation:
and put the plaster on, and make the leg straight at the hip, and bind them together strongly for 3 or 4 days, then remove it; and do not trouble the patient to get up, until the limb is comforted.
And if the limb is not in place, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the ankle, until it be healthy.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it pulls towards the part where it is dislocated.
The fracture is easier, and one must extend it gently with their hands when it is slightly swollen.
And when it is dislocated from the whole, then you must make the patient sit upright, and tighten it with a bandage, firmly above the ankle.
Then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left hand. Do this several times, then stretch it upwards, and bind the foot well above.
and do it several times, as we have said, by bending and pulling the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, restart the work, for it will return;
and if it cannot return thus, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix a strap firmly in the earth between their thighs, and wrap the drapels around, so that they do not harm the patient;
then pull the ministers to the thigh, and another minister stretches out the foot with his hands or with a strap, so that he holds it at the neck of the foot; then stretch out each minister equally, and the strap is placed between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when one stretches it;
then set the mirrors equal to the dislocation at his hands, and another minister touches the healthy leg above, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at a point, set the plaster and bandages above, and hold firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and watch out for the tendons that are on the back of the knee, so the ligaments are not too stretched.
then let it be for two or three days, and if the ligaments are swollen, hold firmly; then loosen it on the third day or on the fourth, and delay going to see the patient for four days. and if he goes beyond that term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses swell up, it is necessary that you treat them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
of two
When the fingers are dislocated, it is necessary to stretch them nicely without exertion, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocations are in any of the toes or feet, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and put your foot on what opens up at these joints, then press your foot firmly, until it sets back in place.
and when it is even, and it does not open at all, then put the flat of the foot on a table next to the .ij. head, then hold it firmly, and let it .iij. hours, then dislocate it; and make it rest, until it is healthy.
of wound and of dislocation together
When a wound comes with a dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patients die.
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, be wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and be piteous and merciful and slow, not hasty.
and you should begin with calming treatments for hot abscesses, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, so that the hot abscesses may come to life;
and when the limb is in its place, then administer calming treatments for hot abscesses, and heal the wound, as it is fitting, with ointments of desiccated herbs;
and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are dislocated, then reset them, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
and you beware of entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worthy of you according to your Creator, and for the salvation of your arm and your body. Amen.
