You, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the latest in the science of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have finished it according to his explanations and by his declarations. And it has come to me in vision that I shall complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and estranged from all, so the science has perished and been decapitated, and nothing remains of it except for small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are shut down, and knowledge is being alienated.
Or it seems to me that I should bring it back to life together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of cauterizing instruments and other tools of work along with the adjustment of declaration and preparation for use, as is necessary.
And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is estranged. And it is necessary for him who undertakes this to climb up in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and tendons and the number of joints, and the movement and rest of the muscles and veins, and from where they issue.
And therefore Hippocrates says that the name without work is much, and with work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
We tell you in the introduction to this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously said, beware lest he err and kill men; thus I have seen many of those who undertake this science abandon their science and lack experience.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut away an abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of her neck; therefore so much blood issued forth that the woman fell dead between his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in an old man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he took with him a piece of the bladder and the man died within three days.
And I had already been summoned to treat it, and saw the patient's condition and the largeness of the stone, and knew well that they were going to die from it.
And I saw another surgeon who took on the care of a duke from our land who had his leg broken, and with the break he had an open wound; and the ignorant surgeon stretched the break over the wound so tightly that it was held fast by strong bandage, and did not leave any room for healing, and thus left it to be finished; and he commanded him not to remove it at all; and thus it remained until the leg became inflamed and the feet came to ruin.
I was summoned to come to him, and I hastened to come and loosen the leg; and when I loosened it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But all the same, the corruption had already been confirmed in the member, and could not be healed; and the corrosion did not cease to spread through the member until the member was completely lost.
And I saw another surgeon who burst an inflamed abscess, and then inflamed it through the wickedness of his lordship.
For when a chancre is free from melancholic humor, it does not agree that one should touch it with iron unless it is in such a place where all that is corrupted can be entirely removed.
And therefore, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, one where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore it is necessary that you keep yourselves thus, so that the foolish surgeon may not be able to speak evil of you.
So take up your arms in caution, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that through the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave the frightening illnesses of grievous health; and lay down your arms from those things that make you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galien says in some of his warnings: "Do not take on a bad disease unless you are called a foolish surgeon."
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauterization and medicine cauterization, and it is the chapter organized from head to feet; and about the forms of instruments, and cauterizing instruments, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about poultices and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter organized with the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from head to feet, and with the forms of instruments.
Furthermore, so that we remember the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of aid and harm of each complexion.
I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest and most subtle science and hidden reply; and many wise men have spoken about this and agreed with it; and I am satisfied with their words, for I fear the length.
I say that cauterization helps universally to all complexions where there is matter, except for two complexions: namely, the hot and dry complexion with matter, and the dry and cold complexion with matter.
In the hot and dry complexion with matter, some have divided their opinion and said that cauterization is great aid; and others have said the opposite: that cauterization does not help with diseases that come from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be cured with hot disease by heat or dryness; and that man who said the opposite says that cauterization does great aid to hot and dry diseases that come in the bodies of men. For when you understand the body of man and its moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it to be true on some occasions through experience.
Et toute voie, not venture at all unless it is by him who has tried it, and who knows through long usage the book of cauteries, and the diversity of temperaments of men, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and the chances and the pace of time; from other temperaments we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the surgeons assembled and agreed on the cautery.
And know, son, that cautery together with fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater benefit than burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and does not come to another member unless it is applied to the part that is burned, and does no harm to another member if it be named.
Burning medicines come from one member to another, spreading and causing great harm to the sick person, and by chance kill the patient.
The fire because of its excellence and the goodness of its substance does not do this unless there is excessiveness.
And I have found this for you through experience and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was based on the truth of things; and therefore I excuse myself from the length of the speech, for it does not please me to take away from you the secret which is related to fire, and the quality of the work, how it repels diseases of the body, as philosophers say in demonstrating; or accept it into your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauteries should be done and selected patients.
And I say that cautery is suitable in all times, because the ensuing harm is mitigated by the aid of the cautery; and likewise if the cautery is for necessary and pressing pains that cannot wait until greater evil comes to the member.
And never think this, dear son, as foolish surgeons do; for the disease that is cured by cautery has no return; and they say so, but it is not as they think, because cauterization is nothing more than medicine that changes the complexion, dries up the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is worth more than medicine for its haste and value of its work and sovereignty.
And it is possible that the disease may come at times according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue; and are gathered in him the superfluities through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless it is cauterization administered in a place where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as cauterizations for denseness for pain, and similar things, and that kind of pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauterization is worth anything after medicine, but their intention is false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer ways of cure in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it works. Therefore it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish surgeons.
The ancients said that cauterization with an instrument of gold is more effective than one of iron, and they did not say this except for the quality of the gold and its excellence in substance; and they said that the location of the cautery does not make a difference, but this is not true because I have tried it, and I have found that it is true for some people; and cauterization with gold is worth more than one of iron, as they said.
And yet, when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know how hot it is by the color of the gold, and it has soon cooled down; and if one heats it too much, they burn themselves; and thus there is enough hindrance.
And therefore we use iron cauterization because we have found it to be suitable for our work.
Or I have ordered this chapter from the beginning to the end, so that the way may be more light and easy to find.
of the olive-cautery
This cautery is worth for moistness and coldness on the head, and there are two ways in which it is done because of a disease that is called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and because of multitude of dreams and pain of denseness and pain of the throat, and likewise for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, sodality, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a solvent medicine, cleansing the head three or four times, according to what the virtues and age and habit of the patient can withstand; and then make the patient's head clean.
And then make the patient sit with their arms crossed between your hands, and put their hands on his shoulders; after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and let your fingers go where they may, so that it bleeds a little, and then cauterize the "olivare" cautery, whose form is this:
And place it on the marked spot with ink, and make your hand move gently up and down in a twisting motion; then lift your hand suddenly, and reward the spot if you see bone 1/4 inch small; and if you don't see it, repeat the cautery until you do see it as I told you; after that, take 1/4 of a thread, and place it in a soft and wet cotton cloth inside, and place it on the spot, and leave it for 3 days; after that, apply moistened linen to the wound, and leave it on until the scab is removed; after that, cure the ointment called "tetrafarmacon" until it is healed.
And the ancients said that when the wound remains open longer, it purges more thoroughly; and therefore it is more effective.
And some of them said that one should cauterize until part of the bone is burned, and then stop what has been burned from the bone, and be cured.
And others say that one should cauterize so much above, and push it so hard that the bone is worn away as wide as a vertebra that women put in their corsets because the humors are moved outwards; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; after that, one should cure and soothe.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be good in every case, except for some people who have a predisposition to fear; and it seems to me that I should abandon it; for the joints are weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we observe in other members; and likewise when the patient's joint is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salubrious and purging for me, and this is what I use with great success.
of ancient pain of the head
When chronic pain comes to the head and lasts a long time, then the patient should use year's balm and pills that are called "cochie", and purgatives for the head, oils, and plasters; and if one makes the cautery that we have previously mentioned, it is not worth it.
Take care if the patient's head is of a strong nature, and it is not too cold; then cauterize under that same cautery as we have previously mentioned.
After, make a cautery on each horn of the head just to the bone, as we have previously mentioned, and make one cautery at the place called "vasselz"; and is one place where one puts poultices; and hold your hand so that you do not see right up to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in the others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauteries on the horns be more subtle than those used for the middle part of the head, and that's the shape:
of the head cautery When sudden pain comes to one part of the head and the disease spreads all the way to the eye, and the patient's head is purged by mundane medicines, and all the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases are done, and none of it helps: then he makes cauterizations according to two manners, namely medicine and fire.
The medicine cauterization is when you take a dose of aloes, remove the rind and repackage it into one pot as two heads, then make a temple incision where the pain stays in such a way that you can put the dose of aloes under the skin; and when it has been replaced, secure it well and leave it like that for twelve hours; then release it and let the wound be like that for two or three days; then put a poultice on with butter until purpura appears.
After the ointment cure, until it is healed; and if you see that this is done with some burning medicines that I have written or in the treatise on burning medicines.
The fire cauterization is when you do it according to this manner. Heat the cauterizing iron, which has the shape:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or if there is one small piece of charcoal, and in it, there is a small appearance; and you put it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly, until half of the esparto of the key is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and pour out an abundance of blood.
After, put cotton in awe of silk, and put it on the spot for three days; then put wet cotton in butter, and then cure the spot with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", at all points, and take care not to cover the artery in this migraine that is not ancient.
of migraine
When you treat migraine as we have previously said in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that neither the medicine nor fire cautery before mentioned is sufficient, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and then sign over the painful spot a line half an inch long, and once remove your hand, and strain so that you do not cover the artery and come right up to the bone; and take care of the jawbone which moves when eating, and the nerves have regard for the movement and that spasm does not occur in the patient; and take care also of the bleeding of blood from the artery when it is cut, or if there is great fear and especially in one who has not studied and experienced; and let the work go in my way; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
And if you see that these cauterizations are not sufficient for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize in the middle of the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
of the pain in the ears due to coldness
When pain comes to the ear due to coldness, and one has worked with solvent medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat this cautery called "poins", which has the shape:
After, prick all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move a little above the root of the ear after you have marked the spot to be treated; and have 10 pricks around each ear; then cure the spot until it is healed.
of the torture of the mouth
Torture that must be cured by cauterization is not other than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of disease; and do not make any cauterization on similar things that come from heat and spasms of nerves.
When you cure this similar torture that moves from phlegm of idres and espurgements of the head and gargarism, and it doesn't help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one in the root of the ear, and another a little further back from the temple, and the third in the joining of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery near the head of the ear above a small piece below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as an inch; and leave the cautery so that half of the esparto of the key is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery:
And this is the same shape as the "cultellare" that we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the knives be a little thicker; after, cure the spot just as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one in the spot called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last one on the mouth of the stomach; and let it be cured just as we have said before.
from lethargy
to this illness it is fitting to give the patient great years and powders that are beneficial for the brain; after, rinse the chief of the patient thoroughly, and place the poultice of mustard on the back of the head as written in the treatise on poultices; and this is the manner of the cautery: do it just as I have said.
If he is cleansed thus, it is good; and if not, make three cauterizations around the head from top to bottom as far as the collarbone, leaving a space of two inches between each one; and cure it just as the others, and if you see that it is swollen or the patient is suffering, make one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and cure until he is well; and let the cautery which is called "olivare" be such as I have said before.
from chill of the head It is fitting that the head be cleansed with years and with what we have said before; after, rinse the head of the patient, then make a cautery in the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is spreading, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most of the boil is burned away, and lift your hand; after, cure until he is well, and let the cautery which is called "olivare" be such as we have said before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use a cautery unless they are suffering from phlegmatic humor, and it is fitting to cleanse the brain with years and other remedies that we have said in the division when the patient is large and suffering greatly from poor medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot suffer it, make him gargle and chew on something that will cleanse the brain often with good meat; after, rinse the head in the middle, and make one cautery according to what we have said before, and one on the nape, and on each horn; and if the patient is spreading and suffering greatly, make cauterizations as I have said for someone who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let it be an olive cautery according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is a child, make one subtle cautery according to this manner:
When due to melancholy the superfluities or moisteries are corrupted and become thick phlegm, then make the same type of cauterizations as we have said for someone who has paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink that will cleanse the brain, according to what it is before in the division.
After rinse the head of the patient; after make one linen bandage well made, like a circle, and put it on the head; and let the patient be crossed, and be well held from all sides; after present the liniment, and anoint with butter from ancient burdock; and heat it over moderate fire, so that the patient can bear to have it poured in; after empty the circle within the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week for each time with good governance, until he is well.
Or if you see that the cautery makes points more than once on the whole cautery. This manner of cautery cools down the brain sufficiently; and then put on a moist cloth soaked in butter and goose fat.
of the water of the eyes When water comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that will cleanse the head, and watch over all moisteries, and make him sweat or take a bath several times on an empty stomach.
After instruct the patient to put his head back, and make a cautery in the head, and make two cauterizations on each temple if the watery discharge is from both eyes together, or from one; and close all the veins and arteries that are under the skin, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and watch out for bleeding, and if you see too much blood issuing, then stop the bleeding with a cloth as best you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incisions, how to stop bleeding; and never make a cautery or hatterel under the two bones behind.
of the tears of the body
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that appear on the forehead outside; and one sees that it is cold phlegmatic superfluities, then make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the watery discharge flowing to the eyes: one cautery in the head, and two cauterizations on each temple, and two cauterizations or haterel under the two bones; and if there is need for more, then cauterize sagitally above the forehead on each small cautery.
of the tears of the body within the eyes
When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help at all, then give the patient three cocked nuts to drink; after rinse the head, and make a cautery on the middle of the olive cautery; and make two cauterizations of the cauterization called "clavilis" on each temple, a little below the eyebrows; and watch out for the artery so you don't cover it. And that is the form of the cauterization called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery called "olivare". This is its form:
And if you see that you should make two cauterizations on each eyebrow as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave your hand off until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
of the hair that points the oil Never happens that the hair of the eyebrows is converted to pus, and points at the oil, and one makes cauterizations according to two manners: it is to know by fire or by burning medicine.
Or cauterization by fire commands the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even as possible; and if they point at their birth, then restrain the eyes so that they do not move until they are born.
When they are born and are equal, then put the patient in their right mind; afterwards draw a line on the paper of the eyes like that of the leaf of myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the sign below the hairs; then place moistened cotton in egg yolk and persimmon juice on the eye, then heat the cautery to its form.
Afterward, cauterize on the figure that you have signed slowly and gradually many times, so that the burns are gone from there; and the sign of health is when you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then place moistened cotton in butter until the burning sensation is removed; afterwards, apply ointment treatment until they are healed.
And if afterwards the hairs come, and the paper is softened then restart the cautery on that same spot, just as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, so cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural place, and is even, and do not prick the hairs into the eye.
The medicine's burning cautery is that you instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment shape like the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and live coal, each one third, and grind them together well; and do it quickly so it doesn't cool down, then spread it on the shape you made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the paper of the eyes; and if the patient is holding in only one eye, then work on that one alone, and if in both alike; and place moistened cotton under the eye in egg white; and the patient's head should be in a state of well-being and you should show your two fingers on top of the medicine, and press once or twice each time the patient feels the biting sensation of the medicine, for they feel it as if by fire. When you have done that for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand. And when the biting sensation has passed, then lift the leaf of awe, and reward if you see the paper lifted just as if it were lifted by constriction of fire or incision; and if so, then it is well. If not, then put more medicine on the spot where the medicine did not work, until your works are equal and your eyes are in place; then place moistened cotton in butter until the burned areas are gone, afterwards treat the leaf with ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
And if it is necessary for you to be very careful with your work so that the medicine does not harm the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick into the eye, then start the medicine again on that same spot which has been softened by the proper paper, just as you did before; after the treatment until it is healed; and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to this be your constructions; and do not assume the right way for one who is studying this art.
Note: The text seems to be a continuation of the previous treatise on medicine.
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you make him undergo a fire treatment in this way.
Instruct the patient to put his head in your lap; and hold the men's hands on his head between yours in this manner that it does not move, nor will he leave his head; after put a moist cloth in the yolk of an egg or in the juice of persimmon on the eye; after heat the cautery which is thus: and shape it to the head as if it were the form of a vulture's feather, together with the queil being the cautery; if you see, it should be appointed from one head to another, and if you see, it should also be like a tent; but nevertheless, this one that is shaped is worth more for your work.
After press the fistula if it is open, and take away the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, then work on it, and remove far the bowels; after put hotly upon the cautery, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part of the neck above the eye, so that your hands do not make a mistake; and put the cautery in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery just up to the bone, it would be well. If not, then restart the cautery one more time, and if necessary again, and leave it for three days; after I put a moist cloth in butter, and treat the wound with drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass without healing, I put on corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; and then reapply according to what comes in my chapter.
And I have a way of fire treatment for a fistula that none of the ancients said. Understand the fistula, and split the seat; after put in the split one subtle camphor of which it is the form: and I make it to the quantity of three pints of wax; and hold your hand with camphor firmly, and do not let the patient move until the melted wax flows to his eye; and it is necessary that you put a moist cloth on the eye for the patient in the yolk of eggs or in ale: the wax soaks up the seat of the fistula, and heals it by wondrous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer a poultice to the neck, and bring the fistula back to its proper place in the neck according to what is needed.
Cracks in lips Often happen cracks in the lips which are called "fuzz", and likewise in children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then heat a small cauterizing cautery according to this form:
And put it hastily into those cracks so that it comes just up to the front; after treat the lip with ointment until it is healed.
Of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth; and it becomes putrid and rots and is filled with pus and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit: then it is necessary that you make a cautery according to the size of the fistula; after heat or boil the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron becomes red at the front of the bone, and at the back; and do this once or twice, after the cure as we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
of the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and this does not work, then put the patient's head in your lap; after heat the cautery whose form will come next in this manner that you put a string on the tooth; and put hotly inside the cautery hastily, and hold your hand so long as the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after lift your hand and restart the cautery according to your desire; after fill the patient's mouth with salted ale, and let it stay an hour and then vomit.
And in this manner the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums restrained, and the corrupted moisture dried.
of the pain of the teeth
When the pain of the teeth comes from cold or there is cold or heat, and medicines do not work, then it is necessary to make a cautery in two ways: and cauterizing with butter and cauterizing with fire.
Cauterizing with butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and shape it into a spoon of iron or earthenware; after take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and soak it in boiling butter, and put it on the aching tooth hastily and hold until it cools down; and do this often until its virtues come to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton are soaked in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put on a hot iron until the fire reaches the crown of the tooth.
The cauterizing with fire is such that you take a iron or earthenware cone, and make it big so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; after heat the cautery, whose form will come next, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, for the pain will be gone that same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter in the excitement of that cautery, and then vomit richly; and this is the form of the cautery:
When scrofulas are of phlegmatic and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the cauterizing with the shape that comes next, and have two openings for the fumes to issue from the other part; and put the hot cauterizing on the abscess once or twice as needed, until it reaches the front of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then make a cauterizing according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days; and put on soaked cotton in butter until the swelling is gone; after treat the wound with ointments and tent-like dressings until it is healed.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, and meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;
of the breast When all and every disease of the womb are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or heat, and is the disease old, then make two cauteries on the belly in visible areas; and one other cautery between the breasts among the two nipples; and it should be called "clavicle" according to the form said before.
And if you see, make a cautery by piercing at the point called "poins" of which the form is as described before in the disease of the ears; and be the points up to thirty or thereabout. After curing the wound according to what was said before, and have three wounds according to this form:
And therefore are the cauteries lighter because you make three at once.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After be sure the patient on his back and on his side; after lift the skin that is inside the titillite with your left hand; and if the jointure is dislocated inside, then heat the cautery which has two handles like this form:
and cauterize the skin as far as the side, and the bleeding from the cautery comes together with three cauteries; and because it is done with the cautery which has three handles, for which the figure of cauterization are six cauteries; and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cautery which has three handles:
And sometimes it is joined above one nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
After put on the cautery a poultice with oil; after make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until it is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, a little thing happens then, make a cautery on the thickness of the clavicle cautery, or many cauteries in piercing. For the jointure is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
of the pectoral cautery
The ancient ones said that one should make pectoral cauteries with Aristolochia roots, and in this manner: take a long root of Aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your arm; and soak it in oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the breast and the neck, and two small cauteries a little below on the part that is under the beard; and two cauteres between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little; and one cautery in the middle of the chest, and one on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on either side of the breast, after the cautery which is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make it appear openly as when smelling.
And ancient ones said that some men used a fire cautery resembling a razor, and they heated it and placed it between the ribs, so long as it comes to the abscess; and then there is no more pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work, there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the mule
When you cure the disease of the mule according to what we have said about the divisions of cures, and it does not benefit at all, then there are three manners of cautery that are all good.
One manner is that you make three or four cauteries along the length of the mule, according to the figure of the liver cautery that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cautery, and be sure the patient is lying on his back.
And another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two handles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the skin which is near the mule, or the patient's ribs come towards the left side, and be the elevations when you lift the skin according to the skin, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
After put the two handles on fire so that the skin is pierced from the other side, and then draw forth the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see, then cauterize all the cautery with three handles. After curing when it has given rise to perturbation for a long time, and this is more effective than the other cures mentioned before.
of dropsy
Cautery is not good for dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes". When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit at all, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the mule, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breast; and be the cauteres well close to the skin of the keur.
After leave the cautery open to let it heal for a long time, and do not cease the care of the patient after the cautery; and salvation will hasten, and there will be together the two intentions with the aid of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the same as the one we have shown before, and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what was said earlier.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsy-like, and are full of yellowish moisture, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery so as not to turn. And do not enter too deep within, lest the yellowish moisture comes forth, and be the cauteries according to this form:
After make two cauteries on each leg, one at the tip of the little toe and one behind the knee, on the inside of the leg; and let the cauteries be long, one under the kneecap in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries open for a long time until the moisture subsides; after cure with the other cures that we have said.
of the menstruation
When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by any methods; and you see the patient suffering badly and with great virtue, if make one great cautery on the stomach according to what is spoken here before or the cautery of the stomach, to the circulatory cautery; and three subtle cauterizations around the mouth, each a small, subtle cautery, and two cauterizations on the hips.
And if you see the moistures abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each toe, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the great one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and they are ancient and consist of gross, cold, moist, corrupted humors, and are cured as we have said in divisions, but it does not profit, if make cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, that which is entirely under the almecdate pome and pome in triangling, and one cautery under the mouth. Two others;
And if you think that his stomach is chilled and the meat is not cooked, and one sees the face inflamed, then make one great cautery on the stomach, as said before, and one other on the liver, and one other on the kidneys at all the subtle cauterizations; and leave the cautery open for a long time. After that, cure the limb until it is sound.
of the fleshiness which is called "thelul"
When you cut the thelul, if it seems like a razor, then put the cautery all ablaze on that thelul cut; and I leave it for as long as the cauterizations come to the beginning of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much thelul, then cauterize each one as we have said; after that, cure with ointments that are beneficial until they are sound; and if you make a great cautery on the alchatim, it will have greater aid.
of an ill-cured wound
When the patient cannot endure surgery or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes such a disease that it cannot be healed unless by cautery.
When a fistula comes to anyone, and is inflamed and discharges putrid matter and corrupt moistures, then you must prove the entire tent very subtle, and take care that you know exactly how deep it is. After that, sharpen the cautery which seems like a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the quantity of the tent that has entered it, and continue the cautery until the corrupted flesh and matter are burned away, once or twice or three times, according to the necessity of the case; and beware of burning the nerves that are nearby, and the great veins. If the fistula goes into the bladder and intestine, then beware of those places, and do not make fires except in a charred place, and think that it is not yet purged; after that, cure the limb until it is sound, and if the limb is seared, and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the limb is entirely sound; and if the matter is not removed, know that the limb is tormented, and the bone is corrupted at its foundation; and thus as one of those things which we will say in its place.
of the disease of the kidneys When cold pain comes to the kidneys and great windiness, and does not take a feminine shape, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the kidneys from one side and the other at the subtle cautery that we have said before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will bring greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the part in front of the bladder, where the hair of the wrist begins, and one to the right and one to the left, and each of them be as long as the length of a finger; and make one cautery behind the back, or two if you need it; and let the cauterizations be subtle according to the form said before.
of the kidneys When the kidneys are cold and moist, and do not allow conception to occur, and the flowers are corrupted and their terminations are late; and when they come, one feels great pain: then it is necessary that three cauterizations be made around the mouth, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the cauterizations be subtle, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moistures descend to the hip of the hainche, and because of this the patient's limb is moved from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the patient has a departure in the region of the hips, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the hip of the hainche with one cautery resembling a circle, and sign before the limb around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is inside the circle; and let the cauterizations be such as those which we have cauterized the stomach.
And if these cauterizations are not present, then make three great cauterizations on the olive, and let the cauterizations be as deep as all the veins; and cure until it is sound.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes to the hip of the hainche, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured by what we have said in the division, but the cure does not hold, and the disease is ancient: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills or other good-smelling pills.
After that, make a cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two manners: namely, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many manners, one of which is: that you make three triangular cauterizations on the hip of the hainche in this form, and make a good depth and size, and have between each cautery the thickness of a thumb, and let the cauterizations be olive-like; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on the head of the hip, so that there are four according to this form:
And if you see, then cauterize at the cautery of the circle that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circle contains all the hip and all the tendons of the knee are burned.
And that is the way one does in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip and does not reach as far as the thigh or leg. And if it reaches as far as the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations there where the patient says the pain holds, and one at the ankle four fingers to the left; and let the cauters be cutaneous, and let the tendons of the knee be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends as far as three or four fingers below the foot or near enough, then cauterize where he feels the pain three or four times at the cautery called "points".
And if necessary is, make him have more; and if it seems that the pain is under the knee towards the thigh, then make a cauterization at the cutaneous or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cauterization until you burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more great nuisance and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who have had a cauterization on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so that the leg was completely swollen, and the feet as well, and it was pierced and corrupted all the feet. After a purging of the belly from which he got his death.
And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cauterization in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu'il soit toz rouges et giete senteles,
Albucasim says that we should use this fire cautery because of the fear of its regard, and if we see few who use it; and nonetheless, it is one of the good cauteries that can suffer it, and the place where it afflicts.
Of the pain in the back.
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or striking or from too great evacuation or from similar things spread cold matter, none of these similarities is worth cauterizing except that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary afterwards that the patient be freed from fetid pills or other similar things, and one should place them on their back, where the pain stays, three lines marked with a cross, and in each line .v. cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; and the cauterization should be done according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make iij. cauterizations or iiij. at the clavicle median according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow back when they wake up, and fear; and you will find in the last part of the spine of the back and in no other spines.
When you see this and you see it curing, then cauterize it at the cautery of celery according to this form.
And the cautery should prick each part of the spine equally. And if you see, then cauterize around the spine at the poignant cautery .ij. lines or .iij., and let the points be close to one another. After curing, leave it so long as it is sound according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply a cautery in a spot which is in spasm of nerve.
Of the pain in the joints.
When pain of joints is from moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which the barber calls "podagre" properly, and when it is from cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterizations in this manner: make many cauteries around the jointure of the foot, and be the cauteries olive-like according to this form:
And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make a cautery to the whole point that we call "point". And if pains come as far as the knee and to other joints, and this happens many times, then make a cautery on each knee .iij. cauterizations or .iiij. from each part, to the whole olive-like cautery; and if you have need of more, then make more, but do not hold your hand too long until the splinters of the heart are burned.
And if the pains descend as far as the knee and back, then administer the cautery that we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are to the hands, then make points around the wrist .ij. lines; and if there remains any pain to the arms, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come as far as the ribs or as far as the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and do good government to the patient and use medicines. For if you do good government and purge phlegm, it will be sound by the aid of God.
Of the scurvy of the syphilis.
When scurvy comes in sores, and the boils descend to the groin and it's new, then it is necessary that when you see it curing, that he does not move at all on that day; and that he uses things which loosen his bowels, so that the phlegm descends from his belly; after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his backbone until the boil is repaired, and bring them down to your knees, and mark an incision below the scurvy on the bone of the thumb, and at all a sign that is similar to the middle of a circle above the body; then cauterize it according to this form:
So long as it is white and it emits sweat. Then bring the boils back to their place; and have the patient hold his hand above so that they do not return; and work well the thighs on the patient, and put a cushion and a servant under him on the thighs, and another one on the breast which holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and steady until you reach the bone; and if you do not reach it at first, repeat it again another time until you reach the bone; and take care subtly that the boil does not burst when you make the cautery; nor burn him; so that through this the patient may not die or suffer other harm.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauterizations of children be subtle according to their measure, and of grown people as great according to their measure; after that, cure the wound of butter for three days until the inflammation is gone; after that, treat other ointments until he is sound, and have the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well closed; and it is necessary that his nourishments be prolonged for a long time, so that the boil does not burst when he will need to go to the chamber.
And after 40 days, when he will want to get up, have him administered a well-made bandage, and wrap it for another 40 days; and let him have good rest, that he troubles himself little and beware of too great repletion in drinking and eating, and too high laughter; and when he does this instruction, then he is entirely sound. And I will say next about the cure of cutting in its chapter. Of the scurvy of the belly.
When scrofulas come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make 1 cautery of the same type as the quantity, and let the third of the heart be burned; after that, cure according to what we have said; and some of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at the cautery to .iij. angles according to this form:
but mark the first sign in the cross and make one line for the breadth above the scurvy, and another below it, and put your hand through all the olive-like cautery. But the first cauterizations are lighter and more subtle.
Of old pains in any member. When pain comes to any member, whether from falling or injuring, and that pain persists for a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the "points" cautery, and the cauterization should be according to the length of the member, its smallness, weakness, virtue, and location in terms of twisting and pain. If he is sound after the first cauterization, that's good; if not, start another cauterization on top of it, because such cases are that one must change the member that is closest to him, therefore it is necessary that you make the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
surgeonry
The surgeons are aided at times by cautery with great help, and indeed the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is in its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not recede nor remain, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the patient, then do five cauteries on the head: one within the head about nine times, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape; and leave your hand until the cautery comes to the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape; and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is beforehand.
And if the surgeonship is spread everywhere; and it is manifestly failing, then it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauteries on the head, and one cautery in the neck, and two on the spine of the back, and six on the spine of the back, and one great one on the scapula and another below, and two on each shoulder; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the back, so you do not burn them; and sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the elbow, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more I do of cauterizing, the more aid and profit it brings; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as much as the healthy person does, because the body is already too corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of iron. Afterward, care for the place with flour and honey and other cures until it is healed.
swelling
When swelling comes to any member and is cured by medicines and oils and emplasters, but it is not healed, then make cauteries on the member according to its greatness and smallness; and let the cautery be a little way into the flesh of the knee. Then cure with ointments until it is healed. And sometimes one makes a cautery at the hand, foot, and back, at the issue of the nerve that moves the member, and thus the swelling is removed; but however, no one interferes unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the issues of the nerves moving the body.
of abscesses
When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed, and the art of medicine is worth nothing, then cauterize it with one cautery a little deep, according to the thickness of the flesh of the knee, until the pus is removed, and its color is changed; then cure with flour of vetches and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of calf and blood of almond, each in equal parts; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the wound until it is healed.
the cure of chancres by cauterization
When chancres come at the beginning, and you see them stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery that looks like a circle, all around the edge of the chancre. And yet wise men say to make a cautery also in the middle of the chancre; and yet this does not seem good to me, because I fear it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen once or twice; and more correctly is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
of swelling which cannot die
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it delays in dying or due to the superfluity that it makes or due to the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, too old) and he has little blood, or due to the weather; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries in succession; afterwards leave it so. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it piercing all the way through the entire cautery, then heat the cautery so that its form is:
And put your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the knee, and be such cauteries that the patient feels them outside in this manner, so that the course of the pus is alleviated. Afterward, care for it until it is perfectly healed.
the cure of fire by iron
Another manner of disease exists which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a corruption of member, for it corrupts the members just like fire corrodes dry wood. If you see this disease in a place that can tolerate cauterization together with fire, then heat small and great cauteries very little by little according to what is needed at the site where the disease is; afterwards cauterize all around until you have eradicated all the corruption, so that nothing remains of it except what is corrupted. And then leave it for three days, and put on the burned places a poultice with oil as long as the eschars of fire are removed, and all the corruption is gone. Afterwards, cure with ointments engendering flesh. And if you see after three days that healthy skin does not form, it's good; and if not, then re-start the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted places. And this corruption has been sometimes cured with medicinal water in place of fire cauterization; but nevertheless, fire cauterization is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure of medicinal water in the division: take as much as you need.
of boils that come to the feet
Many times it happens that on the feet outside a disease is born which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a big thing that breaks out on the foot. And the cautery of this disease is done in two ways. It's to know that one is fire cauterization, and the other is hot water cauterization. Fire cauterization is when you heat one cautery like a quill, and it is made of good iron to measure that it can penetrate the boil from all sides, and have subtle edges; afterwards put it all hot on the boil, and turn your hand all around the boil until it reaches the bottom of the boil; and then leave it so for three days until it begins to discharge pus. Then make an ointment with wild marjoram leaves crushed with oil, and leave the ointment on throughout the night, and the boil will fall out and be uprooted from its roots. Then care for the wound with ointments engendering flesh until it is healed.
Et s'il sont convertit par defors le corps, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d'aigue chaude;
The cure for trembling
When some tremble from coldness or numbness, or quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you make .iiii. cauteries or .iv. on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery on the weight, and one on the stomach at the olivaire cautery; if the trembling ceases, and the health of the cold disease hastens.
of foul pustules
Sometimes apparent on the bathed body or foul pustules come from gross corrupt matters. If it is necessary when they appear to make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, so that the point may be seized by fire, or a long root of aristologe, or a lenticular cautery. And sometimes one cauterizes at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow any further ahead, but the superfluous matter from which they come is broken off, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Often great hemorrhages of blood occur from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or at a cautery of the member, and similar things; and it is very grievous to staunch.
And yet when this happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and hold them tightly until the blood is stilled under your fingers, and no more flows; then apply fire to the olivaire cauteries, many small and large ones, until they are all red; then take one, whether great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery runs, and put it on that vein where you hold your fingers, and hold the cautery there until the blood is stemmed.
And if it spurts forth when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily one other of the cauteries that are at the fire.
And do not cease to apply these one after another until the blood is stemmed; and beware that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, one cannot well stem it, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of the three ways we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medicines applied which have power to stem blood; and let it be bound and restrained in a good manner.
Whoever attempts to stem the bleeding by binding tightly with cloths or applying hot things on top, or other similar things, if it does not help at all.
And if this happens to anyone and he has no mirror or medicine present, then he should put his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press tightly until it is stemmed above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but moisten it with cold water often while it is very cold, so that the blood may congeal and thicken and be stemmed; and make a way forward for those things which he needs, such as cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter about every disease in which it is necessary to cauterize with fire or hot medicine, and the causes and symptoms and forms of cauteries; and I have placed that chapter on the head until the end, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same way for those things which one wishes to find more easily.
And therefore as I begin this, dear friend, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and for this reason it is necessary to exercise greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to take foolishness. For many ways of people come to cures. Some come with such a disease that they will die quickly due to the ignorance they find in their disease, and the greatness of their evil; and from these one should have fear. And from these, some will give you their sense and say: "Wait, I am healed"; and the disease is spiteful. It is not necessary that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not act foolishly but wisely about those things of which you are certain, and about which you can take and hold; and use prognosis and indication in the cures of your diseases for which salvation is converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
Very dear friend, May Our Lord give you good understanding and rightness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy breath of his hand, Amen.
Now I have ended this chapter by describing it in chapters, according to what is before the chapter of cauteries, which I have described from head to foot, so that you may find more easily those things which you will need.
full of pure water
Know that this disease often befalls children at birth, and when the midwife holds the child's head too tightly; and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause.
And I have never seen this disease occur except in children, and all those that I have seen died suddenly; and for this reason it seems to me that it is not worth bothering with such cures.
And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the head grew thicker every day until it could not be sustained; and so much moisture accumulated that it seemed dead, and this moisture is assembled under the bone above the sphenoid, between the skull and the bone; and the operations are such that if the moisture is between the skull and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you cut a wide incision in the head; and make it as long as two nails, so that the moisture runs; and look here at the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is more thickened and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is below the bone, and the signs you see are the commissures of the head opened up on each part, and the liquid jumps forth when you press it with your hand from inside, and this does not respond to you: then you must make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
And after the incision extract the moisture entirely. After that, close the incisions with cloth and powder, and put wine and oil in them, and let it be like this until the fifth day; then dislodge, and treat the wound by tents and ointments, and let the head drain equally, and then let the patient eat dry meat without moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And another manner of incision is that you look at or open the great extent of the abscess, and the gathering of the liquid; for sometimes it is before; sometimes behind; sometimes to the right; and sometimes to the left.
Cut then the spot where the abscess opens and the liquid accumulates, and let the liquid flow according to what you have the power; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and come forth blood, so that the patient may die from the deprivation of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
Of rheum.
When it happens to someone a disease which is called "catarre" in the eyes or at the liver, and the disease is old-fashioned, and the treatment of medicine does not help at all, then the final cure is the fire cauterization with what will be cut off the two arteries.
It is necessary then, when you see them being cut off, that the patient bend back his head; after he rubs the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then have the patient hold out his neck to one end of the cloth; then look at where the vein bites, and the veins of both sides are afterwards behind the ears, and they will respond; then mark the veins with an inkstone; then cut off one and the other with a sharp spatula, two parts as far as the bone, and it should be by the width of the head.
And if you see, push the spatula under the artery and cut above it, cutting in the same way as two should pass through.
And when the vein is cut, blood will jump out continuously from above.
And if the artery does not open to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the space of three fingers, then mark with an inkstone and cut up to the bone; and what needs to be done with the blood to let it out is six cells, and by chance a little more or less, according to how the patient can tolerate, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone point of syphac, then cut off the apostemes that do not come forth, then drain the wound and bind, and treat with ointments until it is healed.
Of migraine.
When ancient migraine comes and sharp catarra, due to the moistors of tears and heats in temples and old foreskin and similar things, and medicine does not help him by ways of medical treatments and all this does not profit him at all, then we cut off the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient bends back his hair from his temples, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is little responded forth except in some men who are too cold; and if it is responded, then has the patient hold out his neck with some cloths, then rubs the place with a rough cloth, and raises the liquid hot until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula which is of this form:
Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then raise it up with pincers, and separate well from the tissues that are below each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it to the point of the needle, then cut off that part according to the quantity of two fingers. For if it is not cut off, blood will not flow forth at all.
And extract the blood of six cells up to three; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it with two knots of a strong double silk thread, so that no pus may come forth before the wound has healed and there may be bleeding; then cut off the superfluous part which is between the two ties at the same hour, and then, if you see, cauterize with the cutaneous cautery up to the bone as far as the hairs are cut; and this is the main work, if the patient has no fever and is of hot complexion.
For the cauterization is aid to finish the moisture: therefore it is of greater help against moisture. For it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and puts on well-made tents; and when one unties them, one must be careful with dry medicines that bring forth flesh, and with tents, until he is healed; and if there is no gap in the artery as long as you are working, then hasten to cauterize by fire, or apply the place with vitriol and strain it with your hand until the blood is stopped; and if you do not have that present, then put your finger on the place so that the blood may congeal, and raise the place with cold water so that the bleeding ceases, and be strained as needed; and what is more main and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this fire-cutting knife, but the cutting parts should be well spaced to withstand their heat longer. For when the cutting parts are too close together, they hold less heat. And it should have one big gap between the two cutlery, and then when you have marked with ink the two places, and you apply the hot iron on top so that it reaches up to the bone, and cut off the vein in two places; and let them be distant from each other between the two cells, for it is not sealed by this cautery at all; and this is the form of the cautery:
Of tears.
When the tears of the eyes are flowing from the veins that are above the forehead of the chief part of the face, and it does not profit at all from the medicine one makes there, and you see the patient's face redness, and feel the forehead sensation as if from trembling; and thus oil are tense and moist so that the hairs of the papier are fallen, and the papier are heated and scalded by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary to perform this cure.
Et l'apelerent li ancien "cure contuse", et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poils qu'il ait ou front, puis li fais .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l'une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusque neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l'incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au travers joins;
from the incision that is below the temple up to the second incision; and scrape out all the fat that is between the two cuts right down to the suture that is on the bone, then do the same from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then extract this spatula.
then insert into the first cut the instrument called "culterelle", and it is very well sharpened on one side, and on the other side it is soft, not at all sharp, and that's its shape: And put the soft edge of the instrument towards the fatty part of the flesh, and the sharp edge towards the bone, and push it in as far as it will go to the middle cut. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head down to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to what appears from the fat; and then do the same on the middle cut up to the other cut; and then extract the blood evenly, and express the wound for the taken blood; then put a cloth of old cotton in each cut, and put wet cloths soaked in wine, oil, and vinegar on top, and watch so that no abscess forms; and on the third day untie the bandage, and administer great quantities of watered vinegar, then apply ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other remedies for wounds, until it is healed.
of the eyes
When anyone comes with a great and accustomed cataract, and you see the eyes small and tight, and dimming the sight, and the pupils burned; and the hair is falling out, and there is a severe pain in the forehead, and the patient is strangled; then knows by these accidents that those matters and this cataract come from many veins, and the father of medicine who knows it, so it is this.
And it is that you command the patient to bend his forehead, then make a great incision in the middle of the forehead and another one from the wide side. One point. And begin from the temple on the left to the right temple, and let the incisions be up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples that move at mealtime; and when the bone is exposed, so evacuate all the blood with a sponge, and then dry between the two lips of the incision and put in old cotton and linen cloth; then bind above wet cloths soaked in wine and oil, and take care not to form an abscess; when it is dressed, you should rub the bone until flesh begins to appear, then apply remedies that make flesh grow.
In the same way: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of galenicals, and make a poultice; and administer it to these wounds in order to promote flesh growth throughout.
of ear suppurations
All that falls into the ears is one of three things: or grains, or beasts, or pebbles of stone, or similar things like iron; or seeds, such as ashes, vetches, peas; or flowing things, such as water and vinegar and similar things.
When it falls into the ear a pebble or other thing that does not belong to the ear and does not grow in the ear, then put the ear in the sun. If you see the pebble, distill some violet oil or sesame oil, then administer an extraction; and make the patient snore with condiments, and block the nostrils when the snoring comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and keep the ear above. Many times it comes out through this cure; and if it does not come out, then administer an extraction with fine tweezers, and that's its shape:
If it jumps out through the tweezers, that's good; if not, then administer an extraction with fine forceps of small double-jawed type; and if it doesn't come out through that, then make a chain of iron and insert the head of the chain or piercing of the ear very tightly, and stop whatever is around the chain from entering with wax so that the blood cannot enter with the chain; then treat it firmly, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it doesn't come out in this way, take a glue from which birds take their nests, and put into some instrument that is pointed for that purpose, and wrap a little cotton around; then press the glue on the pebble or whatever it is, and treat it. And if it doesn't come out from all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut open the ear before an abscess forms and spasms; and the manner of cutting is that you first make the patient's head bleed, and extract the blood according to its virtue, then sit the patient between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fatty part or dependent part; and let the incision be like a moon, until you reach the pebble, then remove it as much as you can, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and cure it until it is healed. And if it's grains that are inside and they're inflamed, then administer an extraction; and if it can't come out, then administer one sharp spatula according to this form:
and administer an incision to that grain. But don't do it when you think the grains are moist because of the moisture in the ear, until you've made many pieces; then extract them with fine tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is smooth.
In the water then that falls into the ear it is necessary for the patient to use condiments first and fill the ear with old cotton. And let it be thus on that same ear where the water is. If it comes out through this, that's good. If not, take many stones according to the length of your stick, thin and light, and burn them slightly in the fire; and put one or two of these stones into the patient's ear, and then strike another stone on top of the one in the ear; and don't stop doing this with stone upon stone until all the water comes out, and thus it will come out entirely. And if you see, take one reed, and insert one end into the ear, and set fire to the other end so that the most of the reed is burned; then do the same thing again with another reeds as long as the water comes out, just as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is small in body, such as a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, then administer an extraction with fine tweezers; and that's the easier thing to remove what's in the ear.
When extracting worms from the ears, as we have said in the division and treatment of distillations, and the cure does not benefit, it is necessary that you look at the ear to the sun: if there appear any worms, then treat them with subtle tweezers; and if none appear, take a string whose form this is.
And it is narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle tip into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then pull firmly on the string; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey in coming out, stop around the string with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not jump forth as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the killing of worms, and you will find it in the treatment of distillations; and also distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, whose form this is as you see:
And it is of silver or tin, narrow below to a small hole, and wide above to distill; and for pressing within the distillation with one instrument of well-made bronze for this purpose, and if you see, take one scraper and wrap around the point with cotton; then pour your oil or juice into it, and all that you have of medicines on the string, and the string be in the ear; then push inside the scraper to all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled out of the ear; and if the patient feels inside, and the distillation is a pot heated over fire so it distills into the ear; and take care that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
of the stopping of the ears
No child is born without a small hole in their ears; and the same thing happens to men through stopping of wounds or new growth inside the ear, and these stoppings often come very far into the ear, if one cannot see it; and sometimes there is one pot overflowing with the hole, and one can see well.
Then the one that comes very far in, if one cannot see it, is from grievous cleansing in multiple dispositions, and in that which one can see, it is necessary that you put the ear of the patient to the sun; and look inside: if you see the opacity apparent, then work with all this spatula whose form this is.
And be gentle and careful in front of and behind all the way, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the opacity is from new growth or flesh of the ear, then hold it with subtle tweezers and cut lightly, until all that flesh is completely removed.
And if the opacity is very far in the ear, then take a subtle and light scraper and heat it slightly over the fire, then put it on the flesh of the ear. If you sense the opacity from which the patient senses grief at hearing, cut lightly, and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the hole, and dampen in Egyptian ointment.
Do this every day until the wound is closed, or take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on vitriol broth; and if you see the ear inflamed, then it is necessary that you remove the tent and replace another moistened tent made of rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is removed; then care for it until it is healed.
And if bleeding comes from the decoration, then plunge a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the bleeding which are found in the treatment of distillations.
of the flesh of paperwax.
This wax that comes from the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to spread with forceps and tweezers, and cut with a spatula of its roots; then put on the glass vitriol broth.
And if the wax peels off, then cauterize with a lenticular subtile cautery, and after the incision move slowly; and many times repair, until nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of the hellebore.
Many times they come in the eyes' wax-like things that seem like hellebore in form and hardness, and because of this disease is called "grandine", and it is an assembly of thick moisture in the paper above and below; the works are such: take care if the grandine moves from one side to the other, and it's a light thing to know; then do the opening on the large side, then peel off each part lightly, then take with tweezers, and cut. If you can't cut without piercing a little of the paper, don't harm the patient; and if the opening is great, assemble a seam, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, don't do anything forceful, because the ointments restore it soon and bring forth flesh.
And if the grandine is descending into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper over and take the grandine with tweezers, cut and press from one side to the other; and if the paper is separated by the incision, it does not harm anything; and when the grandine is cut, let a solution of salt water flow, and cure the wound of those who bring forth flesh until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes.
Exinach is a fat that is brought forth in sheets of paper above, and this happens more often to children than to adults, and it causes great harm to their eyes; and they come with catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes; and therefore they lie on their faces again, and sleep above, and their papers below are moistened by the inflammation and appearance that has covered the exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the wound with your fingers and feel the exinach within.
And the manner of the treatment is that the patient places their head in your lap; and then take one linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinach from each part, then put it on them; and press with your fingers from one side to the other, so that the exinach is assembled within the circle; then make a mixture of rose water and spatula, cutting a slit of the large size, but not greater than the wound or making a wound of vinegar; and make the skin smooth in depth until you reach the exinach; and in multiple dispositions, exinach comes from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Here is the translation:
And if the surgeon does not open in the beginning of the cut, so slightly enlarge the cut until he sees; then pull it as we have said, then damp cloths in air and water, and put on the bandage, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who break and put on poultices to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then heal him until he is sound. And if the apostemated part becomes hot, then apply soothing emplasters until he is sound.
of hairs from paper
When hairs from paper grow differently than those of nature, and are whitened, they harm the eyes, and bring forth manners of diseases as usual tears and softening of the papers and blurring, to the point of destruction of the eyes; and is the cure according to four manners: either by fire cautery together, or by aqueous medicine as described in the chapter on cautery, and is made either by incision and suturing or by cauterization, as I will say.
You should place the patient's head on your shoulder, then turn the paper from the eye to your left hand; if it is converted, that's good; if not, put an awl through each thread above; and let this be at the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow below these hairs, and draw one thread above all the paper, and turn it to a razor; then make in the part beneath the paper, beneath the hairs that are grown together, from the great tear to the small one; then pull out one thread, and put beneath the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth, then sign on the paper a figure of an oak leaf, as the sprig of myrtle, and although it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see the paper being divided into.
And if someone has a need to cut away a large quantity of the paper according to how the paper is softened; then make an incision on all the surface above the two lines you have signed, and begin from the great tear to the small one; and let it be one of the cuts near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the needle into one of the two angles of the corner, then scrape away all; then assemble the two lips with a suturing needle using one thread of fine wool, and stop the bleeding, and make the excess threads above the two circles on everything sticking together if you see fit to do so; and if not, don't bother, then leave the suturing and threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without suturing anything constricting, because the paper revives with the closing of the wound and its assembly, but the suturing is deadly (as the ancients said), and it is a work without fear.
and if there is another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is as the sprig of myrtle, as we have recounted, with three separate needles according to the shape which is here:
then cut off what rises above the small forces equally according to the shape which is here:
And if you are unable to hold the forceps and the things are not equal, then take a needle with one thread, and put it in the figure; and put another thread near the great tear, and the second thread near the small one, and assemble the threads equally between your fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above where you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by suturing, and heal it until it is sound; and if an apostemate comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar ointments soothing.
and at times it happens that the hairs of the paper are converted: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the suturing in one and in the other is more artificial.
The cure of cauterization is according to this form: and it is that you transform the paper and make a hole within according to what I have said, and then make two cauterizations by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the surface are; and cut off at both ends of both parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above what rises from the paper from the oil, and strain the two cauterizations from both parties together; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin that is strained will die, dry up, and fall away, until it falls off by itself.
If it delays, then cut off the excess forces, and heal it until it is sound; and when the wound is closed, and the paper has been lifted away, and the hairs can no longer grow; and this is the form of the two cauterizations that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The work is such that you take a fine needle, and put one thread of soft and subtle silk on it; then assemble the threads and knot one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be as long as a palm; then arrange in the chase another thread of fine silk briefly, and knot the end of the thread; then place the patient's head on your shoulder; and let it be under the sun so that the work is revealed, for this is a subtle and minute work; then put the needle through all the chase in the root of the hair grown together, and make it pierce the paper quickly as you guide it above the natural hair; then pull out the hair until it comes to the end of the chase on the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then pull out the chase from below all the thread that you have arranged, until the chase comes forth from above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then pull out the chase and the thread, and close the eye and let it rest for two or three days, until the hair grows in its place and the flesh is restored on top; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair of the natural eyebrows, and raise it with that which you leave it, until it is elongated and then lift it.
of the pouring of oil
When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the pouring comes into the oil, there are two kinds: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens by sudden wound, or cutting, or cauterization, and by similar things.
Et the manner of the work in this is that you cut open the wound, and release the lips from it, and put inside linens, and bind it until it heals; and it is not necessary to use in its treatment things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than the first one; but work with things that soften, such as fenugreek; and rose petals or althea and flax seed be cooked, and ointments of water lily melted in some oil, and it is wrapped in a linen cloth, and this is its treatment.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not heal in the same form as it was before; and these works that we have said are nothing but remedies for this disease, so that it does not return to its previous form.
of the flesh that comes into the oil
This disease that is beneath, which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wound and cut and cautery and similar things; and the way of working with it is that you take a needle, in which there is one double thread, and push it into the flesh, and make it pierce all the way from left to right, so that the threads come out in two pieces of flesh; then stretch the flesh over the entire needle, and cut at one broad spatula.
And if the shape of the paper comes back in accordance with what is necessary, it's good; if not, then take one rasp and put it in the incision, and turn the paper, and make two incisions or cutouts on either side within the paper; and let the pieces from the two incisions be at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, so that when they are assembled, the shape will be like the shape of a letter which has no "one Greek"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity of its sides is grown below, from what follows the paper; then join the two disjoined parts and sew them together with a thread of linen; then apply the treatment for this that we have said about softening medicines and linens, until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from a cut or an opening or a cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain incision below the hairs of the paper, and according to what has been said before; then separate between the two leaves of a linen cloth, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an engine to do everything they can to make the figure return to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary in terms of treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
of the suddenness of the paper
When this swelling has occurred in the same way as the paper above is bound with white of oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary that you insert the point of a rasp under the paper and lift it up; and stretch it with tweezers until you cut what is suitable for a subtle spatula, which is not too tight nor too loose, so that the patient cannot bear having the spatula too tight or causing harm to the oil; and make your incision, from which you remove this assembled part, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and let all this assembled part be healed, and sometimes in the oil add a little salty water, and lift up sweet water and vinegar; then put between the paper and the oil a linen cloth, and place wet wool on top of it in abundance of eggs; and after three days use the colic remedy and similar things until he is healed.
of the grime of the oil
Know that the grime is in two ways: it is nervous and resembles a hard scab, and another which is not nervous but resembles white moisture frozen, which when touched with iron and cooked between pincers, one cannot bear; and both forms begin near the large vein, and grow little by little until it covers all the sight and all the light and movement of the oil.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then opens his eyes; and lifts the paper to your hand, then coils the grime between pincers with small double loops, and stretches it above; then take a needle, and insert one hair from a horse, or cow, or ox, and a strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little bit and push it into the grime, and make it pierce all the way to the end of the needle, and tie the grime with a thread and stretch it above, and scrape off the rest on the side of the grime that follows the prune and silk until the hair reaches the head; then cut the remaining part in the root of the vein to all the subtle spatula and small forces, and leave the natural flesh or vein as it was before incision, so that through the incision the body does not produce tears habitually; and sometimes stretch the grime only to the onyx and thread, as we have said; then scrape off everything at the soft spatula of which this is the form:
And be careful that the spatula does not touch the fleshy skin and break it, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision, throw a little bit of broom seed into the oil and a colic remedy made from litargyris, and leave it until the next day; then apply the treatment as necessary until he is healed.
And if the grime is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, and the onyx cannot enter, many times this appearance of grime is treated with medicines; and it is born as I have told in the division, and when you see it growing, work the oil of the patient, and take a spatula slightly rough according to this form:
And remove the grime above gently, and if you see that it is not diminishing and the reason approaches, then distill from your mouth into the oil a colic remedy made from litargyris and red colic and broom seed, and stop the oil until the next day; then continue the other work according to this same work, until it is all removed.
If nothing is contrary to you in the oil, like an aposteme grows warm, then milk it, and first cure the warm aposteme until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh at the vein causes great harm in the oil, then suspend it to the onyx, and cut off a part and not all, so that tears do not come forth; then distill into the oil a red colic remedy made from litargyris.
of the flesh that grows on the eyelid
Some men's eyelids grow red flesh at times, and cover the eyelid and restrain above the papers and turn it away from the face, and seem like a pomegranate rose; and the work is that the patient puts his head in one's hands, then opens the eyes, and cools all that flesh with suitable cloths to its condition, and sustains it by force; then cuts off the first layer of flesh, and goes on cutting until the end, and takes care not to bleed the eye during the operation; and the incision should be as we have said in the incision of the tongue and for small forces where one removes a scab, as the form shows after this chapter.
and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, then anoint the eye with oil or distill red pepper juice or similar corrosive medicines, and put a cotton cloth on top of the eye with egg white, so that it may be assured of warm aposteme; and if there is nothing left, and the blood does not clot, and you doubt warm aposteme, then leave the eye and treat the warm aposteme with soothing things for aposteme; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus make all flesh removed from the eye by this resemblance.
But it is necessary that you hasten the cure of each weak eye by natural means; and by accidental means, in iron work; and do not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that this member is suffering from this operation.
of veins of the eyes
Sebels are red veins that are covered on the eye, and tolerate the sight's work and weaken the eye all the time. It is necessary then to the first that you look at whether the oil is where the sebel is, if it is excessive, and there is no other disease except for the sebel; then coil it in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head in your hands, then suspend those veins on all sides according to your wisdom, and be the ligatures subtle and double according to this form:
And let there be two ligatures by degree in one piece according to this form:
Then coil the forces those veins subtly, and remove the blood hour after hour, until you see removing those veins from the eye; and take care not to bleed the eye at all points of the scalp, and do this operation at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut off more than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill green and red pepper juice into the eye to corrupt what remains of the sebel.
And if you are unable to coil all of that in one hour, then make a poultice on the eye with soothing things for the pain of the eyelids, and let it be some days until the pains are soothed and you are assured of warm aposteme, then resume according to this manner which is before, until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
of the abscess of the eye
The surgeon so calls "arissati" abscess: when you cure it by cautery and burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is a reason in it that you cut into the aposteme, where it should decay, and drain out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then replace it with all the instruments that are there according to this form; and it is called "aspre chief", and make it from iron into one chief bent, and be pointed like a file as it is in this present form:
And put it on the surface of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed; and do this some times, then restore the surface with excitative medicines.
if the bone is hardened, and flesh grows, and the body of the bow is hardened, and remains so for 40 days, and it does not heal and is not apostemated, and bad accidents come, then know that it is healed; if not, then there is no other reason than to bring the fistula back to its original place according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with burning medicines, and when it is uncovered take one force according to this form, and be the key of iron at three angles, and the bolt should be tempered until the tip as you see here:
Then put it on the bone near the socket, and remove your hand from the eye a little, then turn the whole force until it pierces the bone and the patient feels by this that the blood flows if they hold their hand on their neck; and then restore the surface with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the bone, the matter will go to the neck; and it is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the issue of the eye
When the eyelids open fully and it does not come out of the neck or decrease, then it is necessary that you bind the patient; then heal him, then put poultices or bandages made from iron to suck up, then put a lien on the eye made from aloes, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla, and then strain the eye, and plaster it with bandages and drapes; and the manner of the drapes is that you take soft drapes, and double each one in four, and then put one on top of another according to the quantity that the eye has need of; then strain it above a strong binding cloth, and repeat the poultices to suck up without causing harm; then remove the poultices and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the lien becomes worn out, then it is necessary that you restrain it much; then remove the lien after the day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, it is good; if not, then repeat the plastering and draping and liening and poultices until he is healed.
of the bursting of the vitreous humor
When a disruption comes in the vitreous humor, then it bursts forth, and comes out like a grain of resin, and it is so astonishing to see; then if you see it burst, the operation is such that you insert an awl into the root of the part below just up to the top, then insert another awl where there is a double thread from the socket; and make it pierce, and leave the first awl according to its position; then cut the place of the double thread and tie one part of the vitreous humor around, and strain it well, then remove the awl and put on the eye a damp linen cloth soaked in egg white; and let it be until the threads choose with the vitreous humor, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the vitreous humor in each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
If the eyes show great appearance, then puncture with a subtle spatula that comes from beneath the eyebrow, and correct the moisture albugina and descend the eyelids, and enter it in short order; then pull it out until it is clean.
From the bottom of the eye.
This disease called "alcunnati" is not other than the lower part that is assembled in the eye, resembling a drop descending, and it's not a drop; and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on one prepared seat and straight, then take their head between your two hands and gently move it until you see the lower part come up to your eyes; then it will be inserted, and not descend and become disheveled the light, and the patient will see things as they used to; and if it does not go down below, know that it's a drop, and if the descent of the lower part is not prepared as we have said. Then make the patient sit in your hands, then take the subtle spatula and insert it above the corneal tissue one point at a time by the continuation of the conjunctive with the corneal tissue and the crown, until the lower part comes out; and when it is issued, distill into the eye hot water mixed with honey or water or fenugreek boiled with honey, then be treated with another cure until it is clean.
from the tears of the eye
We have the similarities of tears in division and what is necessary to pierce; then work according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit in your crossed hands, away from the light for the sun, and tie the healthy eye very tightly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are left-handed, or in your right hand if the eyes are right-handed; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left-handed, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are right-handed; then place the point of the instrument beneath the cornea by the thickness of a nail in that corner of the eye near the smaller tear duct, then push the instrument called "almagda" gently and turn your hand until it pierces into the corner of the eye, and sense that almagda comes to the empty space; and it is necessary that the measure of the path of almagda be at the forefront of the measure of the space which is from the prune to the end of the night; and that is the cornea of the eye; then you will see bone on that paper by the brightness of the corneal tissue, and then place the instrument just above or where the tear is, and press it down one way after another. If the tear now descends, the patient will see before him and the instrument in his eye.
After a little rest, and if the tear rises again by the second path, place the force with the instrument, and when it is inserted and does not rise, gently pull out almagda by rotating your hand little by little; then put in a small amount of this gemstone, and leave it inside the eye. Then place a poultice or a wet cloth on the eyelid made from rose oil and abundant egg white, and bind with the healthy eye. Now, and those who are of our time, we apply a common broth with abundant egg white.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some people who have very hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", whose shape is:
And then puncture the conjunctive only, and do not go too far into it, but make a subtle point, and then insert almagda as we have said; and upon the completion of the work, prepare for the patient one a gentle bed, where he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be free from all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and let him rest according to his disposition until the third day; then release him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then put back the tie up until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this during the treatment or after the incision now, but rather hasten this, because the tear rises quickly.
If the abscess is inflamed, you should release the eye before the seventh day, and direct it towards what soothes the abscess; and when it is pacified, then release the sight and put on his face a little wickerwork to cover for some days, and let him stay in that dark house. And then come out of the house slowly and gradually, and convert back into his own condition; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
And one came to us who was from the land of Yrach, who told us that in his country he had seen someone make almagda pierce, which causes tears to flow, but I never saw anyone do this in our land, nor did I read about it in ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the shapes of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them see; and they are properly from iron.
And the head of these is made of this same subtlety, and the end in three sharp angles.
from the skin on the nail
At no time do nails or nail skins come together in diverse forms, of which there are some that resemble scorpions by many feet; and if there is such a one with skin enchanced by fiery color, or skin soft of bone color. In that then of these skins which is soft, and not at all enchanced, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and pour the juice on those skins, and treat them gently; then take what you can sustain with a subtle spatula from one side, until you know that this skin is entirely loosened.
And if there remains any part that cannot be removed, then open it with all the subtle instruments gently, until nothing remains; and if without stirring or aposteme inflamed, then proceed as is necessary; and if it is malignant apostemes, then hasten and cauterize as much as possible, until the wound is stanchied and all the skins are removed; then pour in wine or vinegar.
If the nail works and moisture comes just to the palace, know that it is healed; and if moisture does not flow as it should, know that there is skin born in the bone above, which prevents the instruments from coming: then it is necessary that you put a piece of linen thread about the size of a finger, well oiled by hand, with about one or two inches between each knot; and make the patient place the end of the thread in his nose to his power, and guide it through the nostrils until it comes out at the mouth; and this is done many times for children at school, and it is a light thing for someone who wants to do it. Then hold one end of the thread that comes from the nose with one hand, and the other end that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and let them go in succession as we are on the thread. Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted that skin, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose just as before; do this for three days or more, until all remaining skin is corroded by the ointments; and then place a piece of linen cloth on the nose for some days until it is healed, and if it needs medicinal poultices, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, which distills oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d'argent ou d'arain, semblant  une lampe ouverte, si comme une cainne, et li conduis ausi;
On the skin above
Many times a sickness called "telul" arises on the skin above the navel; it grows and becomes great in size until it is a visible thing to behold; and therefore it is necessary that you cut off the top, and remove all fat, then place the cautery or burning medicine upon it; and if one delays in cutting until it is great, take heed lest it become hard, of foul color, of poor sense: do not touch it with iron because it is an enchanted abscess, for when one cuts into it at any time, a great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of foul color, and you see that you can cut it all off, then empty the patient and cut off the abscess without fear, and cure the place with drying and constricting things.
when the navel is cut open and cauterized
Know that when a solution of continued healing comes to one of these cartilaginous works, it profits little, more than in some people. It is therefore necessary to act thus with each, if the wound is fresh and full of blood; and then place the two lips together, sew them up as much as they will stretch, and cure until they are healed; and if the lips have already become separated on one side or the other, it is necessary that you scrape off all the parts of their keratinizing so long as they bleed, then put the two lips together again, bind, and powder with blood of dragon, and incense bruised; and place upon the powders a piece of ointment of good or another ointment suitable, and let it be until it cures by itself, then cure with oil until it is healed.
The manner of sewing is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or by thread, as I have made known.
of abscesses of the lips
Some people have abscesses within the lips that are hard, resembling grains of millet, and smaller or larger; therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut into each notch, and take out the contents with pincers and cauterize each part; then apply a poultice to the area after incision of vitriol bruised, until the blood is staunched; and then leave the lip open, and cure the area with drying things until it is healed.
of the skin of the gums
Many times a growth called "albulus" arises on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; therefore it is necessary that you hold it with forceps, and cut off at its root, and let the bow or blood flow; then place upon the area vitriol bruised, or other drying and desiccating powders; and if that growth returns after incision, and many times occurs, then cut it off again, and cauterize: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
of sores
Sometimes they are gathered at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs which are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green, as long as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; therefore it is necessary that you sit the patient in your hands, and his head be in your sight, and remove the teeth or scabs that appear, until nothing remains; and thus do with the blackness and yellowness and jaundice and other discolorations, until they are cleansed; and if one removes what is at the first stage, it is good; but if not, then continue to repeat the second day and the third, until you have removed everything; and know that teeth need diverse forms of instruments to remove, according to what the work shows, for this reason that the rasor used to scrape away the teeth has other forms than those used between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you delay drawing out as long as you can, for it should not be done hastily; for it is a very high substance just up to where one has no excuse for drawing. Then when the patient is constrained to draw out, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth's fault. Many times the pain makes the patient think she has a holy tooth and has a good tooth drawn out; and yet the pain does not depart from her through this, until the bad stuff comes out, for we have already made to go away these saints; and when you are well certain of the tooth's fault, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth in all its splendor, as much as possible, strong enough to ward off the gum from all sides; then move it to your hands or subtle forceps at the first pace and pace, until it is well extracted, then secure the forceps; and have the patient's head in your sight between your knees, and hold it thus so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out, take one of these instruments and insert it into each side slightly, and move it as you did initially. And if the tooth is pierced and eaten away, it is necessary that you fill it with drapels, where the perforations are; and then extract it subtly with forceps, so that it does not break while being strained; and it is necessary to work very skillfully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And take good heed that you do not break it, and leave a part, and the root returns to the patient with even greater pains than the first. And take heed that you do not act like foolish sages who, through their haste and boldness, sometimes break the chariot and do not bring what we have recounted; but rather bring great sicknesses by the roots that remain or by the chariot that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the area with vinegar or oil and salt; and if blood comes out of the wound, which often happens, apply the area with vitriol bruised; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
The forms of instruments with which one should extract teeth first are those with long points and thick handles, so that they do not double back on you when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
And should have thick handles so that they do not bend when extracting, and should be made of well-forged iron, and should have teeth to hold in place.
of the roots of the teeth When the root remains at extraction, it is necessary that you put a moistened cotton pad on the wound .i. day or two, until the wound is softened, then insert the forceps called "algefri", with which the wound seems to take on the shape of a comb; and should be made inside like a file, and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tongs, then it is necessary that you uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali", which is also known as "palainche", of which this is the form:
And if it is strong and thick so that it does not break at all, and if the root jumps out by this means, that is good; but if not, then help it with all the instruments, of which the forms come after this:
And if you aid with this instrument that has two handles, of which this is the form:
and other instruments that are before in proportion to the teeth, and of this instrument which seems like great tongs, of which this is the form:
And let these instruments be such that they cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters skilled in themselves find their instrument, according to what their works and the disease demonstrate, for there are some diseases where the ancient ones did not teach an instrument due to the diversity of bones and flesh, or it breaks on the bone or on another bone, or it can, then seek out the instruments that are needed, which I have told you, and aid with gestures, of which this is the form: And let them be large and well-held to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is putridity in the bone, and it is small, then reduce all this instrument:
When the teeth appear not according to natural bodily form, and the shape is ugly, and especially in young maidens, then it is necessary that you know if the tooth is newly after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and cannot be soothed or trimmed: then file; and if it is rough with the tooth, take this instrument of which this is the form, and it is similar to one small beak, and let it be made of iron with a sharp point above:
And the edge is worn away little by little over a few days because of the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can trim it, then use a file like this in its form:
and it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth little by little over a few days gradually, so that it does not move until it is even; then smooth out the end of all roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and hurt the tongue, then file off the roughness as much as needed, so that it does not hurt the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
when the teeth loosen
When the front teeth loosen, either by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot press on what they eat lest they fall out, and you have treated them with restrictive medicines, and it does not work; then it is necessary to restrain them with a thread of gold, for silver threads become green and putrid, but gold ones never change; and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the size of the space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are directed, take the thread and tie it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the knots between the bad teeth, as many as there are, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then re-cover the covering up to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and slowly, so that it does not move; and let your finger be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then file the knots of the thread with pincers, and assemble them, and re-point between the healthy teeth, and place it thus so that it does not hurt the tongue; then leave it this way as tight as it can remain, and if it breaks or the threads rot, then restrain it with another thread; if it remains and serves in this way throughout its lifetime, and that is the form of the teeth and the figure of the adjustment of the two healthy teeth, and the two bad ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, then put it back in its place, gradually and step by step, as we have said; and do not meddle with it if you are not wise and skilful, and at times make the shape of a whalebone tooth, and put it in the place where the defect is, and restrain it as we have said, and remain and serve thus for a long time.
to cover the tongue
Sometimes this ligament comes from under the tongue by nature, or by accident of an old wound; and the work is such that you must open the mouth of the patient, and have their head in your hand, and lift up the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament of the wide, so that the tongue is dislocated from its seat, and if there is hardness or swelling, and it is a recent wound, then apply an unguent and cut off the ligament; and be sure the incision is not too deep, for the artery that is underneath; and when you have done this, then lift up the rose-colored cloth and let it dry, or use cold water, and then place a linen tent under the tongue; and leave it on each night, so that the wound cannot heal. And if bloody discharge comes forth, then put vitriol powder on the wound; and if the blood flows, then cauterize with the slow fire, which is good for this; then cure it with another remedy until it is healed.
and if you see that it is of foul color or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, then do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining towards gangrene, and there is moisture, then apply an unguent, and cut a small opening with a subtle spatula, and deliver it from one side and the other; and if the wound flows at your operation, then put vitriol powder on it until it is stopped, then return to your operation until you have done everything; then lift up the linen cloth and dry it, and cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
of abscesses of the throat
Sometimes an abscess called "godath" comes inside the throat, and they are properly called the two almonds. And when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then beware: if it is a hard and small abscess of foul color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the reason of bloody discharge; but let it stay until it dies, and then you will open it or it would break apart by itself; and if it is a white abscess that reopens, and the root is subtle, then prepare the instrument to cut, but examine first whether the abscess is at rest and appeased. Then have the patient sit before the sun, with their hands in your hand, and open their mouth and take hold of the servant between their hands, and press the tongue below the entire instrument, which is the form; and it should be made of silver or subtle lead, like scissors:
Press the tongue all over this instrument and see the abscess, then take a needle and thread it through the amber, and pull it tight above as much as you can; and leave nothing loose with the threads, then shape the instrument accordingly, so that it has the form that appears to be some force; and although the head is curved, and one end to another, and are very sharp, and made of iron or flint.
And if you don't have this instrument present, then shape it with pliers, so that it has the form:
And make it taper from one end to the other; and when you have shaped one of the amber pieces, then shape the other in the same way; and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot and cold water, and if blood vessels appear, gargle the patient again; or use cooked apple pulp, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then continue to cure until they are healed; and sometimes new abscesses arise in the throat that are like the two amber pieces, so shape them accordingly.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was born inside her throat, namely one of little sense; and I had already closed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked conduit, nor eat or drink, and would have died if she had remained like this for a day or two. The abscess was so swollen that it had pushed out two rains through the two openings of the nose. I hastened then, and threaded a needle, then pulled it tight, and removed a great portion of blood; then I refixed the other part in the other opening of the nose, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards I threaded the needle into this abscess, and cut off a part, and only a small amount of blood came out; and thus was unblocked the conduit of the woman's throat, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease cutting away at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess kept growing back, and filling up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; then I bound it and cauterized it inside her throat: thus it stopped growing; and I left those parts, and only God knows what happened after me.
of the vein
When the vein descends to the vein, and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is under a thick and rounded one, it is called "vein". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the abscess is appeased, and it is subtle, then it is necessary to cut it; and the one that is rounded and not long; and it is sanguine or of a rusty color or black, then it is necessary to avoid making an incision on it. Because there is great danger for the patient. Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner I have said, you must make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument that we mentioned earlier; then thread a needle into the vein, and pull it tight, and cut off one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two ambers. And it is necessary not to cut more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural term; because if you cut more, you will harm the voice, and speech; and after the incision, use what we said in the incision of the two ambers, and cure it until it is healed. And if the patient has fear of cutting, then it is necessary to use a trick for the cauterization without fear. The manner of the cautery is hot water. And it is that the patient puts their head on your shoulder, and then presses their tongue with the instrument that we mentioned in the chapter of cautery, and confesses with warm water, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and in using this instrument, so that it has the form:
And place the patient's head on a pillow or a cloth, just as hair is placed in a comb, and put the instrument on all of the medicine on the vein; and the patient should sit up straight on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine, without going down to the throat and wound. Then hold your hand on all of the medicine and press it on the vein for the length of half an hour, until you see it turn white and the medicine's inflammation is appeased; and if you see anything, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton with medicine, and insert the instrument into the cotton in the cane above, until the cotton reaches the vein; and do this many times until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and wait for three or five days. And if you need to start the medicine's cautery again, start it again, and afterwards apply a poultice around the vein with butter, and purify everything that surrounds the medicine; and be rinsed with cold water, and cured by gargling until they are healed.
This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them into one pot, and add a little water, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glazed with clay from a hard earth, and inside the pot have one instrument carved according to this manner: And it should be of silver or lead, and one of the keys should be inserted into the patient's mouth until the vapor rises to the vein through the tube, until the vein is suffocated; afterwards, repeat this often, until the vein dries out, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the abscess' heat, for many things happen then; and don't do it more than at the decline of the hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, then take a tube and put an eggshell into the patient's mouth so that their mouth doesn't get too hot; for the eggshell doesn't allow the vapor to bother the mouth, and it is a good cure together with salvation.
Many times it seems to be stuck in the throat like a bone or a fish spine, or something else; so it is necessary that you try what you can see and press the tongue on the sun with all the instrument, until you see the thing move; and whatever does not appear and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the thing will come out through vomiting; or the patient should swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and tie the sponge with a thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the top, it will be stuck, and then you will pull it out further; and if it does not come out from what we have said, then take an instrument made of lead according to this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the top so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head lifted high up; and beware that you do not touch the epiglote, lest all life depart from him, nor push the bone inside; and make sure the patient puts the instrument in place, because the thing is awkward; then push down, or pull it out fully with all the instrument equally, until it is fully out.
Of the phlegm of the throat
No time is medicine for the phlegm, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when that does not help, then look into the throat of the patient at noon, because you press the tongue to the instrument that I told you. And if you see the phlegm, then pull it out with a small hook or fine forceps worth doing. And if that doesn't work, take a braided string and put it in the throat of the patient, then push the hot iron into the string's knot, and do this often. And if the patient is bothered by water all day, then take a full view of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it down without swallowing, and move it to their hand often; and as soon as the phlegm feels the water, it will settle.
And if it doesn't settle as we said, then suffumigate the patient with asefetide at the instrument that I told you in the fumigation of the ear; do this many times, for it will settle without much trouble. And the manner of the fumigation is to take a pot that has hot coals in it, and have the pot covered with a pierced cloth in the middle, and in that perforation be the key of the instrument; then pour your fumigation into it, and the patient puts the head of the pipe in their mouth, and closes their mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but comes just to the phlegm; and the phlegm will settle now, and if it doesn't settle, then resume the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and drink no water; and then it is necessary that it goes forth through this governance.
And the form of the instrument with which you treat the phlegm is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved forceps for entering the throat; and it has a resemblance to a surgeon's beak, and on it there is an asperity of lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go; and look at this form:
The chapters on abscesses
Many types of abscesses are, according to what is remembered hereafter in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and there are two manners in which one is similar to the other, and that which holds moisture. And the second manner is for those who are at the bone or in the body. For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the bruised place are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if the abscess is not to be pierced until the swelling subsides according to its completion; and there are those which need to be pierced when they are hard, and do not subside according to their completion, such as the abscesses that come in joints. For when abscesses come in joints, and one leaves them until they are all around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, thereby causing contraction in that member. Or the abscess is at the principal member, and if you delay perforation until it subsides, it will harm the principal member; or if it is at the foundation, then one should pierce it as soon as it subsides; and it is not necessary to pierce a hard abscess without digestion being complete, except for that which is at the foundation, lest it burrows inwards and becomes a fistula; and cannot heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the time of perforation of the abscess which is soft according to its completion, and this is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and the diminution of pain and redness, and of the swelling and firming up of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation where the abscess appears more dependent on its location, and where it opens outwards; and the perforation should be made from long to short in the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints, nerves, or arteries, and in all equal places where there is no pain.
In those that are painful, according to the member. And when abscesses are in bruised places, it is better that you leave the perforation until they are confirmed in completed digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce them before then, the body of the venom will be prolonged, and it will be filled with a great deal of ordure; and by chance the lips and the profundities of him may harden. And for any abscess that needs to be pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member requires. And it is necessary that you make small perforations for small abscesses, and large perforations for large abscesses, and many openings according to the appearance of the greatness of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cut off the key, and cover; when it has become as worn out as a piece of cloth, and is no longer nourished, then one should do as one does for babies: and if there are those that are split in three angles, and if there are those whose covering is done like the foliage of myrtle, such as abscesses of the kidneys; and if there are those where one makes a round shape, and other shapes and similar coverings.
Those that have no head, such as a soft abscess on the surface, it is necessary that you pierce it thoroughly; and it is necessary when the abscess is large and has accumulated great swelling, and you pierce it, not to remove all the swelling at once, but to remove part of it; then stop the abscess up until the next day, and do not touch anything above; do this by degrees, as long as the swelling goes away; likewise if the patient is weak in virtue, or a woman carrying, or small children, or old men decrepit. For the expectations sometimes tremble with the issue of the swelling, which might cause the patient to die, and you would not be aware. Therefore, proceed with great caution through this chapter, and when you have pierced your abscess, sew up the wound; and look if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it's a plain cut, insert tents made of linen or old cotton; and if it's a large abscess, and there are many openings, it is necessary that you put one tent in each so that they come together against each other; and if you have removed part of the skin from the abscess and wrapped it around, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or flax cloth without moisture, and tie it up until the third day; then remove it, and cure it with ointment as long as it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient  ton ovraige, si amnistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor leu dcorant par maintes fois.
And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: for I have told you how one should proceed before the treatments of abscesses, and see chapter.
of boils
Wherever a boil comes on the head, they are small abscesses, and they are like the cocoons of silkworms, just as a spider spins its web; and many resemble this. There are some that are fatty and similar to poultices; and there are those that are dry and stony hard to cut into, and there is no doubt if the artery does not make it difficult. And the works of cutting are such that you test all .i. instrument called "entromissoire", from which its form comes next, whatever it contains. For if it contains moisture, one makes it above the long one. And when the moisture is emptied, one scrapes without leaving any skin containing that moisture, for it returns immediately if one leaves anything; then dip in Egyptian ointment, if present; if not, in water and salt, and fill the wound, and leave until the next day; and those who are left of the night. And then re-dip the cotton, just as before, on the second day, and again on the third day, until you know well that it does not stay at night; then cure the wound with ointment as necessary, until it is healed. And if the abscess holds one night's fatness, cut it according to this form, from the long one; and pour out your poultices, and scrape off all around, and put all your care of drawing forth from the skin where it lies; and if the artery makes it difficult for you, do what I told you afterwards. And similarly with the abscess if it is stony, and of cutting and curing just as I told you.
And the cutting above the stony abscess and the moist one is easier, because they are full of blood. And if there are some of these abscesses on the head where there is no moisture, and one of these abscesses that I cut open on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess just like a dry stone, hard and white, and could not break it; and if one had done anything to it, one would have made as much of a wound as from a stone. In other abscesses coming to the head, except those that come to the heads of children and to the roots of ears, the opening should always be at its most dependent place, so that the bow may issue forth; and cure them as it is necessary.
of scrofulas
Many times these abscesses occur at the neck and below the armpits, and in the angles, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and are many, and are joined together. And each scrofula is properly within its own coat, just as the boil and the abscess of the head, as we said; and the likenesses of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are malicious ones that do not wish to obey health. Therefore, when you see a good disposition in the touching, and it is similar in color to the body, and quiet from each side, and is not hard on the nerves of the neck or the artery or the conduit, and is not too deep; then it is necessary that you cut it above, and scrape off each part, and let the two lips of the boil open, if you need it, just as we said in abscesses of the head; and draw forth bit by bit, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, nor should the spatula be agitated or tearing, lest your hands escape, and you see too far ahead, lest you do not cut what you should.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not leave you to work, then put in the wound a vitriol or broom, or some powders that stop blood, and close the wound; and let it stay until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot. And when the blood is stopped, then return to your work, until you have completed it; then look at the sign of what remains if there are any small scrofulas, cut them off and clean them. And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula, it does not need that you cut the scrofula at its root, but tie it with a double strong thread, and let it fall by itself, without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, and cure.
And if you cut out the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you gather up the two lips of the wound, and sew them together now, so that there is no remaining superfluity due to the greatness of the scrofula. It is necessary that you understand how to cut at its root, and draw forth, and sew as we have said. Those scrofulas that hold superfluity, pierce there where it appears; and pierce it in this way, depending, then apply tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with ointment releasing flesh, until it is healed.
of squinsy
The ancient ones spoke and talked about the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their word.
To those who have squinsy, it is necessary that the opening of the throat, which is called "epiglote", be opened; and one does not make aid by this, because all the veins and the prominence of the patient are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in two armpits. When the disease is in the prominence of the neck, it is necessary to cut open the epiglote to avoid the peril that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary then, when we want to cut open the epiglote, that we cut it under three circles or four a small slit from side to side, between the two circles or according to the size of the abscess's opening, not in the cartilage.
and this is suitable for the section of the epiglote that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long in length.
And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to the entire wound, then cuts open the boil until it comes to the channel; and stop the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut out the abscess, just as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the blood from the channel which jumps forth through the broken ligament and by the failure of the voice.
and leave the wound open a piece.
And when the hour is passed about which one doubts strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with care, and sew all together without leaving any cartilage; then administer medications that cause flesh to grow, until he is healed.
Also it says that one should not do this just yet until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, and his life is slipping away. Then cut off the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
and therefore the ancient ones command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal, until it was healed.
and I will tell you what I have seen. I saw a maid take one knife, and thrust it into her throat, and cut off part of the veins of the groin;
and I was called to cure him, and I found him just as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and saw well that it had not yet been drained or led away from the throat, and the veins were flowing out through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and healed it until it was sound.
and nothing happened to the maid except that she regained her voice, and then returned to her normal condition.
therefore I say that in cutting off the epiglottis one should have no fear.
of the thick throat
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess in the greenish color of jasper, and it is very common in women.
and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental; or the natural one has no deceit.
And the accidental is according to two manners, one of which resembles fat tumors, and the other manner resembles an abscess that comes from an artery; and it is not to be feared, and one should not hesitate to operate on that which is small, and test and search all the surrounding tissues. if you find it just like a small fatty tumor, and it cannot be drained by any vein, then cut it off, as one cuts off tumors, and treat it all around, if there is none. and search well all around, and heal it as it should be, until it is perfectly sound.
of the tumor
There are many kinds of tumors, and I will tell all their likenesses;
and it is fitting that I tell the whole difference which is between tumor and abscess.
I say that an abscess is hot and feverish, until the suppuration has passed away, and the putrefaction is complete; then the fever and heat cease.
With the tumor there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains a pus-filled sac, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the body, and begins just like a greenish-yellow abscess, and becomes large.
and they are according to two likenesses, either fatty or moist, and much of the color is as I have said in the classification.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the tumor, that you examine and investigate first all the instruments that are called "surrounding" tissues, according to what its form will be or chapter which comes later.
And the manner of inquiring into abscesses of tumors is that you take or more moistened tool than what you find in the abscess, and turn your two probes back and forth, until you know that the instruments have pierced the skin, then according to the size of the abscess.
then extract the surrounding tissue, and take note in what it bursts forth.
If the moist discharge is greenish or yellowish, then proceed as I have said about other abscesses.
and if after the surrounding tissue no moist discharge comes, knows it is fatty, then proceed to cut it in crosswise fashion, and take hold of it with pincers, and scrape it lightly from each part, and preserve the edge or corner where you find it healthy along with the tumor.
and if you cannot remove it intact, then remove it in pieces, so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it will return the tumor many times.
and if only a small piece remains and the blood grieves you, then apply a caustic powder to the wound, and stop the bleeding, and place soothing things on the hot abscess, and heal it with other remedies until it is sound.
and if the tumor is large, then sew up the two lips of the wound, and heal it with those things that promote flesh growth.
and if the vein beats against you or another obstacle is contrary to your action, and you hasten and apply a poultice of vitriol, and let it lie two or three days or until the wound purrs, and the pus settles; then return to cutting off what remains of the tumor.
Behold the forms of surrounding instruments, and they are of three kinds: great, middle-sized, and small; and there are also three squares that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are three kinds: great, middle-sized, and small, to investigate abscesses of fistula.
and they are also like the needles with which one sews sorceries, and they are of citrine bronze, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are most valued, and are more tried in black lead to investigate the cavities of fistula.
and they are of three kinds: great, middle-sized, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the orifices.
The forms of the lancets are many likenesses, as you see here: great, middle-sized, and small; and there are also lancets that have two orifices of three kinds alike.
and there are lancets that have three orifices, and they are also of three kinds; and there are lancets that have two orifices, and single lancets with one orifice, and they are all of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their place.
The heads of these lancets are cutting, and there are some that do not cut very far from one side, with which we remove the tumors, so that one does not cut into the vein or nerve.
and of these introgressors are the alemeles replied in girdles, so that the patient is not aware of the opening of abscesses.
and there are three kinds: great, small, and middle, as you see;
and one does not use more than in a well-proportioned body, such as legs, arms, and hips, and similar places;
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling the scions of fistulas, according to this form, in which blood is staunched;
and one puts it sometimes at the place that heals completely from veins and arteries, and sometimes returns according to this great form;
Sometimes the breasts of certain men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so that they seem like women's breasts;
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, should follow this form of the line b until g; then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicated grease, then bring together the two lips of the wound at the seam, and cure it until it is healed;
and if the breast hangs down and is loosened by its size like it is in women, then cut it into two folds above, with two similar incisions; so that one is attached to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b until line g; then scrape off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about seams and powders, and everything necessary for the cure, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed or the incision is not fully made because the patient does not want to rest or due to the decomposition of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton in corrosive oil. and leave it until the remaining fat and grease have melted away, then cure it until it is healed.
of abscesses in the armpits
These abscesses that come under the armpits are hard forms of scrofula or if it has nodules, and some of them contain moisture.
Then those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b until line g: And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment according to this form until it is healed.
And if the abscess is like a scrofula, then cut it as we have said in incisions for scrofula, and if the wound yields pus, then apply cauterization as we have said before.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured and the skin above is sewn shut, then many abscesses come, and it also happens that the vein swells and becomes an abscess.
and if one knows thus when it is due to the artery, then the abscess is long and deep inside. and when you feel it in your arm, you will feel one strangeness; and when it is due to the vein, then it will be swollen and appears forth.
and it is folly to cut this abscess, and especially when it is under the armpits and in the groin and neck and many other places, and it is very large. It is then necessary to avoid ironing the wound, and also for him who is at the head, and in that which is swollen from artery, cut above the long skin.
It is then necessary to avoid ironing the wound, and also for him who is at the head, and in that which is swollen from artery, cut above the long skin. then work on the size of the abscess, and separate the artery from the flesh, so that it is fully exposed.
then insert a needle below the abscess, and make it pierce through to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in temples;
then tie the place between the two ties with an introgressor so that the blood that is there will issue out, and relieve the abscess.
then apply the ointment that draws pus, until the tie breaks. then cure it with ointment according to this form, until it is healed.
and if the abscess is due to the swelling of the vein, then it is necessary that you anoint with your hand all that you can of the abscess and the entire skin. then insert the needle below the place that you are holding with your hand, and make it pierce through, and have one double thread, so that you can draw it out from the other side. then bind the abscess, as I have told you, or tie one end of the two parts of the thread to the other two chisels of the file.
and if you doubt that the thread is not long enough, then insert another needle along all of the thread below the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in four places.
then cut the abscess until the excess pus issues out, then cut off the excess fat and leave what is tied.
then place a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil on top, then apply remedies of tents and ointments until it is healed.
of abscesses in the kidneys
Just as abscesses come to the artery and vein when they are ruptured or due to excessive strain, so too do abscesses come to the kidneys when they are fatigued or from excessive labor and similar things.
And this often happens in the armpits and arms, and in all places where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is accompanied by many dispositions without pain.
and when one strains strongly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in the depths of the body, but rather below the fat.
and it hurts all over, and does not move forward or backward, nor up or down, and the one who is in joints should not be cut with iron: perhaps there would be contraction.
and the one who is on the head or forehead, make the skin at the eyebrow. If the abscess is small, then take hold of it with forceps and cut it off at its root;
If it is large, suspend it on the gallows, and flay it, then extract the bone and assemble the wound to the seam, and care for it until it is healed.
of great hanging lips Sometimes it happens in wombs and not elsewhere in the same way, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and the roots are subtle and the swelling great; and there are small and very large ones.
and I have seen in a man who had two in his womb which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had small roots, and were torn apart, and immediately began to exude moisture.
I cut them open and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6, and the work in the incision is that you see if the patient is moist, and the color of the articular fluid is white and moist and of fine roots.
if you cut the spatula wide and are present at the burning cauterization; For when cutting comes often too great a bleeding of blood, and if the blood overflows, then hasten to cauterize.
and if you see the patient is frightened and fearful of the incision with iron, then take one well-made linen thread and bind the articular fluid as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to strain the linen thread until you have cut the articular fluid, and take care by this means; and if the roots are large, be afraid to cut further because of the womb, but you can well cut half.
then cauterize it so that it does not recur; then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the articular fluid which is of foul color and poor sense and with regard to milk.
For this is an abscess infected by enchantment, and I will come to the cure of abscess hereafter.
when the boil has burst
If the appearance of the boil comes from a cauterization of a wound or an incision for syphilis, and it is on the belly and in some of the boils, as it happens with other swellings, or from blood which flows from veins or arteries according to what has been said before, or from windiness;
and if it is due to the swelling of syphilis and by the exit of pus, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and appears with diverse exit. And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press it with your fingers it springs back, and then returns, and by chance it may be solidified, and greatly swells at the entrance of the bath and through great labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and appears well when you press it with your hand, not constraining at all; and if it is due to blood, then it appears by these signs as a big and hard abscess, and is fixed according to a quantity.
and if it is due to windiness, then it hurts at the touch, and the work is that you look to see if the appearance is due to blood from an artery, or vein, or windiness. It is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the boil, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his breath, and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the boil. then command him to lie quietly between your hands, then go around the place where you have signed all over the spatula, then cut off half of the abscess above all the great incision;
then work on the half of the abscess stretched out above the ligament, and put your finger's index into it, and cut the intestine; if you find it bound by the ligament, then untie it, and put the intestine outside of the belly.
and if you find the boil, then take hold of it on the gallows, and cut away the superfluity.
and if the artery or vein gives you trouble, then go around it well, and come back to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads on them, and put the two needles around what you have done in a cross shape as if you were piercing.
then strain the abscess in three places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place until it can be done, and take care of the dead flesh by itself. or you cut it when it is subtle and ready, then treat it as necessary, and shape the abscess as we have said.
or you cut it when it is subtle and ready, then treat it as necessary, and shape the abscess as we have said. and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place as necessary, and close the wound.
of the abscess
We have said in the division about the appearances of abscesses, and how one should work with medicines, and how one should avoid iron treatment; and we say that abscesses are born in marshes, and great caution is needed in its cure, and the ancients say that when abscesses are in a place or can be reached as if it were in the very flesh, and in the groin, and in similar places, one should remove it all at the beginning; and when it is large and old, one should not approach it, for I have never seen anyone heal from it, nor has anyone healed before me.
And the work, when it is in a place or can be removed as we have said, is that you purge the patient with black bile at times; then make them healthy if they have manifest repletion; then prepare the patient a good place to do the work; then throw your gallows or abscess, and shape it from all sides, and remove it from all sides without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow out completely, and inspect the wound with your hand or some other thing; and if the bleeding of blood makes you contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it so that the blood is stopped; then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
of dropsy We have said in the division about the appearances of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and that which is cured with iron: it is shone solely; and one should not touch iron on these two appearances: namely, tympanites and hydropisic rupture, for it is a deadly thing. Therefore, when you treat this appearance of dropsy, which is called "eclites" of medicines, and the treatment does not benefit, look to see if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as a twisted stomach and similar things; do not touch iron then, for there is doubt. And if you see the patient with great vigor, and he has no other illness except pure dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should act thus: Have the patient sit straight up with their hands and the attendants press the belly to push the water down to the lowest part of the stomach, then take the spathium spinous according to this form: And be cut off at .ij. parts to a point, yet not so much that it can come to the intestine when it is inserted, and cannot injure;
Then look to see if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines: if so, it is necessary that you cut on top of the belly .iij. inches right above the navel; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then make the incision on the left side of the belly .iij. inches; and if it's due to spleen, then make it on the right side, and do not let the patient lie on top of the incision so that excess fluids do not flow to that weak place;
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and plug it, and lift your hand to all the spathium spinous between the skin and the syphac just like in shearing to the quantity of an fingernail or around; then pierce the syphac until the spathium spinous comes to the right width, and that is the measure of water, then treat it further, and plug this instrument which is the form: And it resembles a subtle silver chain, and is made of lead or lighter archaean ore, and has in the lower part .i. small perforation; and on one side, .iij. perforations; and .ij. on the other side, and .i. on another; and the handles are cut like a feather, and that is the form of the incision which the writers fashion the quill:
At the top is the alembic, so that when the instruments come to the water, then pour now onto the instrument; empty it then one-third or two-thirds, for if you empty more than it's necessary at this hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of their spirit of their arm, or they become faint, or approach death;
But empty according to the quantity of their strength, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and their pulses; then treat the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now because of the key that stops the perforation which is on the syphac, of which I spoke, that you pierce in this manner; then start the instrument again the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw out a small quantity of water;
Do this for a few days, and take care not to let out too much water. And if you doubt the patient, and leave out a lot of water, the cure will be for burial or sand heat, and by sweating or bathing in the sun, and drinking; and the cure of drying medicines until they are healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I said before.
Of the stopping of the penis No child is born without a perforation in the penis, or the perforation is small, or it is not in its place. If this is necessary, then it must be pierced at each spathium spinous very subtly according to this form: then insert into the perforation .i. thin plug of lead, and tie it up and hold it thus for .iij. days or iiij., and when they want to make urine, then remove the plug, and let them urinate, and then put it back; and by chance there is no need, because the urine that comes forth does not allow the plug to remain closed. Those who have small perforations are treated with lead plugs, as we said, and it will expand. Those who do not have the perforation in its place are injured, for no one is born with the perforation at the top of the penis, therefore they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis up; and cannot void because the matter cannot come to the opening, and that is a bad disease.
And the manner of treatment is that the patient lies on their back, then place the head of the penis and cut it as one would shape a quill, so that the perforation opens in the middle, as it should; and be careful not to let blood flow from it which often happens, and if it does, stop it with something that stops bleeding, and cure the wound until they are healed.
of the pustules of the penis Many times these boils come on the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; and it is necessary that you take them at one time very subtly, and cut and clean all of them, then put a damp cotton swab in Egyptian oil; then treat with divine ointment until they are healed. And if the boil is malignant, with foul color and smell, it is necessary that you apply a cautery. When you have cut it open, and the boil is on the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the boil that is inside first; and when it is closed, then treat the outside part. For if you cure it together, it is not certain that the head of the penis will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption will come into its place and on the crown; therefore it is necessary to remove everything that is black and corrupted, then bind with an ointment made from the rind of green pomegranates and dates, and then treat with other remedies until they are healed.
And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterization is useful for two dispositions together: that is, for bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you insert a lead wire into the urethra of the penis, and let the patient urinate in between; and when the skin at the top of the penis which has not been circumcised becomes inflamed because of injury or abscess, then it is necessary to shave with a sharp instrument as much as possible until the bond is loosened, and the head of the penis be freed from all sides.
And if this is a difficult thing to do, it is necessary that you shave with a spathium spinous some little bit from the top of the penis and skin; then shave carefully between two points, and put a thin linen cloth damp in cold water on it so that it does not become inflamed again.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not the cutting off of continuity like other wounds; however, when we do this work by our own will and especially for children, it is necessary that we make the best possible work and the most gentle for salvation.
I say that the ancient ones did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have asked the greatest part of masters and saints who performed circumcision around one day, with great forces, and all a new moon; so it was the case where there are two skins, and by chance if you cut the top one and leave the bottom one.
Or the recovery is to cut, and there is double pain, and the point of the member is not ensured; and at the mundification of the tongue by chance escapes the iron, and hinders the work, and many times it happens thus that they do not need mundification and I have asked.
From the mundification that is done with force, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, it cuts equally well in one smooth motion; but let the thread be very taut around the skin; and the manner of the first work is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are not doing more than simply wrapping the thread around the penis, and then allow him to go in all the ways that you can. then make it stay between your hands straight, and repeat the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow or cut, and bring it up as far as the head of the penis is; then clean well from the dirt that is assembled there, then tie the loose end with a double thread, then tie below one piece to another; and hold it in place by the second tie at the pouch and at the right index, and cut between the two ties, then lift the top quickly and bring the head of the penis.
then make it stay between your hands straight, and repeat the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow or cut, and bring it up as far as the head of the penis is; then clean well from the dirt that is assembled there, then tie the loose end with a double thread, then tie below one piece to another; and hold it in place by the second tie at the pouch and at the right index, and cut between the two ties, then lift the top quickly and bring the head of the penis. then let the blood flow slowly and slowly, for it is the mothers; and put powder on top and on top of the powder one sheet glued with a yolk of cooked egg mixed with rose water, oil, good and fresh, and leave it there until the next day, and cure him with another cure until he is healed.
The form of the forces for the mundification is this: the two fingers should be held and should be pressing, and should be equal in length.
The error of the mundification is when the bleeding inside flows out at the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, so that the edges make an abscess; and cut equally, and if you cannot keep it at your finger, then hold it with forceps, and then cut.
And if it lasts three days, and what is below the penis is swollen, then let it be until the abscess has subsided, and scrape lightly; then cut as much as you can move, and take care not to harm any part of the penis.
Then cure the wound with sudden bleeding powder, which we have said or treated in the treatment of powders, and if you cut too much with the knife, and it goes above, then it will not harm; cure it then, as we have said, until he is healed.
Of the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to obstruction of the kidney, or frozen blood, or bowel, or charcoal born, or similar things, which we have said in the division;
and if the urine is not released and you see that the retention is due to kidney obstruction in the loin or neck of the bladder, it is necessary that the patient be bent forward on his knees; and his feet should be placed on the back, and extend his belly from above to the back, and restrain the patient's movements as much as he can; and then constraining the neck of the bladder by expressing the kidney above, so that the urine is released.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instruments called "siringue", of which this is the form: and be made of silver fine, thin, and curved like a bird's feather; and be about one and a half palms long, and be fine at the tip.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it at the top with a piece of wool or cotton, and put the tip of the thread inside the siringue; and cut off the excess of the thread and put it just to the top of the siringue, then anoint the siringue with oil or butter and yolk of egg, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and dry water.
then put the siringue lightly into the penis, so that it comes to the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the pubic area; then insert the siringue forward just to the bladder, and the patient feels the urine coming out just to the empty place, and this is not done according to this order unless the channel or passage through which it flows is twisted; then pull the thread along the entire length of the wool, and the urine follows the wool, then draw it out, and make the urine flow.
and repeat the siringue until the bladder is empty, and soothe the patient.
of the diseases of the bladder
When ulcers or bleeding comes into the bladder, or putridity is assembled, and you see distilled waters and medicines, then make all the instrument called "clepsedre", and this is the form:
It is closed, and has three perforations: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the edges are curved so that the medicine can be applied in such a way that it stops well without adding anything, and then we can draw out the moisture, and apply when necessary.
and when you see that your medicines are in the bladder, put the tip of the cauterizer into the moisture, and pull the cauterizer back to the point where it is; then draw out the moisture with the cauterizer, and then apply strong force to the cauterizer again; then the moisture will go in and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
and this is the form of the subtle clepsedre with which one cleisters the bladder: thus:
And it is made of silver or archaunt, and the key is higher up; and below it there is one seam or the strings lie; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you see cleisterring the bladder into it, then tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat one end of that moisture over the fire; then put the tip of the clepsedre into the penis, then strain your hand over the bladder in such a way that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
et if thou hast not the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make one circle and pierce it all around roundly then put in one strong thread into these holes then assemble the circle as one assembles one tile and put inside that which you see oil water and moisture and tie up the instrument and do so as you have done with the bladder to press with thy hand until the moisture comes out of the bladder.
of stone
We have said in the division the ways of stone and together with medicines and we have said the difference between the stone that is born in the reins and all the signs and in which stone one must work by cutting and in the bladder and in the penis; and I will tell it to you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is born in the bladder is more common in children and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and then hair forms, and the patient's penis becomes hardened and inflamed, and it happens many times, and then it subsides; and many of these stones fall into the foundations; and childhood cures are much lighter until they have three years, and it is very grievous in old men, and it is at its mean between youth and old age; and the cure is more light for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purge the patient with a laxative in order to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders finding the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and lift them up and move them downwards so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and sometimes falls from a high place; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be under his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely declining downward; then search for it and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone in the bladder, then hasten now to cut above the stone. And if it does not fall at all with the touch, moisten your two middle fingers of oil from your left hand if the patient is an infant, or your two middle fingers of oil from your right hand if the patient is a young adult; and insert them into its foundation, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your fingers, then move it to the neck of the bladder; then press above on your fingers, and push it forward where you see the cutting place.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to stretch out his right hand above the coils, and with his left hand take away the skin that is below the coils in the part where you are making the cut; then put the spatula together, so it forms.
And make a cut between what is between the coils and the foundation, not in the middle but on the side of the left naively; and be straight above the stone, and your two fingers should be at the foundation, and the cut should be wide behind, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
By chance the pressure may cause the stone to jump far away with little effort; and know that there are some stones which have angles, and margins: it is grievous to come out; and there are those which are below, resembling a shell, and rounded, from which the issue is light.
To that stone which has angles and margins, make the cut more large; and if it does not jump, it is necessary to stretch above with the pincers which are like a file at the head, in order to strain the stone so that it does not escape; or you put below one of those instruments with a curved head; and if you cannot manage it thus, then widen slightly the hole, and if the blood flows, then constrict it with vinegar.
And if there is more than one stone, then first remove the largest one at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull it out, and the small ones afterwards if there are more. And if it is very large, then it must be split, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or urine comes out immediately by the way that the flesh cannot heal; but still strive to remove it, or dismember with pincers, until you pull it apart piece by piece.
And when you have completed your work, then dress the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and compress it, and put over it a damp cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot aposteme; then resupply the patient on his back, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
And when you remove it, then arise very well the wound of oil and water, and then anoint him with diaphrenic ointment and basilicon ointment, until he is healed.
And if hot apostemes come to the wound and corrosion, and congealment of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by that which flows like urine: then put your two fingers into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and destroy it.
Then lift the wound with water and azole and silk, and help him in all ways that you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the works that you do to cure him, that you bind his two thighs together, and assemble the medicines on the bed.
And if the stone is small and it is in the urethra of the penis and stuck inside, and urine cannot come out; then cure him as I have said before, that you cut into him many times, except for this cure by cutting. I have already tried it thus.
Take one iron rod according to this form and be fixed at three angles in one handle:
Then take one thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then put the rod into the penis lightly, until it comes to the stone; and turn the rod in your hand in the small hole and small hole, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; if urine comes soon, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis. If it breaks off, it will jump out with the urine, and the patient will be healed.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread under the stone and another above, then bend the penis towards the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and release the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure him until he is healed.
of the stone of women
It often happens that stone is lodged in women, and if it ever does happen, then the treatment is grievous, and it is defended against three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-known woman who will uncover herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more inward than the stone of man, therefore it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear.
And if necessity summons you to this, then it is necessary that you take a wise woman well-versed, and find one who knows how, and if you cannot find one, not at all ask one chaste subtle mirror; and the present one, give a good old wife in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command from the examination of the stone.
and look very well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to strengthen her fundament and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, then constrain it under her fundament, and command her to strengthen her fundament with the patient, and gently press her left hand on the bladder.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to beneath, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the bone, there where it is most apparent, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her bowels above or below the stone, and be the incision at first small.
then bind the cord in the incision, if you feel the stone so far along the wound until the stone can issue forth; and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and great, rough and smooth, long and rounded, and those with ridges; and know the likenesses to know the outcome.
And if the blood overflows, then put vitriol powder at the place, and hold it there for an hour until the blood is stayed; then return to your work, until the stone is forth, and have the instruments that I told you in the extraction of stones from men to aid you in your work.
and if the blood overflows, and it is from the artery that was cut, then put powder on the place and strain of tents and bandages, and do not continue this any longer, and let the stone be and do not pull it out at all, lest by chance the patient die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased and the place is clean, then return to your work until the stone is forth.
of flesh hernia
Ramace aquouse is nothing else but the gathering of moisture or white leucorrhoea, which is below the skin of the testicles, that contains the egg; and it is called "leucorrhoea", and sometimes it is properly in the web of the egg, if one thinks it is another egg; and it is the skin of the testicle between the white leucorrhoea that we have said; and this does not happen unless there is nothing.
And the generation of this ramace is from weakness that comes to the testicles, and it is spread out in that matter.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: or it is declining towards yellow, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more often.
and these are the signs to know this gathering, for if it is the white leucorrhoea that we have said, then there is the abscess of rens, a long one like the figure of an egg, and does not open the testicles, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper web, then it is the abscess of rens with a part of the egg, and because of this one thinks it is another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white leucorrhoea, then it feels like one knows well; therefore, when you see to know the color of the moisture, try all the surrounding quarter, because that is the form as it was before. Accordingly, what comes after the surrounding quarter, judge of what is inside.
Accordingly, what comes after the surrounding quarter, judge of what is inside. And when we cure it with iron, then it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to our power and the fullness of his body; then cover him on his back, on something a little high, and put many cloths under him.
then sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit at his right side, and stretch the leg to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles;
then take the spatula left, and cut the skin of the testicles between the long one down to the pointy part, and make your incision straight in cutting the skin of the testicles just up to the white leucorrhoea, and scrape it subtly according to our power.
then pierce the white leucorrhoea with water to a small pertus, and extract all the water, and then put your fingers, and stretch the white leucorrhoea upwards; and do not touch the skin of the testicles, but only the white leucorrhoea, cut it out or in pieces just as subtly, that if you do not cut it well, the water will return.
and if the egg bursts forth from your work, then put it back in its place when you have completed the work of the white leucorrhoea; then gather the two leaves of the skin of the testicles into one seam, and cure it as with other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you tie up the vessels that are suspended, in doubting the decoration of blood; then cut the testicle to all the suspended part, and extract the egg, and cure it as we have said.
And if water is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two ramices; then cut the other part similarly to what you did with the first one, then stop the blood, and put a linen cloth moistened in rose oil into the wound.
and put another linen cloth moistened in wine and oil, and place it over the two testicles, and put doubled cloths above, and tie it up with all the bandage that is according to this form:
Then take two cloths and fill them with woolly material according to this shape and gather them by sewing in the girth of the breeches, and one of the straps takes hold on the foundation just up to the back, and the other at the pointed part; and the other strap goes above the two inguinal rings, and be all gathered into a bundle in the loop of the breeches.
and sometimes this medicine of fire cautery is taken in place of iron surgery, and it is that you take .i. subtle cultellaire cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles, and be heated as we have said, so that the white scab that contains water is uncovered;
so take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that scab with fine points, and scrape it off with a subtle hot cautery.
And cut in all ways that you can, until you have removed everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more wholesome; and take care to prevent bleeding, and be mindful of the incisions.
and if nothing else makes you contrary, or abscesses or bleeding or anything else, then cure what makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horribleness, then administer perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well assured by the signs that we have said that the fire has taken hold,
so sit the patient on a soft couch; then pierce the abscess in the lower part of the entire spacious area, and place the perforation along the length of the body; and make the holes large, so that all the water can flow forth.
then put cotton on the place, and bind it, and let the remaining water flow forth, then cure it until the wound is healed.
and if the white cloth does not allow water to come out of the wound mouth, then it is necessary that you put in a probe or instrument used for draining the waters of dropsy, as we have described before; and enlarge one pore of the wound, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after seven months or so around, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
of the abscess of the testicles.
Know that in the cutting of this remedy there are more fears and dispositions, therefore it seems to me that one should not leave it.
and I will tell you the work and likenesses of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and indeed to the testicles; and this is due to many causes.
It is to know that it comes from bitter superfluity and ague, which spreads to the testicles, or from percussion.
and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and does not find pain, and is a grievous abscess.
and by chance is a grievous and pesky abscess, of foul color, and sometimes comes from no artery or from swelling of the vein.
When it is due to no artery, then it is known by the disposition of hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers. and it does not seem right that you touch it.
He who is made of swelling of the vein is known by its disposition to expression through the feeling of the fingers.
and can do well with surgery on this likeness and on other bodies. and it is that you cut the skin of the testicles, then lift the egg upwards and scrape off the white scab, and deliver the suspended matter from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already sodden with these bodies, then it is necessary that you scrape off the egg and the skin.
and if it is stuck to the scab or in what is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that mass and cut it again.
And if the birth of the lump is in the back part, then it is necessary that you cut it all and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, then apply the wound with wet wool in rose oil and wine, and then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
of the abscess of the testicles
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a bunchberry, with the softening of the testicles, and if the patient grows gravely ill when they walk.
and the cure for this disease is just as frightening as the one before.
and yet we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a soft couch, then put the suspensory of the testicles down to your fingers. to all the vessels that are near the penis, and tie them in place with the master's strings, and stretch them out properly.
then cut at the spacious area cutting a wide traverse around the vessels, until they are uncovered.
and then scrape off from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are on the temples.
then insert a needle where there is a doubled thread, and tie it to the first place where the blood came out, and tie it again at the other end. then cut them straight in the middle, according to the length of the body, and extract the corrupted moistures.
then cure the wound as with others that are inflamed, so that no vessel may bleed that would nourish one of the testicles.
for by this there is no harm, and if all the vessels come forth blood, then it is necessary to drain the testicles from all the vessels. so that the testicles do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and wither and are unable to be helped.
of the rupture of the scab The effects of this remedy are by the section that comes from the scab, or the extension above the belly in the part of the inguinal region, therefore the intestines descend through that rupture to one of the testicles.
and this rupture is either from the scab or from the extension of it, and comes in two ways by many causes: either by percussion, or by jump, or by bray, or by lifting a heavy weight, and similar things.
and the signs when it is from the extension of the scab are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly. and the abscesses are equal up to the very bottom, because the scab presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is from the section of the scab, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear in diverse forms, just below the skin, and this is because of the issue of the intestine and the body's departure through the scab.
And sometimes the intestines descend with the umbilicus, and are retained there, and cause great pain to suffer in the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments, wherefore one should avoid them with fear.
And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to bring his intestines back to their place within the wound, if he can reach it. then be stretched over his neck between your hands, and lift up his shoulders.
then stretch the skin above, and cut off all the fat from the length of the scrotum. then push inside the leaves of the flaps according to what you need to open the wound, and make them such that the opening can emerge.
then flay the scrotum that is beneath the skin of the scrotum, until the white scrotal membrane is uncovered from all sides.
then place your two fingers in the part that separates the scrotum, between the white scrotal membrane which is beneath the skin of the testicle and between the second scrotal membrane.
and separate what is behind the testicle, and between the second scrotal membrane; and then move your hand to the right within the skin of the scrotum, and stretch the white scrotal membrane upwards to your left hand, and lift the testicle away from all the scrotal tissue towards the thigh. and instruct the assistant to stretch the testicle upwards and release what is above behind the bond.
and search with your two fingers if the intestine has enveloped or wrapped around the white scrotal membrane, and if you find anything, then put it into the belly beneath.
then take a needle with which there is one thick thread made of ten threads, and put it in the rear part of the scrotum, which is after the skin of the scrotum; after the thigh, then cut off the knots that appear from the threads, until there are four threads. then gather them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the scrotum, which we have said is beneath the skin of the scrotum, with a strong bond of two parts. then wrap the knots of the threads and tie them together with a bond of two parts, so that no vessels that nourish them can enter in there, lest an abscess should not arise. and put the band on top according to the first bond long with two fingers of that one, and after these two bands leave the scrotum which is beneath the skin of the scrotum a quarter of an inch.
and after that the other according to the roundness that the testicle bears; then cut in the part which is beneath the skin of the scrotum, until the cord and the bow are like we have said before.
then apply moist wool in oil to the wounds, and put on it the band that we have said. And sometimes the white scrotal membrane that we have said is cauterized after incision, due to fear of blood loss.
For this happens many times, and leave the band until it falls off by itself; and if it takes too long to fall off, then raise it with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it falls.
then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is completely healed.
of hernia of flesh
In this remedy I never saw anyone who dared to make the treatment by fire.
And the old ones say that it is done in the same way as the remedy that is together with the life, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after the thigh on the underside lightly.
then cut it in half and treat the abscess of those who work, until the vessels cease; and then cure it as we have said, until he is healed.
Sometimes the bowels come out in anger, as we have said, and open the gut; and none of the intestines descend to the scrotum, and if any do, it is rare, and repair all hours.
and yet if he stays too long in this position, the wound or scrotal membrane will grow, until the intestines descend.
and this happens through the extension of the scrotal membrane which is at the groin, as we have said, because it is stretched, then softened and inflated the gut and opened.
and the cure is done by cauterization, as we have said before; and sometimes it is not cured by iron in this way.
and it is that the patient lies sovient on his back between your hands, then cut the gut of the hernia inflated to its width according to the quantity of three fingers.
and then extract the scrotal membrane that is beneath the skin which follows it, and take the rim and put it on top of the gut apparent from the scrotal membrane.
and press it to the bottom of the belly, then cut the two guts apparent from the scrotal membrane on top of the rim, and cut one and the other.
then extract the head of the rim, and do not cut the scrotal membrane or stretch the testicle nor any other thing, as I have made known to you in the treatment of the remedy for the intestines.
then treat it with the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the threads, so that the patient may not be troubled and cure the wound, until it is healed.
The scrotal membrane is constricted, and has no appearance in the hernia, and the cauterization is more fruitful in this wound, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Many times the skin of the scrotum is softened in some men, because the contents that are inside are softened, and it is to be seen; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, to make the patient lie on his back, and cut off the soft skin above the natural skin; then gather the two lips together into a seam, and if you see, cut off first the superfluous part of the softened skin at three or four seams; then cut between the seams, and treat it as one would other wounds, until he is healed, and the thread falls away.
of correction or punishment
I know that correction is ordained in our law, and so it pleases me that I should not speak of it at all in this book. And it is only necessary for two purposes: one is that the physician may answer when asked about a remedy and its cure; and the other is because we often have need to correct certain beasts to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other beasts.
Of hermaphrodites
Des hermofrodites is according to two manners of men: the one manner is when between the two testicles it appears as much as the figure of a woman's nature, and there is hair, and sometimes in court the urine flows. And the other manner is in women, and has above the finger as much as a rod and two testicles. And the cure for men and women is that you close the torn parts together and care for it as for other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
Of the tentigenous.
Tentigenous is a torn part above the natural part, as much as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that's the cure. It is necessary that you dye the excess of the tentigenous with your hand or fingers, and close it lightly; and do not go too deeply into it, lest blood flow from it, then treat another wound until it is healed; and to another part that arises at the mouth of the womb, and fills, and by chance jumps forward, and is according to the likeness of a cow, and therefore they called it in olden times "cow disease". It is necessary that you close it as we have said the tentigenous, and cure it until it is healed.
Of the erratic.
Erratic is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the womb is small; and it is caused by birth or accident due to disease that has occurred; or it's because of a torn part or subtle abscess, and it makes a hole in the womb, sides, or below, wherever it may be; and it prevents conception, childbirth, and even having flowers (i.e., menstruation); and the knowledge of this is determined by gazing at the belly. If the abscess is close to appearing, it will go to your right or left. If it's a subtle abscess, and it's close to the two kidneys, hasten and do thus: place your two fingers together, and the woman be on her back with her legs spread; then press the two kidneys firmly until the subtle abscess is gone, and cover the abscess with a cloth; then have the woman lie down each day, so that it cannot coalesce. And if the abscess is hard and coarse, you must cut it off in a manner resembling a myrtle leaf. If the abscess is of natural flesh, suspend it at the oncus and close it; and use medicines stopping blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, and eggshell, together with many other remedies; then administer a broad belt of linen, so that the wound cannot coalesce; and thus be treated for a long time, and administer a tent of dry linen; then be cured of other wounds until it is healed. And when in the womb comes natural flesh, you must close it according to this manner, unless it's an enchanted aposteme. For an enchanted aposteme that is in the womb, one should not touch with fire.
Of hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which, without corticization, become accustomed; and when hemorrhoids are old they become hardened; and we have said in the division their likenesses, signs, and I will say here those that receive a cure. I say that hemorrhoids and hardened things, when they are deeply seated in the womb, and there is no sensation, it is not cured by fire. Those that are at the mouth of the womb, where one can feel them, are those that one can cure. It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, then place the hardened thing on tongs, and close it in its roots, then powder with medicines restraining blood, such as dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then dip her feet in cold water for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding comes from it, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomace skin and galls, and similar things; and then take barley flour, mix with honey and oil, and make one plaster on her back. And if it subsides, that is good. If not, make poultices on the back and breasts to avoid further irritation; then take linen, moisten in plantain juice or elderberry juice with old wine, and apply to the wound. And when the aposteme recedes, cure the wound with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is similar to a rough head, so close it as I said for hardened things; and then cure it until it is healed.
Of the apostemes of the womb.
Here is the translation of the text:
From childbirth
It is necessary first at the delivery that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and signs if you see her hastening downward, and desiring to give birth; then the infant hastens to emerge forth; then know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and the issue is beneath its head, and the secondine with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press lightly on her belly so that the infant emerges soon; for when it descends above its head, the secondine is with it, and the midwife removes excess fluids by good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes it comes beneath its feet, or above its body or legs, or hand, or on its belly, or under; and it is converted by chance to its neck, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should assist her.
If the infant emerges above its head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth grievously, and her virtues are weak, then make her sit on a stool, or have the women hold her; and arise her nature from oil or fenugreekic be cooked, and then pour the balm between her breasts the small spatula-like thing which is its shape. and cut the secondine, and compress it to its umbilical cord as long as the moistors that are enclosed force; and take hold of the woman's belly until the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to purge the woman with fenugreek mucilage mixed with sesame oil; then make her press and evacuate her condisi, and keep her mouth and nose shut for an hour: thus the infant has emerged. And if the two hands emerge forth, then it is necessary that you gently draw them out bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a stool, and lift her feet up high; then set the stool back down on the ground, and support the woman so she does not fall while getting up; and if the hands cannot enter, and the infant has died, then compress the hands to the cutting tool that is placed before this, and extract the child, and draw it out evenly.
From childbirth of the infant on its feet When the infant emerges on its feet, it is necessary to lift it up. and then turn it bit by bit until it is even.
then take one of the feet and stretch it bit by bit.
Can't he just jump up to his hips, if she commands him to press, and make her evacuate her condisi. if he jumps out, as God wills.
And if he is not forth as we have said, then turn him bit by bit until he is according to the natural figure. For then it is so slightly.
And if he does not come forth as we have said, then take fenugreek mucilage, and sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind all in one mortar; and put it on the woman's nature inside and outside with this ointment. then make her sit in warm water up to the armpits.
and when she is moistened below, make a collar of myrrh and put it on her, and let her wear it for an hour. then make her sit on a stool, then make her evacuate and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the infant is now jumping. From childbirth of the infant on its knees When the infant comes in this form, then put the balm on his hands bit by bit.
From childbirth of the infant which emerges with one arm stretched out It is necessary to ingeniously bring back the hand. if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman stand up and walk.
if she cannot walk, then make her sit on a bed, and gently loosen her legs.
then administer the mucilage that I have told.
and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a stool, and study how to bring back the hand. and ease the infant according to its natural shape, and make her evacuate, and command her to take hold until the infant emerges forth.
From childbirth of the infant on its neck, with spread arms and face turned towards its mother's back It is necessary that the balm holds its hand, then turn it bit by bit, and ease it slightly.
and when it is even, then put on the natural mucilage of fenugreek and oil, as we have said, and command her to move bit by bit.
and when you have done this, then make her sit on a stool, and command her to take hold; and make her evacuate. of the same manner for all the secondine
of the same manner for all the secondine When it comes forth in this way to all the secondine, then compress the secondine with your finger, until the moistors is emptied.
and if the infant puts its face and neck on it, then compress from below, so that it is not retained, and kill the infant.
then put the infant inside, as long as you have placed it as is necessary, and command the woman to take hold sometimes:
From childbirth of twins Know that twins are born sometimes, and sometimes three or four; and this is not an uncommon thing, and it happens bit by bit. Two are a strange thing, and do not live unless they have a name;
I know that they are multiplied, and are torn apart by the cord that divides them, which is tied to the womb;
and sometimes they come out naturally as one below, as we have said.
And if they are grievous, then the cure as we have said, and be the bail subtle, and do soon and lightly what it does; and do thus as it is worth for salvation. of many children
of many children Sometimes they are formed in the womb, that is to say, one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, and up to fifteen, and all are shaped in the form of an infant by the measurement of divine wisdom.
and it is necessary that the bail knows all this, for similar things may happen to him by chance; so do as it is fitting.
of the dead child
When you cure the woman after giving birth to a dead child or stillbirth, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are forced to do manual work; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or fears death;
it is necessary that the woman be positioned on her back, and have her head inclined downwards, and her legs lifted;
and the midwife takes hold of two parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she will not be moved down from the child;
then wipe the mouth of the womb with moist oils mixed with althea and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint the bail's hands with these oils and mixtures; then pour them into the womb lightly, then take one or two of those leaves that are suitable for this purpose;
and take care to see if the child is descended onto its head; if you place the leaves in his eyes or on his neck or in his mouth or on his palate or under the beard or in the forehead or near the ribs;
and if the descent is onto feet, then place it or prick it and cut off the moles;
and it is necessary that he holds the leaf in his right hand, and puts the cord between his left thighs, and pours it all over his hand lightly, and places the leaf in any of those leaves that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing;
then place it against another leaf, or the third one you have need of, so that the extractions are equal;
and then stretch it evenly by moving from one side to the other, so that the leaves are bent, in order for them to stay, as this is the form;
And if a part remains, then anoint some of the bail's fingers with oil and pour it into that part, and treat the other part;
and if none remains, then place this leaf or higher one, and do so until it comes out entirely;
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot return because of the constriction; so it is necessary that you wrap it on one cloth, until it comes out entirely;
then bind it at the joint of the plant or at the cut, and thus it is necessary that you do so in the other hand, and have two feet;
And if the child's head is large and it is thin in the issue, or it has a sharp-pointed head assembled; so it is necessary that you pour the spine-bone between your thighs, and bend the head and extract the water; or you cut it with the instrument which is called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and do so likewise if the child has a large natural head; and then pull out the bones with forceps;
and if the head jumps forward and it is strained at the forehead, so that it is split, until the moisture that is in the birth issue flows;
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces as much as you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then it is necessary that you make a hole until the moisture runs;
And if the child is on its feet, then the movement is light, and the directing to the mouth of the womb is light.
And if it is thin in the belly or at the breast, then it is necessary that you extract it to one cloth wrapped on the hand; and open the belly or breast, until the moisture that is there runs;
and if the other limbs are broken off, and the head remains; so the bail pours his hand into the birth canal, and pulls it up to the mouth of the womb; then pour in one or two leaves, and pull it out;
and if the mouth of the womb is constricted because of a hot abscess that has come there, then it is not necessary to work at all; rather it is necessary to prepare moist and greasy things; and the applier applies unguents, and puts in softening and moistening waters.
And if the child is on its side, and you can make it equal, then apply what we have said in a living child;
and if one cannot, then pull it out by pieces, and leave nothing of the remaining part.
And when you have done this, apply what we have said in hot abscesses that come into the womb;
and if bleeding comes from the womb, then it should be put in restraining water, and the applier should apply other cures.
And I saw a woman whose child had been dead in the womb, then she consulted another doctor on top of that, and the other doctor rejected the dead one. After a long time, an abscess came to the mouth of the womb, and swelled so much that it burst open, and began to cause great disturbance.
I was called to the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
I applied an ointment of strong attraction, and one bone came out, and after some days another did. I was very astonished, because the womb has no bones.
So I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I treated the wound, and pulled out many bones, until the woman was in a better state; and the woman lived for a long time like that, and every now and then she would pass a little bit of blood from her loins.
and I have not read this chapter except that when the master finds a strange thing, he should know how to help it.
to bring the joint back to its place
Then comes the form of the preserver, by which we preserve books; and at the second turning to the second joint of the two lines. However, the corners should be more subtle than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth of the wood should be one and a half palms wide, and the edge of the trees one palm, and long a palm and a half; and between the two lines should be two joints of this same wood, which are firm on one and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
and these two joints are inserted in the mouth of the joint so that it can be opened when one turns the two corners.
Another form, even more subtle and light, should be made of wood of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of pincers; and have two joints, two hinges, as you see, one palm long and one and a half palms wide;
and when you see the joint open to all the instrument, then make the woman sit on one litter, with her feet bent and her legs outstretched, then insert the two hinges together in the joint, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between her thighs; then work your hand on the entire instrument, just as you have done with pincers evenly, according to the amount that you see the mouth of the joint open, until the patient makes what she wants.
These instruments are all mounted, and their shapes are multiplied; and when the makers have prepared them, then is the work more hasty, and higher in price for men according to their quality.
So do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, because their necessities are not excusable.
When the secondine is retained at childbirth, then you should instruct the patient to retain her breath, and then make her exhale slowly, and hold your hands on the mouth and navel; and if she coughs for that reason, well it is.
If not, then take one pot, and make one perforation or cover, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the joint, such as chamomile, rue, anise, and centaury.
all these herbs or some of them should be cooked or put in water on the fire; then put one end of the pot and the other head into the mouth of the joint.
and let it stay until the vapors come inside the joint; then make her exhale, as we have said. If the secondine comes forth quickly. And if it remains after this treatment and is not fully cured, instruct the patient to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or mullein juice from hawthorn, and then put it in its natural state.
and the secondine will come out; and when she has found it, then take hold of it and extend it little by little straightly, so that the joint does not hinder its extraction. but it is necessary to move it slightly to the right and to the left, and then pull; and it will come out and be dislodged.
And if the mouth of the joint is narrow, we have said the treatment for exhaling and the fumigation of herbs;
and if she is not cured by all that we have said, then beware that you do not force the extraction.
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the joint, you tie to the woman's groin, then anoint her with ointment of fourfold physician.
and it will help and restore her, and she will come forth; but nevertheless, when she has purged in this way, a foul odor comes to the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
So it is necessary to make suitable fumigations for this: none of the ancients have proven that fumigation with cress and dried figs is effective.
The form of the instrument by which one fumes the woman at the retention of flowers and secondine is this:
And it looks like a cord, and one puts the head into nature, and the wide ends above the fire;
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and let it stay until it is spent, and then start another one.
of piercing the foundation
Many children are born who have not had their foundation pierced, but rather it has been stopped by a subtle syphilis. so it is necessary for the patient to pierce that syphilis at its tip, and not pierce with sharp spatula, and guard the ligament so she does not touch it.
then put on a moist linen cloth in wine and oil, then the treatment with ointment until he is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not close, then put or make a perforation in a piece of cloth, and let it stay for many days, and be removed when the child wants to go into chambers.
And whenever this swelling comes from sudden wound or abscess; then it is necessary to cover that swelling: then be cured, as we have said of the cloth wrapping.
of the fistula of the foundation Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodulations, and grow larger as they come from the sides of the foundation or in the space between the two parts.
and if there is one or more fistulas; and when that nodulation is old, it opens up, and then makes more moisture, white or subtle pus.
and sometimes these fistulas are purulent; and they are known by this that there is or ejection or evacuation when the patient makes ejection, and by chance jumps out one or two verses.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and they reach just to the groin junction, and just to the top of the knee.
And thus one knows the purulent fistula at the foundation, and not the non-purulent one. and it is that you insert your two indices or foundation, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no tortuousness.
And if it has tortuosity, then bind with a thin cloth or one hair of a horse, as long as you feel the cloth or hair at your touch.
and if you don't feel it, and there is no emission of pus, wind, or urine, as we have said: know that it does not puncture; if the wound hastens to heal.
And when the fistula is piercing just to the bladder or just to the channel of urine, if the urine jumps out and cannot be healed by medicines.
If it is pierced just to the jointure of the hip, then the tent is coming just to the place; if there is no tortuosity and the cause of the pain around it, then it is that he goes down to the bowels, and it is not worth medicine or a poultice by anointing.
and in these piercing fistulas there is no cure except for labor, and the vanity of foolish physicians who meddle with them.
In that which is not piercing and not ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced.
and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and you lift his legs up to his hips, and have his hips inclined towards his belly. then bind a cloth of linen or of wool if there is tortuosity, as long as you know where the cloth comes.
If the patient feels it around his fundament, then it is necessary that you apply your two fingers to it.
then sense that the cloth has pierced it; and be discovered where you feel between your skin or flesh, then know that it is piercing. if one does not labor on it, then it cannot be healed.
One says however that one can well heal some, but this happens rarely.
and the aid that one makes there, is to burn the small cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before. and bind it all hot in the fistula, until it comes to the fundament; and make this twice or three times, as long as you know that those burnt char pieces are like a feather of a bird.
and then cure it with moist cloths in butter, until that burnt char comes out; then cure it with anointing oil pouring and binding.
If he is healed thus, it is well. If not, otherwise he cannot be healed.
and if the cloth enters and does not pierce just to the skin which is on the fundament, and there is between your two fingers and the cloth a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula at that point where the covering of the flesh begins. so cut from the beginning of the fistula and bind afterwards before the cloth, and then burn with a cautery until it comes to the top of the cloth.
and the cloth will be delivered and fall off; then remove those burnt char pieces that resemble a feather of a bird, and none will remain.
And if the blood vainly swells and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine as needed.
For fire cauterizes two good things: that is to say, the burning of those charred pieces, and the staunching of blood and the drying up of moisture.
then cure it with moist cloths in butter or in a broken eggshell, as long as the wound pours bile, and let the burnt char pieces come out into the bowel.
then cure the wound with anointing oils that bind and dry hard flesh, and are the medicines dried up.
For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not return.
And if the fistula comes just to the very bottom of the fundament, and is removed from the body, then bind your two fingers or fundament, and inspect it.
If you feel the cloth, and between two is the thread or skin or flesh, where it is close to piercing, then there should be no other remedy except for the way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
or you burn it as we have said, or cut it just to the foundation, or if you can, put cloths and cure it as before.
and do not go too far down into the foundation, lest you cut the dwelling that holds the fundament, and come forth with excrement unwillingly. then cure it, as we have said;
then cure it, as we have said; by chance it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it as soon as it is cut below the fundament, by cloth or by another instrument appointed. then remove that burnt flesh piece which is in the wound, as long as you can.
then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the part beyond the fundament: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And there are no fistulas according to this manner: and is when you bind the cloth in the fistula, and it is on the side of the fundament below the skin above. so take a pierced cloth at the top according to this form: And I bind one twisted thread into two, and bind the cloth to all the thread in the fistula until it reaches the top.
If it is piercing within the margin of the fundament inside, then take out the thread from that hole, so that you bind your two fingers or fundament.
and pull the top of the thread, and gather the two ends together, and hold one to the other, and let it remain for one day or two.
and restrain it at no time, until the thread cuts those charred pieces that are between two, and they fall away.
then cure the wound until it is bound up and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, then make it pierce in all ways that you can, if it is not too far down.
For it is not good to make a hole cut so deep, and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the spine-like espinous from which one makes the fistula is much rougher in one part and torn. and on the other part not, therefore one should not cut what one should not cut, as you see here.
Hemorrhoids are according to two manners: or they are inside the fundament, like a small piece of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in cutting away blood flows. and if there is one or more, and they are without foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are without it have little moisture
and then a little bit of yellow water or a little bit of blood, and they have the color of the flesh
and the treatment of those who have them inside the foundation is that you instruct the patient to lie down in chambers until the foundations come forth, and then the sons appear so hasten, and hold it with pincers, or you hold it to your finger, then cut at its roots
and if the bandages cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take one of linen, or cotton, or a piece of camlet and extract them from your hands, then cut, and powder with some hot powders that are in place of cauterization or you cauterize as it is said or written in the chapter on cauterization, then treat with other treatments until they are healed
and if the foundations cannot come out, then purgative him with a bitter and sharp clyster to cleanse what is in the foundation, so that it can come out openly
when the patient is well prepared, and if the sons are out of the foundation, then the treatment is gentle and it is that you take them in your finger or with pincers, and cut, then treat as we have said, until he is healed, and so that he fears the incision by iron.
It is necessary that you sew according to this manner: take one twisted thread, and insert it into a needle, and then draw the thread upwards and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle and if it is of the width; and bind the thread tightly, then tie the thread, and extract the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one for closing the superfluity of blood;
then put on the foundation one moistened linen cloth in rose oil or cerotin, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest
and then leave him until he has relieved himself, and when they have ceased, treat with ointment and other treatments until he is healed.
of the suppuration of the wound or foundation Many times there is suppuration of wounds in the intestine, and due to natural constraint, and when the patient is old and medicine is of no avail.
It is necessary that you remove the scab on top with a spatula or your finger, which does not let it become moist. then treat it until it is sound as it is necessary;
and if it cannot heal, then repeat the scraping more strongly than before until it heals thoroughly and is scraped off. then treat it until it is healed.
of trembling Formication is a small, failed appearance on the skin, and it goes very deeply in.
and sometimes the frost takes hold of him, and it is felt all over like death from formication, and comes to hands more than any other part.
And the treatment is that you take a quill from a goose or a strong turkey's feather, and put that quill on the formication, until the circles surround the formication entirely. then turn your hand around the entire quill until you cut all around the formication, and put it deeply in, and extract the formication from its roots.
And if you see, then make those of a copper or iron quill according to this form, and be subtle beneath and trailing above.
not to pierce, but to keep it at the two and to press; And if you see, then cauterize the formication, as is written or said in the chapter on cauterization.
of the form of the clyster Sometimes one makes a clyster of silver or archaute, or melted and malleable copper; and sometimes one makes those small and great instruments, according to the way they are prepared.
Those then which are used in the treatment of children and who are weak and painful are small.
The form of the small and great clyster is above large, or the belly is tied in this manner:
and it has an opening or the belly is tied as you see, and the channels inside pierced; and have two holes on one side and one on the other.
and the belly or stomach is where you put medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and is pierced all around with small holes.
and have between each hole one thread of espace, then put in these holes one strong thread of twisted thread in ten or eleven parts around, and gather the belly as if it were a goat. and when the medicine is inside, tie it with the instrument before with a strong thread, then clysterize; and this is the form of the circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or egg yolk or similar thing, then put it in gently.
then have the attendants press with their two hands together until it is all visible, then extract the clyster, and lift the patient's legs to the sight.
and if the medicine needs to come out, then let it stay as long as it can; and if he sleeps one whole night, it is a greater aid.
And if you clysterize in the disease of windiness of the belly, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it as many times as necessary until he is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are on the foundation or abscess, then be the clyster as subtle as for a child.
and this is the form of the subtle clyster above which the skin will be strained:
of wounds
We have said in the division the treatment of wounds; and now we will say the treatments of hands and medicine, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or locations where they are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by striking with stone, and cutting with sword and knife, or with lance or stick or seat, or similar things;
wherein are done according to the places of the body, as wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or on the back, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with the wounds of the head simple, because the remembrance will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is due to a stone or similar things, and the skin is all torn and the wound is great. and you doubt slightly of an abscess hot: if you make it heal soon by the cephalic way itself even if it comes out with blood from the wound, and let the healing be contrary to the damaged part.
and instruct the patient to fill up on wine and large meats.
And if it does not want to heal, so be it reduced its meat, and do not drink wine, nor eat flesh.
and put on the wound if an abscess hot comes, a moist cloth in rose oil alone, or in vinegary wine.
and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the wound powder which I will say soon after.
and if the ulcer has been moved by fire, then put on some unguents until it is healed.
And if the wound is great like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by stretching, then bring them together by stitching, just as I will say about belly wounds by stitching.
If the wound is uncovered of bone and greenish and barely holds together by a thread, then cut it; then treat the wound with medicine and restore hard flesh in place of skin. and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as cooked testicles and wheat, also like pigeons, and similar things.
And if you find putrid flesh and it is not attached to the bone, then cut out all the putrid part and throw it away, then treat the wound.
and if there is an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be stopped without cutting, and it cannot be stanched by medicine, then tie the artery, and if you find it severed, then bind it with a thread. and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you put this powder which unites just as much as fire has moved it.
And the manner of the powder is: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; three parts of live coal, and grind the powder subtly, and fill the wound, and bind it tightly, until it closes well and joins with all its blood.
and then bind it well, and leave it unbound unless it swells; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes one does this with coal alone, when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but only if fire has moved the wound.
And if fire has moved the wound, especially in this state, then do not put one ounce of this powder.
but put on some digestive unguents, or pigeons made of barley flour mixed with water and honey, until it flows freely. then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if a bone break comes with the wound, and it is small, then set it with fine tweezers.
and I will tell you soon after about the breaks of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between that and one on the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it's the nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave the wound alone and not put anything restraining, because it harms the nerves and makes them retreat. and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be warm, like charcoal washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and let it wash also in sweet water. and other stones of my mine according to this manner, and moist unguents.
And if the wound is great, then bind it with cloth and tie with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and full of pus, then puncture or cut below it.
and if the artery is cut and blood comes out, then dissect it, and tie it, and cauterize it as needed.
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the gullet, and the conduit is preserved, by which the flesh goes. so cut the gullet on the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape. and then bind it gently, and leave it for some days, then treat it with drying ointments until it is healed.
and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then cut it. and if there are pieces of bone, then treat them all as you can, and those that you cannot have, leave until the wound putrefies. and be separated and cleansed the discharge.
and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have said. And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
of the wound of lance or knife
If it's a cut from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then look to see if there are any signs of inflammation around the wound that the patient complains of: know then that the wound is mortal.
and if it's not deep, and it's fresh with all its blood, then do not put powder in the wound at first hour, nor bind it for the blood that does not clot in depth. and rekindles in the heart, and kills the patient. but I put on attractive ointment, and bind it two times a day.
and if you don't have balm, put old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture.
and make the patient sleep on top of the wound three days, or four, or more; if there is no convulsion, nor ill trembling in the heart nor drawing out of tendons; and when you see good dispositions, then know that the wound is saved. Then cure it with tents and other treatments, until he is healed.
and if she cannot heal, nor open, then know that there is a fistula; and cure it as one should.
And if the wound is an incision from a sword or knife, and it is simple, or deeper or on the back, then cure what is in front.
if it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder; and if it is pressed into the bone, and has broken pieces, then close the wound, and remove the pus if it is open. and if they are not open, then let the wound suppurate, so that the extractions will ease.
and for other wounds on other members is the judgment as we have said.
rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are great and medium and small;
from the great wound sometimes a portion of the intestine or one of the intestinal loops bursts open, by which there is an entrance for them;
and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a great one,
therefore it is better to put the intestines back in gradually, rather than all at once. because the intestines swell soon as they feel cold, and thus enter more slowly.
and therefore it is better to make the wound smaller, because one should put the intestine back in its place that belongs to the other two.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to three manners:
the two common stitches occur in the stitching of the belly,
and the stitch of other wounds of the body and the two other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
and yet they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will say each one and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine protrudes, and if something is to be put back, it is done by one of the two manners: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it up in this manner: soak a sponge or one piece of cloth in lukewarm water only, or boil it in water with aqua sanguinis, and cypress, and spikenard, and apply the intestine until the swelling is removed;
and sometimes this wine restrains and is good to ease swelling.
And when you see the swelling departing, then moisten the intestine with water or boil it with malva and mallow. for by this it is eased the entrance to receive a little something;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small opening in the wound with the instrument used to cut off hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is better than the cutting, that one should not cut without great necessity or need.
and this is the instrument to divide:
so cut inside the curvature and do not cut too far, and see where the shape is.
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine bursts forth, then put it back in its natural place according to its proper location. if you can manage, for this is better.
When the wound is wide and it is in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back. and place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, then put your attention on making the injured part higher than the other.
and thus it is necessary to manage what I say about large and medium wounds.
Small wounds put what is appointed to you,
then take in your hands one pitiful minister who holds all the rupture in his hand, and bring together the lips; and this is the common manner of stitching.
and this is the common manner of stitching. and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound one or two fingers' breadth, and insert a needle where there is good strong thread; and pierce the two sides of the skin with the two sides of the siphac,
then strain it with a double thread around the needle on both sides, and bring together the two sides of the wound in a natural way,
and then leave one or two fingers' breadth, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to your need for needles. until all the wound is restrained;
and be the needles moderate, between fine and coarse. because fine needles cut through all the flesh, and those that are too coarse cannot enter well at all: therefore it is necessary for them to be moderate;
and it is not necessary to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin,
lest they cut and open the wound before the suturing.
and then cut off the ends of the needles, so that they do not disturb the patient while sleeping, and put tents or cloths on the ends of the needles to hold them in place. and leave them so until the wound is sewn up;
and this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for it can be done with one needle or two.
The second stitching if is common, and it is that you assemble the two pieces of leather and the two pieces of silk together with a needle where there is one strong middle thread; and when you have pierced these pieces all four together,
and when you have pierced these pieces all four together, then tie the needle to the part where you began, in the manner that one sews cloth;
and put a space between each stitching, the thickness of a minor denier;
this stitching is good for men,
and I sewed up a wound that a man had in his belly,
who was wounded with a knife, and the wound was more than a palm's width deep, and the intestines were exposed two palms' width deep,
and the wound was in the abdomen. I brought back the intestines and he had been without them for 24 hours,
and the wound was closed in just 15 days, and I healed it, and he was cured.
And the doctor had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I didn't anoint him with ointment, because I was in one place where you couldn't find any, nor any medicine; and I placed clean cotton cloth over the wound two times a day, and washed it with honey water until he was cured.
Now I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching:
take the needle and push it through from the outside to the inside.
when it has pierced the corner of right in right, then tie off the end of the silk or thread where you put in the needle,
and make it pierce from the other side into the inside to the outside.
and the intention of this stitching is that you sew as pelt makers make their pelts, and that you leave once the silk on one side and then take it up again on the other, until the stitching is all finished.
The second method of stitching, which Galen says properly,
is like those who assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one end of the silk to the other end, in this manner:
push a needle or hook close by, and make it pierce that point alone, and leave the two ends of the silk; then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outside to the inside. like two ends of silk;
then make it pierce one and the other from the outside to the inside, in two other hooks that are on the other side;
and this is the second method of stitching and the most common.
Galens says that this word, and some testify to it,
that one should sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each;
and one must push one needle from one side and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew corsets;
and knows that when a rupture is within the belly, it is the stitching more difficult than on other parts of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, and the air has made it turn; then put back the intestines and the gut; then apply powder of burnt charcoal on top,
then put back the intestines and the gut; then apply powder of burnt charcoal on top, and if the air has made it turn, then apply some ointment that is present until the wound heals. and cut the thread, and tie off the silk and the needle; then cure the wound as with others, until it is healed.
and if you don't have medicine, then apply, at first, clean cotton cloth; and move it two times a day until he is healed.
For you don't need any other medicine in many simple wound cases;
and if you doubt that the wound may cause community among the principal members, then it is good that you moisten linen lightly with temperate heat oil or rose oil, and place it around the groins and under the armpits;
and if he feels pain or itching in his bowels, and this often happens, then they should be cleansed with black wine tea, and likewise if the itching comes just to the intestine;
and probe inside, and knows that when it is the large intestine, it is more easily healed than the small one.
The intestine called "jun" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is due to the thickness of the veins that are there, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and the approach of its nature to that of swine.
And if the intestine bursts forth from the wound, then put it back in place just as the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it has turned yellow or black, then it is good that you tie up the part that is black, so that no bleeding comes from there. for there are veins and arteries;
then cover what is between the ligament, and place the two ends hanging from the part below the wound to the outside in order to ease the extraction when the intestines fall out and the wound heals.
of the rupture of the belly
When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, then it can be restored in some men,
because I saw that a man was wounded in the belly with a lance;
and it was the wound on the right side of the stomach, and it became gangrened and turned into a fistula, and from there came the evacuation and the flatulence;
I applied treatment according to what I knew, and did not cease to subtlety until he was healed, and the flesh had closed.
And when I saw him heal, I doubted that the patient did not have an illness in his belly; and there was no illness, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
and some experienced people say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in this way: take fresh linen from large sheets, then close the lips of the wound, and when the linen has covered the mouth, put it on top of the two lips,
then put one more piece of linen after in that same way as before, until the wound is entirely covered;
and sew the wound. This method will heal in the intestine and cause no harm to the patient,
and one can bind the intestine with a thin thread that is sewn from the intestine of an animal,
in this way: take the end of this thread of intestine that is well cleaned, and then tie at the end of this thread one thin piece of linen twisted, then thread the thread onto a needle, and sew the intestine, and tie it in the bowstring;
and this manner of sewing with linen is not other than according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the large intestine, there is no remedy or health, except for subtlety.
of a fistula or whatever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it festers, is universally called "fistula", and even when it is cut and flows down.
And a fistula is according to the true nodation, hard and white, or one does not feel pain, and it flows like the feathers of a bird;
and sometimes in clear liquid flow, and other times thick. sometimes little, and other times enough;
and I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed and has no flesh, is nothing but due to one of the eight causes:
that is to say, by the smallness of blood or body; or because of its wickedness; or because there is hard flesh inside, and above the lips, that does not allow new flesh to grow; or because there is too much liquid; or the lump is rotten, and the material is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a manner of plague; or because of the property in the region it is slow to digest, and delays health, and flows naturally by nature; or there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicine in the division.
or it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistula which is made by manual work.
Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the bladder, or intestine, or bladder, or in some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are in this manner are of grievous healing, and there is nothing but labor, and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come just to the point I have said, and you have faith in the treatment, and you see it recognized, then take a piece of iron or clay, if the fistula is straight, and cut;
and if the fistula is twisted, then search for a thin piece of flint; for the flint bends to conform to the twisting shape.
and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well search it with tents, so cleanse it through one of the openings,
for the moisture flows from one opening to another, and purifies it;
then cut it off at your discretion, that you know if there is bone or nerve, and it flows out in abundance,
and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and where he feels it;
and when you truly know the place where it is, and whether it is far from a jointure, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places I have told you, then sew according to what I have told you,
or in any of the places I have told you, then sew according to what I have told you, and take away the rotten flesh and corrupt matter that are inside; and then continue to treat it until it is healed,
and if the fistula is well opened at the right place, then it is necessary that you sew in abundance as much as you can, then put moist tents of medicinal water and tie them just at the head of the fistula,
then put moist tents of medicinal water and tie them just at the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains at the bottom;
and then put on gentle ointments of healthy flesh, until it is cleansed.
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it. If veins or nerves do not injure you or principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, then scrape it away until all the corruption is removed. then treat it with gentle things to promote healthy flesh until it is healed.
and if it is not healed and flows again as before, know that you have not yet reached the end.
so uncover and cut until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healed, that's good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to approach; so there is no other remedy than to rely on nature's help.
and if there is a small corrupted bone and you can extract it with forceps, then extract it with an instrument suitable for this purpose,
and if there are many moles, so treat them all, nor leave any one.
and if the moisture makes you contrary, and there is no error or fear, so mix and moisten and flesh, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, so place on the wound something fermenting and rotting. and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones,
and then the bones will be easier to remove;
and if it is a great bone, such as of thigh or hip, so remove only the corruption until all the marrow is removed. then restore the wound;
and if there is a great part of the corrupted flesh, and it comes just to the bone; so scrape and clean all up to the corruption, and then care for it until it is closed.
and I will tell you about a fistula that happened in someone's leg, so that you may take it as an example and help in your work.
He was a young man around 30 years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body,
so much so that the materials came to the leg, and it was filled with a great abscess, and there was no reason to fail to open it;
but the doctors by their foolishness opened so much that the abscess burst open, and a great many materials were flowing out, and it became a fistula, and there came out very much pus that all flowed forth with bad smell and moisture from the body;
and many doctors put treatment around 2 years, and there was no remedy in their skill of hands,
so that I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what flowed out through the pus was very foul. and the skin of the young man became red and had a yellowish color.
I inserted a tent in one of these pus-filled sores, and then searched all the pus-filled sores,
and I found that some came together with others from all parts of the leg.
I hurried then, and scraped in one of the pus-filled sores until I uncovered a part of the bone, and I found it corrupted and perforated, and the corruption came just to the bone inside;
I removed what appeared to be from the corrupted bone, and thought that there was no other corruption, except for what I had removed;
and began to restore the wound with medicines according to the passage of long time, and could not close;
and then recommenced, and found the bone just as before,
and found the corruption continued in the bone, and removed it, and then took it away, and waited to close the joint;
but I could not until I scraped around a palm's length of the bone, and removed it to its very marrow, then restored it with medicines; and he was healed and closed quickly,
and there was no need to continue the work except for the weakness of the patient who could not bear, and because of the fear of death that I had from him. For through evacuation it often bled, but he was healed entirely,
For through evacuation it often bled, but he was healed entirely, and instead of the bone a hard flesh arose, and he was in good condition and had no harm or contradiction from anything at all, neither to go nor to come.
and stretch the top, so that you remove the corrupt flesh below. and uncover the flesh on the place where you see to scrape, so that the scraping does not wound the flesh; and put a hot iron or a wooden spatula under the bone to move and cover the corrupt flesh; and it is necessary to scrape as much as can be seen and felt of the corruption, and scrape again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open up, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, so uncover all the flesh; then put a hot iron underneath,
and then scrape from one part to the other the corruption, and be sure to scrape as far as the length of the corruption is, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then scrape the corrupted joint, and scrape the bone on one side as far as it contains from the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other remedy than to scrape;
and if the corruption is in the fingers of the hand or in the toes, then it is very strong that thing, but all the same you must inquire about that corrosion, how it appears to you; and cleanse it in all ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve hinder you;
and know that the incisors and scrapers for scraping these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and their appearance. and their thickness and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare an instrument for each kind of work.
and know that the work will show you the instrument that you will need, according to the knowledge of this art. and the testimony of the methods of diseases; so think about the instrument that you need, according to what it requires.
of fire The head of the shoulder may be dislocated due to a cause within or due to a cause outside.
and when you have made medicines for that corruption by the treatment of medicines, and they do not help, so it is necessary to scrape off that member up to the point where the corruption comes. so that the patient may escape either by death or by evil, which is greater than the loss of the member.
so that the patient may escape either by death or by evil, which is greater than the loss of the member. and the signs are such that the members become black, as if they were burned with fire. and afterwards it becomes pale, then goes that corruption from member to member, and takes hold of everything in the body; if you hasten to cut,
and if it's by the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar things,
if the corrosion is in the head of the joint, if it cuts, and does not give space for it to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, then cut at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, then cut at the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death. and there is no remedy against it except for the quantity of his virtue;
and so it goes when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then cut after the other joint;
and if it comes to the foot, then cut all the foot; and if it goes up the leg, then cut at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy except to let the patient die.
and the manner of cutting or sewing the member is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister down one strap, and another minister up the other strap, and you uncover the flesh between the two straps with one spatula wide, so that the bone is uncovered;
then cut or sew, and place one linen cloth on each side, so that the sewing does not touch the healthy flesh. and another wound and abscess breaks out in the patient.
And if blood flows away comes when you work, then cauterize the place hastily, or you put on some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed.
then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to one man in summer:
he had a burn that seemed like the burning of fire,
and that corruption came first to his joint in the foot, so that it consumed all the foot;
and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to cut off the foot, and was healed.
and long after that, the corruption came again to the joint of his hand, and he came to me,
and I put on him things that were corrective after the purging of his body, but the corruption could not cease;
and he begged me to cut off his hand, and I refused, for I had hope of correcting the matter; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the virtue of the man was weak; and he became despairing, and returned to his land, and then hastened to cut off his hand, and was healed.
and I have told this story only for the reason that one may do another thing if need arises.
Sometimes an abscess comes in fatty flesh, and stays so long that it makes a great gathering of pus; and then bursts and perforates, and the pus jumps out, and the flesh remains empty, just like a vessel. and the skin that is above is as subtle as one of those delicate cloths; and they do not run up to the bone, nor up to the nerve, and such diseases are called "sain";
but if it is so long that it comes up to the bone in front, then it is called "fistula";
and the skin is that you cut all around that skin, and similarly when it is subtle, like a cloth; and it does not heal because of its corruption.
And if you have faith that the skin will heal, and the corruption is not in front, and the skin is thick with flesh, then clean it with a poultice like this:
look if the sinews are large, and the pus that issues from them has a foul odor, then one must clean it with Egyptian medicine made like this: Take aloes, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put them to cook in one vessel over the fire, so that the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey, and use it to cleanse the sinew, and stop the abscess; and leave the medicine on for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
do this many times, until the sinew is cleared, and the pus is removed.
and sometimes one should clean it with ash water, when this medicine is not present, and you take ashes of vine wood, and pour water over them,
then let it flow, and use it to cleanse, until you know that the sinew is well cleared.
and if the patient cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor ash water, then clean him with water and honey or add a little litharge to it; or cleanse him with honey and sweet wine, which have the property of purifying and cleansing. and the wine makes the skin healthy.
and when you have done this, and you have faith that the sinew is well purified, then cleanse him with what makes flesh grow in it.
and that is by taking definite plaster, and mixing it with rose oil and wine; or cleanse him with some medicines and unguents, whose properties I have described or how to treat the unguents;
and if the abscess of the sinew is small, and the catheter of the cleanser cannot enter it. so enlarge it with a little iron, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basilikon ointment, until it is enlarged.
and if the wound is too wide, then cut and leave it so that only one point or the catheter can enter,
and if the abscess that issues pus is above, then cut or lower it to where it is. Because when the pus is in front, it does not allow flesh to remain; and if you cannot cover the breast beneath as you see so it is arranged in such a way that the bow goes to its lowest place that is.
and if you cannot cover the breast beneath as you see so it is arranged in such a way that the bow goes down slightly and does not leave anything of the bow. and take consolidative medicines to put on the breast,
and stretch it over one cloth of linen that covers the entire breast; then cover the strong spot on the breast in a pouch slightly larger than the first one, then smear soft ointment on another cloth according to the size of the depression, and place it on the breast of the breast to ease the bow and not remove the great cloth until after many days once;
and that one on the breast of the breast is often removed to remove the bow, and knows what comes out from the bow, whether it is venom or pus or enough or undigested or indigestible;
and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has extended in such a way that you see the nature that rises up on the breast of the breast, then knows that the breast is healed and approaches health;
and then loosen it in the morning or the third day, and when you loosen the wound, then change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if the breast ejects undigested bowel after many days, knows that the breast is not healed. And if subtle poisons come out shortly after long time, don't despair of health at all.
because health approaches. For there are men whose flesh does not mingle well in their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
and if undigested bowel shoots out from the breast after many days, knows that the breast is not healed.
and if the breast takes long to heal and is swollen, then apply medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue. just as defined ointment, for it has a great part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
take defined ointment, and mix it with rose oil, and add equal parts of old wine in substance;
then cook it and use it; and do the same for honey cooked thickened. when defined ointment is not present,
or take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them, and powder them on the honey when it is on the fire; and then glue it onto a cloth, and stretch it over the breast, and do not administer it to an Aristologist for a long time, and roots of lily of the heaven, which is also like fine wheat flour and hundredfold;
and roots of lily of the heaven, which is also like fine wheat flour and hundredfold; and use them as simples or compounds: grind them, and make powder, and put it on the honey that I said, and use it; and if the treatment is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment,
and if the treatment is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then knows that corruption is in its depths, and makes an impression on the bone, or hardens the members, or makes ligaments. so treat the wound of a fistula, as we have said before this.
of the abscess of the joint
Abscess is an abscess that arises beneath the joint of the little finger of the hand, or of the foot, or by chance occurs in other toes;
and when it is neglected and one does not take care, then a bad abscess comes forth, and runs and discharges pus until it reaches the root of the joint, and by chance may even go all the way around.
and comes to corrosion right up to the bone, so that it brings a stinking pain, and the toe of the foot is wide, and the color is fiery.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit at all, so it is necessary that you remove all the excess fluid that remains from the joint, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is a great help if the bone is sound and the joint is healthy;
and if the joint begins to putrefy the flesh, and starts to prick and bleed, so it is necessary that you place the thread under the joint where the flesh is pricked, and tie it up above, and remove that subtle and delicate flesh. and put on the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove all;
And if the corruption is in the bone, then remove it, and treat the wound, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it will not heal.
and if you see the toe corrupting, then remove it in one of the ways mentioned above as it was said before, then treat it until it is healed.
and if it is inflamed, and swollen, and it feels great pain, then it is necessary that you heal it first; then cut the joint of the spatula in a diagonal direction above.
and be careful that the cut does not come down to the flesh which is below the joint, for the patient would feel too great a pain;
and if it happens, then put something on top that soothes.
The toes that occur in some men's hands by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is one or two where there are bones, and sometimes there is a joint.
and some of them are born at the root of the joint, or birth in some of the toes. That which is born in any of the nails of the toe does not move, and that which is born at the joint of the toe, by chance moves.
The size of one who is fleshy is light, in such a way: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
That which is born at the root of the joint is grievous to cure: if you take it to be cut.
In that which is born or grows on the back of the toe, it is necessary that you remove the flesh around to the bone. Then cover the bone with a suitable thread to it, then care for it until it is healed.
The swellings that come together come by birth, or by sudden wound, or by burning of fire, or by similar things.
If it is necessary that you cover the swelling, then let it be repaired according to its natural forms; then put between two tents or moistened cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not stick together; or you put between two thin pieces of cloth, until the wound is closed, as it should be.
If swelling comes to any of his hands with the palm, then cover that swelling as it should be.
The vile(s)
Veins are swollen, large, and full of superfluous melancholy things that come to many members of the body;
and it is more frequent in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads than in others.
It is therefore necessary that you administer to him occasional purging with vinegar, and then heal with the oil of basil.
The iron remedy is according to two manners: one is when you cover it, and then tie up the black blood; and the other manner is that you open the vein, and let all the blood flow out.
The cutting is according to this manner: first arise the leg with hot water very strongly, until the thick blood is thinned out, then strain the patient's leg from above the knee down to the part below the kneecap; then cut the vein in one place, or two places, or three, with a wide incision,
then lift and let flow the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood has flowed out as the patient's virtue can endure.
and then bind it, and command that he abstain from meat, drinking black vinegar;
and resume the evacuation and healing when the veins are clean, and it is good for the patient.
The shaving of him is according to this manner: rise the patient's leg if there is much hair, then put him in a bath, and arise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell;
and if you do not have a bath, then heat him by the fire, and then cut in the direction of the vein from long to short at the top of the kneecap, or in the part below to the ankle;
then apply the leather to the inflammation, and scrape off the vein from each side, until it appears when you touch it;
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the leather it seems like a white cord;
then push the end down below, until it is lifted from the leather, and then bend it to the inflammation slightly;
then cut in another place above three fingers; then scrape off the leather on the vein until it appears, then lift it up to the fold, just as you did, and bend it to another inflammation, just as you did first;
then cut another incision, or more if you need it, then lift it, and cut to the toe of the foot;
then let it flow and lift up to the second incision; then pull it from incision to incision, until it flows all out, then cut;
and if you cannot make it flow and lift, then insert a needle into each strong thread doubled, and tie it and let it flow, and insert below one end, and turn your hand from side to side, until it flows out; and take care that it does not cut, for if it cuts, then one cannot make it flow or lift, and harm comes to the patient;
and when you have let it all flow out, then put moist wool on the wound in wine and rose oil; and care for it until it is healed.
And if the vein is constricted and twisted and swollen together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then it is necessary that you cut it crosswise, but do not cover it; and let it flow as we have said before.
then it is necessary that you cut it crosswise, but do not cover it; and let it flow as we have said before. The shape of the iron with which one cuts the vein is curved, and does not cut straight, so that it cuts the vein.
and it is of large curvature, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
Of the Civil Vein
This vein is situated in legs, in hot places where there are no herbs or tree, and on earth where there is no moisture;
and by chance it may be located in another place besides the leg, and this happens because of the purulence that comes from beneath the skin,
as if a serpent or worm were to come forth within the body, and then twist between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg with a very great inflammation, then the skin changes and the vein begins to come out, like the root of a plant.
When the abscess opens, then it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of cloth one and a half inches to two and a half inches, and tie it.
and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it starts to open up again, wrap it around the cloth, and tie it. and if it is too long, then cut off a part of it, and wrap the remaining part, and do not cut it at its root, until it has come out entirely. for if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh, and bring about abscess and purulence at the wound, and a bad disease.
therefore it is necessary that she be treated gradually from top to bottom, and that nothing remain in the body;
and sometimes this vein when it is treated with five or ten inches, and one man came to me, whose it issued from ten inches of length, and when you cut it, he put in one end or a pucker, and pierces all the way to the bottom.
so that all comes out; and the matter inside be emptied, and administer to the wound medicines which prevent purulence for some days, then care for it as for abscesses.
And sometimes at this vein many streams come out, and especially when it opens in the joint of the foot or on the foot itself, and there comes much pus, and it bursts forth; treat it then as we have said before.
There are worms that come between the skin and flesh.
This disease is called in our land "beef disease", because it often affects oxen.
and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and it goes up and down through all the body. and he feels it well as it moves from member to member, until it breaks through the skin where it goes and bursts forth.
and it is filled with various purgings of some humors, such as come from worms, serpents, and lice or roundworms in the belly.
and one doubts its maliciousness, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye. by chance it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and pulled out, one cannot avoid it except when it is being removed:
so then it is necessary that you bind the area above and below with a strong tie tightly.
then cut above and pull it out, and if the worm is deep in the flesh and you cannot find it, then cauterize it with fire above until it dies.
and the greatest harm that it does is that it damages the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye at the top of the head, then bind below it with a band tightly, then cut above and pull it out.
and it is necessary to use the patient in a purging of the body with soluble medicines for the bad humors produced.
and warn him against eating foods that produce purging.
Of the pain that comes from windy distension. This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes in some members, and it moves from member to member; and I have seen what I am telling you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
and soon after, I saw it rising like a worm on the shoulder. even sooner than anything else, just as sharp silver when it cuts from one place to another;
the pain departed from that place and settled in the shoulder.
and then soon after it ran throughout the body until it came to the other arm.
then she told me that it was turning around the body again, just as I saw it.
I was very amazed at how she moved from member to member in this way, for I had never seen this disease move like that before. However, I had seen many who had been known to have pain move from one place to another. but I had never seen it like that, as I saw in the woman;
and I thought to myself that it was because the woman had a dry body and her veins were uncovered. and therefore appeared the windy distension constrained;
and do not appear according to this reason to those who are delighted and have moist bodies and responsive veins.
And when you see this disease being cured, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, then bind above and below quickly, and then cut above until the constrained windy distension is pulled out. and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it at your eyes,
then treat it with those things that resist windy distension, such as fetid pills and serpentine pills, and similar others.
Of arrows.
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they fall.
The diversity of theirs is that there are those which have large points, and small ones, and those with hair-like projections, and those with rivets. and of those that have two angles, and of those that have tongues, and of those which have pieces. and the one that falls in any member falls in two ways: either in the principal member it beheads,
such as brain, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then in any place of these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you next appears: so it is necessary that you warn yourself against extracting this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many conditions. and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain is when the arrow hits it and pierces the bone, and the sac that is above the brain bursts forth. There is when there is blindness and swelling and inflammation and redness in the eyes, and burning of the tongue, and spasms and mixture of understanding, and vomiting of bile. and perhaps it is without force in the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it impairs speech and voice. and bursts forth from the moist white wound resembling pimples, and also bursts forth like a bruise in the flesh.
and if this sign appears to you, then hold off on treatment and pull out the arrow if it is not embedded.
The sign of the arrow when it hits the heart is that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it was stuck in something hard, not empty. and perhaps the arrow becomes still like a pimple, and discharges black blood, and comes with coldness and cold sweat, and fainting. know then without doubt that death is impending.
And the sign of the arrow that does not leave the spleen is when without foam it bursts forth from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and breathes high and seeks cold air.
And if the arrow hits the covering of the liver, it is below the small ribs; and it vomits great gall and great pain and breathes hard; and all the muscles of the shoulders are moved.
And if the arrow hits the stomach, perhaps something from undigested food bursts forth from the wound.
And if the arrow hits the belly, and bursts forth a piece of feces through the intestine's route, there is no hope for cure or extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes forth, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other member, such as the face and shoulders and neck and shoulder and aid of the back and spine and coccyx and heel and legs, and similar members, are safe according to several conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, so that you may do the same.
It happened to a certain man whose arrow fell into the eye socket in the root of the nose: I tried to remove it and pulled it out on the other side of the fatty earlobe, and he was healed without any numbness.
And I pulled out an arrow that fell into the fat of the eye under the parchment. and the arrow was stuck, and I could only pull it out as far as the point towards the wood. and the arrow was as long as a Turkish bow, all light iron without ears; the joint was healed, and no evil accident came to him.
And I pulled out an arrow from the neck of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with ears:
I extracted the barbs, and softened it to the point where I pulled it out, and the Christian was healed.
And I pulled out an arrow from a certain man who had been hit in the belly, and thought that he was going to die;
and then after 30 days, his condition did not change at all; I cut into the arrow, and extracted it, and pulled it out, and there was no evil accident.
And if you see a certain man to whom an arrow fell on the back, and the wound is sewn up above;
and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change his natural condition. nor found any harm in any of his natural works.
And if you see another man to whom an arrow fell on his face, and the wound is sewn up;
and remained like that without suffering great pain; and many similar ones.
And I pulled out an arrow from a certain prince of the king, who had been hit in the nose. and was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was completely stuck.
I was called to the wound three days after it was struck. I found the wound very narrow.
I searched for it with a fine and delicate touch, and did not feel it at all. and he felt pricking and pain beneath his right ear. I thought it was from the point of the arrow
I put on his arm an ointment attracting and digesting, because the swelling did not increase. and I found the arrow's point.
and I found the arrow's point. I put on the ointment every day, and the wound healed above again, and the patient remained thus for a long time.
until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose; and he told me that. I put on the wound a medicinal ointment corroding by the hand every day, until it was open.
and I tried to pull it out, and felt the head of the arrow which was lodged in the wound. then I pressed into the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow appeared visibly.
and it went across well in terms around three months,
and then the wound opened up so that I inserted pincers, and pulled it apart from one side and the other, and it could not come out.
then I did not stop subtlety and manipulating with various instruments, until I grasped it one day with well-made pincers, according to what its shape will come at the end of this chapter, until I pulled it out and restored the wound.
And the doctor judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was healed entirely.
Now I have told you the quality of pulling out some arrows, so that you put your treatment on what I do not say, for books cannot grasp everything.
but wise masters consider very little, and that which is present and failing. and nine works, and nine instruments, for the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not come out of members where they are stuck except by two ways: or through the place where they enter, or from the other side;
and that which jumps out on the side where it enters is an arrow entering soft flesh and jumping out at times.
And if it doesn't jump now, then leave it until the flesh is purged around, and the exit is cleared.
and also if it's stuck in bone and can't come out, then leave it like that for some days, and move it every day.
and then it jumps out, and if it doesn't jump, then pierce around with all subtle force, until the flesh around is stretched, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is stuck in the flesh of the body and cannot be seen, then search for it with all diligence. and if you feel it, then pull it out with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot due to the narrowing of the wound and the depth of the arrow. and there is no bone nor nerve nor vein, so the flesh must grow until the wound is great; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to which it clings;
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to which it clings; if you remove the flesh that is stuck between two parts until you can move; and then break or bend the ears of the arrow so that you can pull it out;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow so that you can pull it out; and be subtle so that you do not break the arrow, but pull it out more gently.
And if you cannot pull it out at once, then leave it until the flesh around is rotten, and then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier. And if the flowing of blood makes you unwilling, then follow what we have said about treatment in its chapter;
and beware of incising the nerve and vein, and think how you can pull out the arrow without danger;
or soon or late, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow struck him; for it is the greatest help that can be, and if you cannot, then do as the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another part, or it reveals something about the inside, or the skin is swollen in front so that one can see or feel unpleasantly;
cut then above, until the forceps can take hold, and then pull it out: if it jumps forth now.
And if it is retained in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, then leave it for now, and then resume the extraction until it comes out forth;
and if the head of the arrow is stuck, then push it all the way in.
and if the head breaks off, and you see that administration is needed, then administer one instrument carefully, so that the point of the arrow enters into the edge of the instrument; and then push forth.
and if the arrow is broken, then insert one instrument with an entering point into it, to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is embedded, then it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can. then treat the wound as it deserves.
And if the arrow strikes or pierces the back, belly, bladder, or ribcage, and it is nearby, and you can cut above, then cut;
and beware of cutting the vein and nerve, and then pull it out, and then cut the wound if necessary; and treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps with which we treat arrows are similar to the beak of a bird, and see here the shape:
And there are many kinds: great, small, and little, according to the size of the arrow.
of the common veins of the body Of the veins through which one purges are 31, from which there are 16 at the head;
that is to say: two jugular veins that are after the ears, which are called "herbech"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing; and two veins that are in the two eyelids of the two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the back of the head; and the two jugular veins that are in the neck; and the two veins that are on the upper lips of the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and the two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins through which one purges commonly are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left shoulder, and people commonly call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and people commonly call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is on the right shoulder. and people commonly call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the scrotum, and it is the one through which one purges, which appears clearly above the navel.
And the saphena vein is the one that is between the wrist and ankle, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and foot are three veins: one is below the fold of the pocket of the left shoulder, and the second saphena which is at the ankle of the right shoulder; and the vein that is called "nesse", which is in the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg are three veins below those.
The purging of the veins that are after the ears thus helps ancient cathartics and migraines; and the quality of the purger, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the quality of the purger, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and wipe the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with one turn, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two dependent loops from the head: which then goes to your side, and where you feel the pulse under your armpit, then pinch it;
then take the lancet, and push it below the vein until it reaches the bone, then lift your hand all the way along the vein above. and cut and open the skin and vein well two fingers' breadth across, and let out as much blood as you see;
then stop it and bind, until it is healed.
and I have already said the incision and cauterization in the first book.
The purging of the two arteries that are in the two temples is worth for ancient migraines, and for headaches, and accustomed to swollen eyes, and for the body of aged tears in the eyes.
and the qualities of the purger are thus as I say: and it is that the patient stretches his neck, until the two veins appear clearly; and feels the hairs below thy skin, and then signs to proceed;
then lift the key above the vein on high at thy finger's indication, and put the lancet below, and lift the vein on high, and cut it, just as you have done in two other veins, and make the blood flow according to your need;
then release the patient, and put thy finger on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton;
and then bind it strongly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their cutting and extraction, or the beginning of the book.
The bleeding from the forehead vein is worth as much as the bleeding from the cephalic vein in ancient diseases of the face, and in migraine, and in headaches;
and the quality is that the patient stretches his neck while twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fossor", whose form is:
and put the point on the vein, and strike with thy hand or other thing, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that thou seest; then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and no more than a slight inflammation.
However, it is not good that the inflammation be too great; and the vein heals across, for the bone is near, and by chance breaks the inflammation when it is subtle.
The bleeding from the two veins that are in the two eye sockets helps those who have the plague, and the itch, and the headache, and the yellow jaundice in the eye, and with diseases of the face;
and the quality of their bleeding is that the patient stretches his neck while twisting at some joint, as before;
then it heals, and the bleeding from the crossing is one pace long and one pace wide, for there is no flesh.
And if the inflammation is subtle, it may break; then make the blood flow, until you need it to stop, and then bind with cotton, and tie it well.
The bleeding from the navel vein is worth for ague, and for feverishness, and for diseases of the face, as migraine and headache that comes to the face, and similarly when it is ancient;
and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient stretches his neck, then strains his navel to thy left hand, and take the subtle inflammation long, and put it in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will begin to flow now;
and do not go too far in depth, and make the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for a night, for it is soon restored;
The bleeding from the two femoral veins helps with the constriction of the gullet, and with the beginning of menstruation, and with many diseases, and with epilepsy, and with ulcers, and with boils;
and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient stretches his neck above one and the other, as we have said; and let the master be standing on the head of the patient, and the patient sit on one seat,
then make the vein of the long one flow a little widely, then draw out the blood temperately, or as much as is needed;
then do the other side on the other vein, then loosen the bond, and stretch the veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, when the wound is healed.
Of the bleeding of the liver The bleeding from the veins above the lips helps to cure mouth ulcers, and corrupt gums, and lip cracks, and around the navel.
And the quality of the bleeding is to make the patient sit before you, and stretch his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left; and recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins: cut then one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
cut then one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, then cut the larger one from each side, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
Of the bleeding under the tongue The bleeding from the veins that are under the tongue helps after the bleeding from the cephalic vein, and it is for the constriction of the throat, and with diseases of the uvula, and with diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts up his tongue, and looks under each side to a black vein:
then cut one and the other, and do not go too far in depth, for underneath are the arteries.
The veins of the arm from which we commonly bleed are bleeding according to two methods:
or in piercing every one large, or olive-like subtle as arm-cutting, and is called "anesil"; and are large and subtle according to the width and constriction of the veins. The form of the bleeding is well-known, and is large as you see:
And it is necessary to open the veins that are covered with a thick layer of blood and are apparent, and contain much blood and turmoil; and this is the form of the olive-like bleeding:
and it is more subtle and pointed, and is for bleeding the subtle veins where there is subtle yellowish blood.
The bleeding of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly;
and it is suitable for the surgeon to bleed gently, and to be wary of the artery that is below. And if he cuts the artery, and a great flow of blood comes, then it behooves to stop the bleeding, as I have said; and one must not pierce the bleeding, but cut as with "anesil".
And if the basilica does not open obviously, then it is necessary to extract it, and change another one; Or you want any vein of his, or you open in place of him the vein in the arm: it opens obviously; and cut at the inflamed navel, as we have said.
And if you want to know the place of the vein, then it is necessary that you open the arm, so that you touch the place until you know the pulse; then mark the place of the incision and then bind the arm, and cut the vein of the inflamed navel;
and beware that you do not hit the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is the artery: thus escape then.
And if you see it flow upward as urine from a child, and the blood is red and fine, know that it is blood of the artery: hasten then, and put your thumb on length, then remove your thumb if the blood stops, as often happens;
bind the arm and leave it so, and do not move the patient; and be above fear, and do not move him until he is healed.
And if the blood is not staunched, and it beats against you, and the medicine is not present to you, then cut the artery if it opens, for the head of it retreats; and stop the bleeding.
And take a slice of fig skin, and split it, and take one half and bind it well up to the other day;
if the bleeding stops, it's good; if not, then cure him as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
and the stopping of bleeding is not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound and the power of the ligament of the arm.
The vein of the vein in the middle helps as much as it takes blood from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to beware of the nerve that is below, and if he probes too far in, and he finds the nerve, and it swells up and the wound becomes grievous, and by chance cannot be healed;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some men because of its subtlety, then it is necessary that you cut the nerves with the instrument from inflamed navel; and escape the nerve as best you can.
And if there is vein between the two nerves, then cut it along the length.
The vein of the cephalic helps, which takes blood from the head and aids the eyes;
and it is necessary to bleed in piercing the inflamed olive or inflamed myrtle, for it is the most safe of all veins, for it has no nerve nor artery below.
However, it is necessary to seek the lighter place, and do not harm anything if it does not take the first time, and one recommences; and by chance the places swell in some men, when one takes the first time, but it does not harm anything. The quality of the vein is according to your thought.
The first thing you should know about bleeding, is that bleeding is not undertaken except to preserve health,
and to escape the diseases that are coming; and let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins that are outside: that is to say, cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of prayers in spring, and after eating in autumn and winter, when the sign of repletion appears;
and one should bleed on the first or third day, after 2 hours or 3 days.
The bleeding that is administered for diseases has no fixed limit, but when the need arises in day or night, at all hours and in all seasons;
and it is not necessary to bleed children until 14 years old, nor a woman who is pregnant except for the last quarter of the seventh month. Nor should one bleed those who are over 60 years old.
And when someone wants to be bled, in whatever way it may be, then it is necessary that they purify their bowels with a light clyster; if he has many bad humors retained, so that the veins do not carry away the superfluities from the intestines which are harmful to the principal members;
nor does one bleed those who are too fat from eating meat, nor those who are drunk, as long as they are thus far gone, nor dropsical people;
and beware of bleeding after colic passion, and vomiting, and defecation from the belly, and multiple times of having sex with a woman, and labor, watching, and mourning, and all that is contrary to nature, or by something of the arm or body;
then subtlety the humors, if the blood is thick, by meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power;
then between or bath, if nothing hinders it, to subtlety the blood,
and let the bleeding from the vein of the liver be around the third, as we have said;
and keep that day free from work, and toil, and lust, and similar things;
and be light and joyful, and let the bleeding be higher in that person whom one is bleeding, and rub the arm two or three times;
then loosen the ligament above gently, for when it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow;
and then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell and one can feel them;
then moisten the bleeding spot with a little old oil, then place your thumb of your left hand on that vein below the place where one wants to bleed; so that the vein does not faint and fail when it is pierced. For there are veins that flow like strings at the time of bleeding, and some that are full of windiness; so that when one puts the pressure on the bleeding spot, it withdraws and does not open up the vein, and thus is one of those people;
and if it overflows the vein, it is too narrow a wound, therefore it is necessary that the bleeder be warned about these things.
And if the vein overflows the first time, that is good; but if not, then one recommences slightly below or above the same place in haste, unless the swelling has gone away.
And if the limb is swollen, and the patient is frightened, let it remain for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: by chance an abscess will form; do not enter into water, then resume treatment if it pleases him;
and if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtly, and you doubt that it will not flow as much blood as you see, then trust in that same opening for all the bleeding right away;
and work quickly, however swollen the limb may be; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the limb swollen, do not resume treatment right away, and put on a little bit of lard oil, for it lightens the body's blood, and is nourishing in this swollen limb.
and thus administer lard oil to each wound that you treat the veins with, in order to stop the flow of blood;
and this same thing is done with treacle and vinegar of eyes, when it is put on the limb; so subtly does the blood flow and separate when it becomes too great.
And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when it is not treated for more than once or twice, or the opening of the vein is small, so hurry, and put on the limb a wet sponge in water and in a little hot oil, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has ceased flowing from the vein, and if there remains on the limb after some days any blackness or greenness, then it does no harm; and if you see, put on some thing of aloe or myrrh mixed with the juice of camphor, ointment, or similar.
And often there appears an abscess and swelling at the wound of the basilica: then put your hand on it, and if you find the limb soft to the pressure of the hand, that is a bad sign. So be careful that you do not put on any of what we have said, for by chance the artery is cut; but make a dry poultice to harden the limb, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
And treat each blood according to its quality and quantity, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it become more subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for the one who is full and strong, and has need of bloodletting, that you make a larger wound, and be the bleeding large.
and to the one who is weak, do the opposite, and let it heal slowly and gradually, and one should heal it by cutting across, not piercing.
and this manner of healing is safe from the cutting off of blood and the tearing of nerves, and is worth more than the healing of the long or broad.
And to the one whose body needs healing, it is necessary to give moist bread in juice of green apples; if he is heated, then treat the blood three or four times.
And if he is of a cold complexion, then moisten his bread before the healing in a sweet syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-scented syrup.
And if he vomits after the bleeding, then it is necessary that he drink broth of pork and a subtle aromatic syrup.
and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
And if he wants to break his arm and heal again, it is necessary that, when he is weakened by great bleeding, he heals slowly and gradually, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
And who wants to break his arm after the first bleeding, and he has strong flesh, then he heals in 72 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And who wants to heal from another part, then he must heal on the second day or the third.
For he has a great deal of blood within the body that is already heated, and makes him bring on fever; so one must let out a great quantity, and enlarge the opening until it becomes an abscess. then you will follow all the conditions of healing, and put your hand on his pulses when he is healing, so that death does not come in place of abscess. and this often happens when the healer is neglectful;
and it's not necessary when you see that the arm needs to be freed and blood needs to flow the second time, and the opening is closed, that you press strongly on. unless he is curved, then let him extend his arm quickly, for it would be bad;
but let him heal the second time; or you put at the tip of the bleeding, until the blood that has congealed at the opening of the vein flows out. and put on a little bit of oil mixed with water, and press down lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
And if necessity requires drawing blood the second time, then let him bleed in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein on the arm is healed at the place of the wound because it is composed.
And the manner of healing is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the blister becomes red.
then it is bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, then it is healed now across, not long or broad.
and let the opening be wide, and let it heal well near the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot come out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough.
and if it is in summer, then do not put the hand back into hot water, for one puts it more in winter than in summer.
and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is no artery or nerve.
The healing of the salivate of the right hand is worth all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
strain the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is swollen, so that one can see it. and if the vein goes awry, and you cut it all the way through, then nothing hurts;
and don't go too far in depth, because the nerves are beneath the skin's layer of flesh,
and then put your hand in hot water if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
And when you have let out as much blood as is necessary, then put oil and salt on the vein to stop it quickly, and do this for each wound.
The pulse on the left hand is indicative of the disease of mouse, and do everything just as I told you for the right side.
The pulse on the forehead is indicative of all diseases that are below the body. such as diseases of the kidneys, and retention of urine, and disease of the feet, and groins, and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of his pulse is that the patient should dip their foot in hot water and rub it on the vein until it breaks. and lie above the ankle of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there go many veins.
then the pulse indicates either the largest vein or the one at the ankle that is most valuable.
And if you take the pulse above the foot, beware of the nerves that are below, and take the pulse across also as in cutting; and let the flame be anointed.
And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let it drain well from the vein.
And if the bleeding fails at first, then repeat the second time above a little bit, because the wound is salty; nor fear for nerves, as we have said, and do the same thing on the other foot equally.
The wound of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of force, and its pulse indicates the pain of the loins when it's hot blood.
And the quality of its pulse is that the patient should enter or dip into a bath and stretch above the ankle four fingers by twisting.
for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then let blood in all ways that you can, and crossing. and it's worth more than you cut, for the wound is sound, and it's very well-repaired in many cases.
and it's worth more than you cut, for the wound is sound, and it's very well-repaired in many cases. And if you don't find it, then let blood from any vein that opens or at the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves.
and let out as much blood as you see fit, and then release the ligament, and put on cotton and tie it up; it is now healed.
I assume this is a heading or title for the next section of the text? If so, I'll wait for the translation to continue.
Cups are made of horns, or lead, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
And this cupping which is not by cutting is done in two ways: either all at once, or step by step;
and two others on both sides of the neck; and the cup below the chin; and the cups on the two shoulders; and the cups above the hips; and the cups in both arms; and the cups on both legs; and the cups on both ankles; and cupping does not treat blood, unless from small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
and therefore one should not be afraid of it, as one is with vein bleeding; and it's not fitting that it be administered, neither all at once nor step by step, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
And if due to necessity of diseases it is necessary to cup, or for customs, then we administer each hour at the beginning or end of the month, and in between and every time.
for there are some who, when they need to cup, have a heavy head;
and there are those who find repletion and inflammation in their face, and on their head, and at the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and spit up blood; and there are those who see visions, and see through dark blood and hurt and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we order them to cup after three hours of the day.
The pulse of the nose is helpful for the heaviness of the head... that comes to them, and it's not fitting for this to be done after the evacuation of all the body.
and this cupping is in place of the pulse of the cephalic;
and it's not fitting for someone with a cold complexion or who has cathartic properties, because this would cause them great harm;
and therefore it's not fitting for the elderly to use it, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
And those who often recover from it become forgetful, and because of this it's necessary to put the cup a little lower down due to the fear of forgetfulness.
The cupping on the neck is in place of the pulse of the head and the cervical spine, and because of this it's worth it for the constriction of the stomach. and to splitting of the channel of the womb, and to all sorts of pains, and to repletion;
and it's necessary to push a little bit, because if it holds too tightly, it will cause forgetfulness or obstruction of the stomach and heart.
The cupping on both sides of the neck is worth for headaches, and obtalmia and migraines, and for strangulation, and for pain in the roots of the teeth.
and it's in place of the pulse of the cervical spine; and it's necessary that you instruct the patient to stretch their hand when putting it in, so as not to cut the artery and avoid excessive bleeding.
The cupping below the chin is worth for mouth diseases, and for corruption of gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it's in place of the pulses of both lips.
The scapular effusions are worth a disease that comes from heat and swelling.
The effusions of the sides are worth as much as three veins of the arm, for it drains blood from these large veins;
and instruct the surgeon not to cut too deeply in front, for the flesh is bare of fat, and there are nerves and arteries below.
The poultice that is on the backside is worth as much as hemorrhoids of the fundament, and similar diseases below, and it must be large, and made of earth, so that it can well draw out; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break through; and it would cause great wounds.
The poultices of the legs are manifestly healing, for they draw blood from the entire body, and are worth as much as the old pains of the kidneys, bladder, and womb, and restore the flowers; and they are placed above the two Sophene bones, and the two ankles, and yet they weaken the body after long use, and bring about faintness in many dispositions.
The manner of applying the poultice is to put it on first empty, and then suck in a temperate way, and apply it hastily, and move it evenly, and do not cease to do so until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the redness of the blood; then stop, and put on new poultices, and take heed of the disposition of the body, for there are some who have thin skin, and clear pores: so it is necessary to strike once only, and necessary to make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to thin out the way of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to draw out a little bit of blood at a time, we can only stand one blow.
And if we want a lot of blood, we often start again; and if the blood is thick, we strike in deep, and the end is that the veins are pierced suddenly.
and it is necessary for one who has thick skin and hard, and those with large pores, that you anoint the places of the poultices with oily and dissolvent balm. if it is in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil;
and if it is in winter, with oil of hellebore, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the superfluities are thick and cold, take bitter oil, or balsam oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
And if the one being treated has tender skin and large pores, there is no need to put any oil.
but it is necessary to wash afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or something similar.
And he who has much moisture, should rise easily with water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
And those who have thick superfluities should rise with old wine, or water of succory, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things.
and it is not necessary to use a poultice before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the poulticing.
and it is necessary that he be warned when he should be pouticed and when he is being pouticed. And beware if the one who is being treated is choleric, and if the blood is too abundant and inflamed. so it is necessary that he take cold things, such as green apples and endive and lettuce at ease, and similar things.
and mild poutings, and fatty flesh, and moist meats.
And he who has a cold complexion, should take honey syrup, and moderately aromatic wine, which is between old and new, and mild poutings, and small game birds and quail.
and the day he will be poulticed, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some men a little triticale or muscatel wine before the poulticing, or after, in order to comfort the main members. and let the blood be thinned, but it is not necessary for those who are hot to drink it.
The poultices that are applied without striking are those that are applied on the liver, and on the mussels, and podagra, and on the belly and the navel and the kidneys and the backside, for these members do not tolerate being struck there.
and it is only done to draw blood from member to member, such as we put on the breasts when the child is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, just as we put poultices on the belly and on the navel to reduce the member.
and it relieves pain when there is inflammation or swelling, and it relieves by its attractive power, perhaps the inflammation, or moves the swelling from its place.
and thus it does when one puts it on the liver and on the mussels when there is retained flatulence.
and these poultices are administered empty to suck for as long as one wishes; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water.
such as in cases of pleurisy, and in such a way that one fills the poultice with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs suitable for this purpose have been cooked.
The form of the poultice administered by fire is as follows:
And it should be about two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and have a little notch or cavity around the middle, just as one would put an awl.
and be made of earth, soft and gentle so that it does not hurt the patient when applied to the member.
and have in the middle a rod of traversed earth or iron, to put a candle pressed.
and be great and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
for the poultices for children are different from those for old people, and for thin ones from those for fat ones.
And one should thus apply this poultice to the member:
take the candle made of wax or a linen thread, and place it inside the poultice across the rod that is inside the poultice, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the bellows so it does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the member, and have the threads on the valve that we mentioned, so that when one wants to, the steam goes out, and remove the bellows;
and apply the bandage just like before, and reapply it often if you need to.
In the bellows then that is administered to patients with pleurisy, at all times, there is no rod nor valve, and it is only applied when it is full of water, and is placed on the member just once;
and this is the form:
Sutures are only applied when there is no place to put bellows because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in bare bones without flesh, such as the skull or vertebrae, and other similar ones;
and the quality of the user is that when you find sutures that are in sweet and clean water without stirring, take them;
and put them in a nut in sweet water until they become familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then be cleansed with wine and bellows, then rub the member until it is red, and put on the sutures;
and when they are full and swollen, if it is a place where one can put bellows, then put them there, because this is very good afterwards.
If not, lift the bone slightly, and then in water, very well, and then bind it;
and if the bone heals too much after the sutures are applied to the body, soak one cloth of linen in cold water and apply it, until the sutures are tightened;
and if the sutures are multiplied, put on vitriol powder or gall, and similar things, until it is tightened;
or put half a handful of peeled beans on the bone, and leave them until they stick to the bone, then it will be tightened now;
and if you need more, take other sutures.
And if the sutures will not take hold, rub the bone with fresh blood, or insert a needle and sew until the sutures come out. and then put them on, and soon as they feel the blood, they will stick;
and when you see that they are falling out, powder on a little bit of alum and silk burnt, or ashes, so they will stick now.
The book of fractures begins here;
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is a treatment for fracture and dislocation.
Know, dear son, that foolish men will fall from this chapter, for they never saw any of the old books nor read a letter;
and because of this reason is strange the science in our land, for I never found any good one;
and I know nothing except through the science of old books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experience, and by the habit of my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and have abridged it at the end, and have shown clearly the forms of instruments that are administered, just as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is therefore fitting that we say the prologue to this book, summarizing the words and chapters where wise men place their understanding and dwell on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or crushing comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, unless something else entirely prevents it, such as weakness of the body, or childhood, or old age;
or if the weather is not very cold or too hot; and I mean by cold, namely, cold joints, and flesh of hare and of goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, nor fill oneself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have doubt about aposteme hot, or spreading of matter in the member; then restore the patient to his previous governance which he has used.
And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meat that makes great nourishment, or has viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and ris, and testicles, and feet, and belly of whale, and eel, and fresh fish, and good wine, and similar things. For with such nourishment the patient is restored more quickly and sooner than the fracture.
And know that the bones of old people and those who are decrepit cannot be well taken up or joined together according to their nature due to the dryness of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
but do not care, apply a thick paste to the broken bone which sets and joins the member together, so that it strengthens as it was before; and do not leave its work, and therefore it is necessary to nourish with large meat, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is another than the fracture of the chest or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manner of fractures. For there is a fracture that occurs when an arm is broken, and another in bending, such as the breaking of a feather for writing.
For there is a fracture that occurs when an arm is broken, and another in bending, such as the breaking of a feather for writing. And also a fracture with wound, and a fracture with a small crack throughout.
And each manner has its own device, and its proper instrument in restoration, according to what memory brings it into place;
and the fracture of the bone is known by that which the joint is twisted, and it opens well by pulling apart, and sounds under the pressure of the hand;
and when there is no twistiness nor sound on touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, unless there is no fracture;
but it can well have a twist, or a crack, or a small fracture. So do not move it by hand, but put on medications that come later, and then bind it subtly.
And know that the fracture that occurs in an arm and are the two parts disjointed, it is necessary to bind them now equally, so that hot apostemes may not arise.
and if hot abscesses come, let him leave it alone for a day, until the abscess is calmed. then put it in order with the muscles that you can move lightly and skillfully, and know that the restoration of this is more gentle than the restorations of someone who has parts; then restrain it, as is fitting hereafter.
And if there are broken pieces in the bone, and they stretch over two parts, whether it is hands or feet, or at your hand if it is small members, or to two cords, or one cord and your hand.
and put the member in its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the member are separated, then reset by all means the additions to their places with the muscles that you can, and take care that through your work the patient does not suffer injury or pain.
and fit well the two joints of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel well by hand if it seems to you that it is not well: then straighten it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who bring about hot abscess and contraction in the member through their work, as we have often wanted.
And when the member is in place, then instruct the patient well not to move it, whether awake or asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and take care that the member is so secure that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, then it is not in place, and it needs to be put in such a position that it does not feel any pain;
For when it feels no pain, then it is not in place, and it needs to be put in such a position that it does not feel any pain; and take care that it is set straightly, lest tortuousness come when it is restored.
and the quality of the broken member is as I am telling you.
Know that the broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar ones; then it is necessary to envelop them in soft and subtle linen cloths.
and those that are big, such as thighs and leg: then it is necessary to envelop them in a wide and strong linen, because the wide linens encircle all the great member and restrain it from all sides equally, so that there is no gap.
then bind it around with gentle bandages, three turns or four according to the member, and hold your hand for a little on all the linen, then go above the break and restrain it less, so that the break may gradually move away from the break.
and soften the linen little by little, until you take up a great part of the healthy place, then take another linen and turn it around again above the broken joint.
then go back to the part below the break and restrain it moderately, not too strongly nor too gently, as we have said in the first chapter above.
then put between the bandages linen cloths or drapes, so that it is entirely even, then tie all above one bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, then put on something calming hot abscess and which removes the swelling, and leave it like that for some days.
then strain on top of your splints, and be made of half a well-seasoned cane, or of wood from which one makes pegs, or of palm branches, and be according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the splint you put on top of the break is a little bigger and wider than the others;
and be also as long as it needs to be for the member, whether small or great.
then strain on top of the splints just as you did in the first chapter, then tie above with a hemp thread, just as in the first chapter above the break.
the tighter it is on top, the looser it should be below; and it is necessary that the thread be medium, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen.
for if the thread is too thick, as I have seen in the works of foolish people who make their threads from twisted linen and do wrong, it is a great error, for the bandage cannot be even if it is too fine, and it does not need to have less than two fingers' breadth between each splint.
And if the patient is hurt by the joints of the splints after the straining in their healthy places, then put below them bandages of linen or flaxen cloth, so that he does not get injured.
When the wound is with the break and the sinew is torn, I will say its treatment hereafter.
And know that it is not necessary to strain splints on all the broken members at first. For when the members are large, it is not necessary to put splints on them except after five days or seven days, or more according to your security about hot abscesses occurring.
and see here the way of ancient poultices to restore breaks, dislocations, and torsions: and it is that you take flour that remains at the walls of the mill, and mix it with a great deal of egg, and put this confection, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the poultice restoring the break in several dispositions, and especially for women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another way of poultice restoring the break and dislocation and torsion: take 20 parts of absinthe and ladani and enule and asefetide and gum arabic and myrrh, 5 parts; aloes, 8 parts; and grind them into powder, and mix with a great deal of egg; if the complexion of the person is hot, use this poultice, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is worth to many people.
Another way of poultice that is worth for torsion: take mugat and vismalve, 10 parts; mirre and aloes, 8 parts; acaica, 6 parts; Armenian bolic, 10 parts, and grind well, and mix with water or a great deal of egg, and administer.
Another way of poultice for joints and bones separated from their places, and soothes the pain that follows, and the use is to cut away the bone and the break: take new linen, and moisten it with a little vinegar and cooked oil, and put it on top of the area. These poultices do not restore, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses, and properly remove the pains.
Another way to plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another way to plaster for the restoration of broken bones and to soothe the remaining abscess. Take root of wormseed, chamomile, violet flowers, rice flour, from each one equal part; grind it, mix with wine, and apply to the member that is inflamed, or mix with moist coriander water, or plain water, and use it.
Another way to plaster that is stronger than the first one, when abscess persists during the restoration of the member. Take roots of wormseed, and flax seeds, balm, melilotus, and safflower, and violet flowers and chamomile, from each one equal part; grind it, mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the warmth of the member and its rest.
Hipocrates writes in his book that one should not apply anything to a broken member before restoring it except for a compound made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says it should be between two things, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that one should apply dry things slightly warm to a broken member in order to restore it, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to make a plaster that is good for lesions and pain: take mugwort and human hair or bird feathers and wormseed, and equal parts of all, grind it, and make a plaster and the like.
And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if not, do not loosen it for three days.
And if pain comes to the place, or itching, with no rest or swelling, then hasten and loosen it, and remove the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, and lift up the place until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased. Then let the member rest for an hour, then apply dry linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind it to a nut, until you are sure that the abscess is hot.
and let the inflammation of the member rest, and the pain be removed, then recommence the gentle binding, and a little plaster, and do not strain it so hard as before; and bind gently until he is healed.
And if you see that the abscess has fully broken open and is red and painful with swelling, and you need to apply plaster and binding again, then do so again, as you did at first.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the member, then do not loosen it until after three days, or four, or five, or seven; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what is seen, until the breakage is repaired and the approximation to the skin above reaches.
Then apply the restraint more strongly than before, and nourish the flesh as I have said before; and if you see the place drying out more than is necessary, know that no pus can come. Then arise the member with hot water tea every time you loosen it, and let it be each third day, and relax a little the binding.
By this work, then, cut off the pus from the member, and hasten to do what fools do, who leave the member twisted: that is bad, and it is a painful work, and I see no other thing than to tire oneself out and work properly.
Of various ways of breaking There are many ways of breakings, and diverse forms, and the causes are destined;
for there are breakings that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone removes all the bone down to the sacrum which is below the bone, as does a hammer or a flail; and because of this it is called "hauching" or breaking.
Or the sword cuts through the bone above without piercing, and is called this manner of breaking "absolute"; and the wound from these two breakings is great or small.
And if there is a packed blow, or a split, or a collarbone break, or falling on stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a persistent breakage that approaches just below the fascia which is under the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if there is a wound that is repaired in the bone as finely as a hair, and it is a small split, and because of this it is called this break "capillary";
and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and causes the piece of bone to enter downwards, and it becomes loose like what blacksmiths do when they hammer on bellows; then the bone enters inside.
And this happens more often in those who have or had moist skulls, such as the skull of an infant.
and this happens to all these ways of breaking that small pieces are dislodged as they are, and I will speak of it in its place.
And we know all ways of breakings through the subtraction above them, and the inquiry made by probing, and by the corrupt flesh that is above.
The capillary appearance is recognized by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubs gently on top, then opens up the black breakage.
In the treatment of the breakage, take care of the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting blood, loss of understanding, extension, paleness, fever, and the flesh issuing forth and turning red, and other similar things in more or less disposition, then he cannot heal without a doubt.
And if you do not see an unbearable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the wound comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day, if you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, otherwise the skin under the bone will be corrupted, and the accidents that we have said will come.
And if the breakage of the bone comes just to the skin that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you cut through the broken part in this way: and it is that you take hold of the head of the wounded person, and uncover above the bone in all the ways you can, and on the shape of the wound as gently as you can.
and if bleeding comes to uncover the bone or abscess appears, then give the aid that is needed, and it is that you should fill the place with damp cloths soaked in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the abscess is calmed and you are assured of no further bleeding; then begin to remove it around the bone, and this is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you scrape with a narrow tool in front, and it is the shape:
And then put another instrument larger than the first one.
And the second way is that you have various instruments with different shapes, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed and made of iron, and work lightly so as not to cut the head.
And if the bone is hard and tough, it is necessary that you pierce around it, so that you can administer instruments with handles, not too deep or they will go through the bone of the skull, and should have above the point a margin or a circle, so that the point does not go beyond the bone; and you need to have several, each one fitting its own place in the shape of the bone, so that you can have handles for all skulls; and this is the form of the three ways of handles:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put a handle on the bone, and turn it to your right until you know the bone has been pierced; then place the handle elsewhere a little bit later, and do this all around, then scrape out the incisors the space of the bone which is between the pertuis, and make it as fine as possible, lightly, as we have said, so that you bring the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have, such as forceps, pincers; and beware not to touch the brain or the sacral membrane.
And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is necessary that you take up the applicator which remains of the bone to all other instruments similar to an incisor, but it must be more taut and more subtle than the other incisor;
and if there remains nothing of the small bones, or no scales, then gently loosen them with one of the instruments; then care for the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And the other way of work is that which the Gauls say, which is more sound; and he lifts it very strongly, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break is most open, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this lenticular incisor, which has the shape:
And do not cut at one place, and it is the part that is worn away on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly scrape the bone all around, and be well aware of the membrane that is below.
if it is attached to the bone, then gently loosen it, because one loosens it very harmlessly and without fear.
And if the break in the bone does not reach to the membrane, and the bone is scraped so only on top, and there are small pieces, it is necessary to smooth out that roughness, and remove the scales with a fine scraper which you should have in various quantities, in order to administer in each place what is most suitable, according to the work and figure of the break.
And take before great scrapers, and after more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
In each of the other fine and subtle breakages, it is necessary that you administer according to its direction; and this is something that is not easily understood by one who has put his study into this art.
And if the sacral membrane is exposed, it is necessary that you take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another cloth doubled in two or three layers, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so that you do not injure the sacral membrane, then administer above one layer at a time, and do not strain it too much until it holds the wound alone.
and leave it thus for one or two days until the abscess is calmed, then loosen it and administer medicines such as lily roots, and wheat flour, and incense powder, and aristology, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and administer medicine without biting.
and beware that the wound is thus clean, that you do not leave any ointment or allow it to assemble with bowels, for when bowels assemble above the membrane of the brain, they will flow and burst forth, and bring great harm to the patient; for when something biting is placed on the sacral membrane, it will necrotize above.
Take care then, if any bad accidents befall the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if nothing else comes forth except through the medicine that has been placed on it, which has such virtue, it is necessary that you take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix them with one cloth, and place it on the sacral membrane. and then care for him in ways that are necessary, until he is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or one by itself, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, but only swells or twists, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you insert your small finger or pertuis of the nose, and put equal pressure on that break inside your index finger, and at the back part by pushing forward, until the nose returns to its natural shape. and do this lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and the finger cannot reach to the place, it is necessary that you put it equal to the head of a rod, a little big.
And if the break is in two parts, do it the same way, and hasten to restore it the next day, if you can;
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is calmed, then insert at the head of the nose threads of linen, if the break is in one part.
When you thrust one thing against another, if there is a break; and let the tents be so large that they fill the holes of the night.
And some physicians say that the tents should be moistened with butter, and changed each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary for them to be moistened in the making of an egg yolk, and mill powder; then leave the tent, until the bone is hard, and the cartilages are hardened.
And sometimes it is necessary to put owl's down feathers in place of tents, and if there is a soft wrapping around, and the break is held tight, and blows on the patient; or make what you see.
And if an abscess comes forth while you are working on it, then put a poultice or wet cotton in rose oil, or in one pint of aquilion.
And if an abscess does not come forth, then put an emplaster by default, of barley flour and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk, then put it on light cauterizers, and do not bind the night.
And if the break in the night is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments for this, then sew the gash, and treat the things that are swollen, and solidifying, as emplasters and ointments suitable for this.
And if there is no wound inside the night, then care for the tents, and put poultices of cloth, until it is healed.
of the fracture of the jaw
When the jaw is broken below, and there is no wound to be found, and the break is only so far, and is not split in two, except for the cartilages inside, then one can recognize it lightly.
It is necessary, if the break is in the right part of the jaw, that you put your two index fingers in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left side of the jaw, then put your two index fingers from the right hand, and press the break inside lightly, and set it to the other hand by default, and make equal.
And if the break of the jaw is separated into two, it is necessary that you administer an extension of two parts, until they are equal.
And if movements of the teeth occur, or fracture, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw a poultice, and put on one double wrapping; and put on the wrapping a great iron band well made, or a piece of equal leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it up as tightly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see that the figure changes, then loosen it on the third day, and then put back to point what has changed; and put a poultice on, of mill powder with egg yolk or barley flour, after you have removed the previous poultice; and put on the poultice a light linen cloth, and if the poultices are dry, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is healed; many times it is healed in three weeks.
And if an abscess comes forth, then apply what we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, reward no part of the bone that has been removed; but gently remove with suitable instruments for this.
And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it by degrees according to your necessity.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and there is none left, then sew the wound, if it is large, and put on one of those poultices suitable for this, to promote flesh, until he is healed.
of the forceps The forceps breaks many times before, near the shoulder, and the break is in three ways: either it is broken and separated into two, with fragments, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
And the work is such when the break has no wound, that you have two assistants, one of whom holds the assistant that feels the broken forceps; and the other stretches the neck towards the part; then set the break to your fingers, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor imperfection.
And if you need to extend more, put under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or linen, and it should be thick according to your necessity; then stretch and lift the forceps, and strain the sphere to your hand, so that you set the break as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the forceps out backwards because it comes too far in, then it is necessary that the patient lies comfortably on his hatrail, and puts a mean bolster under his shoulder; and has the assistants lower the shoulder so that the bone of the forceps is raised.
And then direct the break to your fingers, and if you find it debris-filled, it is necessary that you split it open; and pull out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any impediment, then cut it with one of the incisors you have; but put this instrument under the forceps to guard the syphilis.
and it should resemble a spoon, and not be rough, and be as wide as it is needed, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two handles, as you see, and one wide and the other narrow, such as the fracture of the wound that you made when you cut the bones.
and when you are assured of a hot abscess, then sew the wound, and if the fracture is small, or you doubt there will be a hot abscess, then fill the wound with cloth and tents, according to its quantity.
And if a hot abscess comes forth, then soak one cloth in rose oil and vinegar, and put it on.
The setting of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a poultice of mill powder and egg yolk, and put light cauterizers on, and put a sphere under the armpit, if you need one. Then take a very great band of one palm in width, then put one double wrapping on top of the cauterizers and poultice; then take a fine steel three inches wide and long, and wrap it around that band, so that the head of the band is hanging down. and put the needle on the breakage, and turn the bandage over the healthy shoulder, and under the sick shoulder; and each time rewind it, and when you see that the ligament holds the breakage correctly, and you clearly see that the needle does not move above the broken bone, then reward it each day, and when the ligaments loosen, then hold it back.
and make the patient sit on their back, and put one small pillow under the shoulder, to lift the assistant up high; so that it relieves the breakage of the forceps by the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie them if bad accidents do not occur, for twenty days.
then reapply the poultice if you see that he needs it, and bind and leave it like that, until he is restored; and it is restored in as little as twenty-eight days, and in less to some men.
of the shoulder breakage
Not long after the shoulder breaks or becomes loose, and it is not known to be inflamed except by touch; then arrange according to the figure of the breakage, and rewind according to its natural form in all ways you can. Then put on the joint powder from the mill with an abundance of egg white, and light bandages, and put on one double cloth; then put on a wide and subtle needle, a little longer than the shoulder, and if there are hairs under the needle anywhere on the shoulder, use that hair to sew up the stitches so that the needle stays even; and then bind it tightly with a large bandage, so that the needle does not move from its place, and check the ligament each day. And every time it relaxes, bind it again, and put the needle back in its place if it has gotten out of joint, and make the patient sit on their side; and the shoulder is restored in twenty days or twenty-five. And when this number is completed, then release it, and be sure, for it is not a bone that sets itself free lightly.
And if a part of the bone appears ahead and points below the joint, then go up and cut it, and make what we have said about relieving an abscess to cool.
of the rib breakage
The ribs are sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but they often break at the end. And when it is broken in the middle, then bend downward, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks air, and everything, and by chance vomits blood, and opens up the hairline on the broken bone, and it seems to be well done.
And the restoration is that the patient sits on their back, and puts one cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the edges of the two sides with your hands, and makes it even in all ways you can, so that the figure of the bone is as it should be; then put on poultices and bandages over the subtle needle of salt or another light material, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the ligament back around to the back, and bind it tightly, and reward each hour with oil, and if it relaxes, then bind again; and if it needs to be untied because of corrosion or pruritus that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry and untie it, and remove the poultice, and address what has come there in ways of cures; then rewind the poultice, and bind until he is healed.
of the rib breakage
Know that the breakage of the ribs does not occur except in large places after the back, and at the top inside, and do not bend except because they are slippery; and it seems well to inquiry from above.
And the restoration is that you put the breakage in its place, as it should be. And then put on a poultice, and bind with a needle if you need to.
And if the breakage of the ribs is declining inwardly, then the patient feels very great pain and piercing, just like a pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and breathes with difficulty, and everything and vomits a great amount of bloody discharge, and this is a grievous illness, and the ancients have put great ingenuity.
And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that inflate the belly, in order to push the breakage to the end.
We do not do this, unless abscesses hot and inflamed come, if it has come. And if it has come, then heal it.
And some of us say that one should put cupping glasses on the joint to suck strongly, and this seems like a reason; however, there is doubt whether the cupping glass will attract the superfluities to the joint because of the weakness of disposition.
And some of us say that one should cover the joint with a moist wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make even the ligament around, then be cured by the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone piercing the membrane, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to open up on the broken ribcage, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to ward off the pus; and then one must cut the bone, and pull gently, and then sew up the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure with poultices until he is healed. And if abscesses come hot, then put on moist cloths in rose oil on the joint; and cure the joint as needed for an abscess, and be careful to sit on the side where it should be, until he is healed.
of the collarbone breakage
Occasionally comes a breakage of the collarbone, and rarely bends; and also at the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you see if he will be healed or not, then take heed if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move nor stretch, and when you press them with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that it is mortal in several dispositions, and if they are moved and feel well when one binds and presses them tightly, know that the jointure of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one puts care there.
And if something like this happens to the spine of the back, and you see if he will be healed or not, then take heed if his feet are softened, and if there is no feeling in his hands, and on his back, there is a great ventosity and egestion without willing; and when one has taken care of his belly, there is a great egestion without willing. And when he is taken care of on his back and he wants to rest, but cannot. Know that it is mortal: if one does not labor in his cure.
And if this accident does not happen to him, then it is a lighter thing.
And the cure is that you rub him if there is a warm abscess, and put oil of rosery or egg yolk on it until it is appeased; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and he should not sleep at all on that part where he feels the pain, until he is healed. And if some bones are dislocated, it is necessary to cover with a splint; and take the bone away, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if they are large, by stitching, then treat with ointment anointing flesh, until he is healed; and if the joint of the bone is broken, which is called the "joint of the cow", place your pouch on your left hand and hold it equal to your right hand at your power, then apply a plaster and an iron bandage if necessary; then bind it tight, and if there are loose bones, do so again, and remove the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the breaking of the hipbone
It often happens that the hipbone is broken, and if it does happen, then there follows a little diminishment at the head; and make it long, and decline to the nape of the neck, and comes to the patient with pain at the joint, and puncture, and swells up what has been broken.
And the restoration is that you stretch out your hand above, until you are above the breakage; and know what kind of breakage it is and its shape; and if the breakage is only at the head, then place equal to that breakage, until it is in natural form.
And if the breakage is from the length, or it declines inwardly, then make the patient lie on their belly, until the restoration of that breakage becomes apparent to you. And when you have set it equal, then put on a plaster, and then put on a wooden or horn bandage, and bind the breakage so that it does not move; and apply the joint below the ribs, until the bones are equal.
And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
And if warm abscesses come, do not touch them, until the warm abscess is appeased, and apply what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and bind it as it needs to be bound, if there is no bad accident; and that is the manner.
of the breaking of the shoulder
The shoulder is that which is between the breast and the head of the arm, and if it is broken, then it must be restored according to one of the two manners: one of which is that you take one piece of straight wood with a middle groove, in this shape:
And bind with two joints, and bend them upwards, and make the patient sit on one seat; then throw his broken arm onto the wood, until it comes to the position, and has about half a wooden curve, then bend down onto some heavy thing or have the minister stretch it downwards; then place the mirror so that the breakage is equal in his hands together, until the breakage returns as it should.
And the other manner is that you support the patient on their hatreil, and bind his hand to his neck, then instruct two ministers to have one hold what is on the breakage in their hands, and the other extend each one to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, then bind one ligament under the breakage, and on top of the breakage, and have each minister extend to their part. And if the breakage is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary to place one ligament in the middle under the seat, and another towards the breast, under the breakage; and similarly if the breakage is towards the breast, it is necessary to put one ligament lightly, without effort, until the breakage is equal on the joint, and on the breast; then make equal the breakage, as it should be, and bind it, unless warm abscesses come.
And if warm abscesses come, then do not bind it until seven days, and put on a moist linen cloth in oil of rose, until the warm abscess is appeased; then bind it, and the manner of binding is that you put the plaster on the breakage, then bring together the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or breast; and put the bandage, and bind on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in a state of rest, unless some thing hinders it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use iron bands, and put on the breakage a larger and stronger band than the others, with two spaces between each band, and have each band so large that it passes over the breakage three fingers from each side; then bind on the bands, thus as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the breakage, more strongly and less distant.
And if you see the seat of the bands and the binding, as we have said, in the work that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the warm abscess, then leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each three days the band, lest pruritus or inflammation come to the place, or numbness cannot come to the member because it is too tight. If so, address it, as we have said.
And if no such accidents come, then do not remove the bandage until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach; and put under the shoulder a pillow made of equal linen, and look at each hour of the day or night to see that the figure of the broken member does not change, or become slackened the bandages; then address it through the power of medicine, and give them food as we have said before, in such a way that the food is for the first subtle ones; and when they begin to recover, let it be thick. And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be taken up again after forty days altogether; and then one must remove the bandage and administer baths and medicines of ointments to direct the place. And if the stricture is ugly and swollen, one must wait a day or two months before removing the bandage.
I think I have been reading an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise on the treatment of a broken arm (la brisure du bras). The text is written in Old French, and it describes various methods for setting and binding a broken arm, as well as providing instructions for post-operative care.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fasciculus", from which one is small, and it supports the pouch; and the other is great, and it lies below, towards the little toe. By chance, the great fasciculus breaks alone, or the small, and by chance both together.
When the small fasciculus is broken, restoration is easy, and healing; and when the great one is broken, so is healing poor, and more grievous than when both are broken together. If it is the small fasciculus that is broken alone, then you must slightly extend it and make it equal.
And if it is the great fasciculus, then you must stretch it more strongly; and extend it on one cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the other, and the small toes lower than the other toes, so that the patient crosses over himself, with one cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient suffers no labor; then extend the minister's arm to the part below his hand, or to a strap, and another minister to another above. And then place it so that it is equal, according to its best form.
And if it is broken into pieces, then place each in its place, and if there are any that are loosened or protrude, and you cannot restore them to their place, then fashion them with a saw and an osteum, as we have said before.
And if it has an open wound from the breaking, I spoke of it in the singular chapter; then take care of it.
And if in the beginning of the restoration a boil arises, then apply one cloth made from rose ointment and white wax, which is not too hard or too soft; and bind the cloth gently over the boil until it is pacified. And then remove the ointment and put on an embalming powder with a lot of eggwhite; then put in candles, and let the candle at the breakage be a bit stronger and slightly wider than the others; and know that it should have 7 candles or arms in multiple dispositions: whether the breakage is in one bone or two; and bind more tightly over the breakage than other parts, and always less as you go along, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter. And let the cloths that are on the breakage be soft and moist, not hard or dry; and let the son-in-law, who is being bound, be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And reward the member and the strap after some days. And if some bad accident happens to the member, such as pruritus that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you bathe the member in hot water until those pruritus are pacified; and let the member rest not too tightly. And then resume binding, and if the strap is worn out and the bone loosened, and similar things, then address them.
And if the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you soften it a little and let it be thus for some days, until the swelling comes to it, and then bind it.
And if none of these things that we have said do not come to the patient, then do not loosen him until 20 days or thereabouts, and then let his hands be at his neck, and let his necks be equal, and take care of movement and gesture, and sleep on his back; and know that this breakage is restored in 30 days or thereabouts, or perhaps in 25 days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
(Note: This appears to be a title or header, rather than a sentence to translate. The text is likely referring to "De la brisure de la main", which translates to "About the Breaking of the Hand")
Know that at the back of the hand and as we have said before, there are not many breakages, but only slight ones.
And when the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient sit crosswise and sit upright in front of him evenly; then place his hand on the extended cloth, and extend the minister's fingers to the broken bones, and make them equal with the mirror, until they are well joined; and apply a poultice and bandages if boils do not arise, then put in a candle according to the quantity of the wound; and let it be wrapped in one cloth of linen.
And if the breakage is at the parting around the belly of the palm, then make a sphere of cloths and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken palm; and then bind it with one long cloth, and let the candle be as high as the palm of the hand, and bind it, as necessary.
And if the breakage is at the outside, then it is necessary that you put a candle on top and another below in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and stop the strap between the toes.
And if the breakage comes to one of our toes, such as the little toe, then make it equal, as necessary; and bind it with the palm, and see if you put a small straight candle to lift the breakage, and does not move; and if the breakage is at another toe, such as in the index or one of the others, then make it equal, and tie it with the healthy toe that follows; or you tie them all together in one holding, whichever is better, or you put a candle on top, like the little toe; and take care in the restoration and disposition of hot boil, and support what comes, as I have said.
(Note: This appears to be a title or header, rather than a sentence to translate. The text is likely referring to "De la cuixe brisie", which translates to "About the Broken Toe")
The bone of the toe is many times broken, and well one sees when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is such that you tie one strap above the breakage, and another below. And the patient lies on their face, then each minister extends their strap to their equal part; and this is when the breakage is in the bone.
And if the breakage is near the root of the toe, then one strap should be towards the thumb, and another strap below the breakage. And similarly if it is near the ankle, and then the straps should be on the ankle, with the extension downwards; then place the mirror so that the bone is equal in its two hands, until it is according to its natural figure, and then apply the poultice, and tie it, unless boils arise.
And if there is hot boil, then let it subside and then return to your work and care; the treatment is done in this manner. Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doubl en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus los de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal lestrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins lestraint; puis enten as .ij. chis dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et lestraint, si quil ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis kil ni vient ne aposteme ne enfleure nautre semblant.
If there are pieces of bone that cause pain, then it is necessary to smooth them out if possible; and if not possible, then it is necessary to split the area open and pull forward; and the wound should be treated as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the box is broken like this, so that one puts stones in it, as in the aid and in the arm; nevertheless, in the restoration thus made, the patient does not remain sound.
And know that the box is restored in 1 day, or a little less or a little more, according to the various complexities.
from the hollow of the knee
Know that in the hollow of the knee there is slight breaking, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, then it is only a cleft or a perforation, and it happens to all wounds, and without wound, and this one knows well.
And the restoration is such that one places equal parts on both sides of his knees, as long as it can be assembled; then put the ointment and place a round stone there, if you need to, and hold it as it should be held, then reward all the arrangements we have said in other breakings, such as abscesses, hot and similar things; and apply to each accident what is needed, until it is healed.
from the breaking of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "mustelz" and the other is called "foscile"; and it has all the same breaking as when it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and all the work is done there.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
And if the subtle bone is broken, it then bends forward.
And if the thick bone is broken, then one feels great pain and sees it well; and it bends downward. Then apply an extension, and place it evenly, and tie the bandages equally; but nevertheless, it is necessary to consider whether the breaking is ugly and there are multiple pieces, that the extension be minor and lighter; and bind according to your strength.
And when you have completed all your work, then take two pieces of beech wood that border the leg on both sides and are as long as the leg from the knee down to below; then wrap in two places one bandage above and another below, and tie it in the middle just so, and at this point the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus is well; and some administer a splint of beech wood along the length of the leg, and it is of beech, and one puts the leg to prevent movement, and properly do what is done in the breaking where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident; then treat it until it is healed.
from the breaking of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no breaking, but sometimes the bones of the foot break and the toes a little, and there is only slight damage in one or more positions.
And if the bones of the foot break, and you see these bones rising one above the other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if it were going to walk; and then place your foot now on his seat, where the bones are lifted up, then press it so that they return to their places; then apply the ointment and bandages above, and below the belly of the foot a small piece of cloth at two full hands, then bind it to the ankle properly, then wrap drapes around and other things you may need.
And when three or four days will have passed, then loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are some broken toes, then restore them, just as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place on each broken toe a stone according to the length of the toe, and make it slightly larger, then put beneath the foot that cloth I mentioned earlier, and bind it properly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken toes, then place a stone on top of each toe according to its quantity, wrapped in one piece of linen, and tie the cloth beneath the foot; and let it be so that the stone is above the chief of the cloth, outside the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.
And it is necessary that you not forget the other things I have said about other breakings, as we have said; and apply to each accident just as it requires.
from the breaking of the bone of the thumb
When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, make her sit with the hip enlarged, then lean her towards the back part and hold her by the rear; then fill the natural crevice with cotton, and put in as big as one stone; then lift up the woman, and slowly raise the back a little bit, and then let the cotton come to the entrance of the nature, and return the bone with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back in, and thus do for seven days or around: the breakage will be restored, and if you see, take a sheep's bladder, tie a cord to the perforation, and fill the whole bladder with nature; then blow into the cord strongly, until the bladder is inflated inside: the nature will return to the breakage; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thumb of a man or woman is broken, restore it in the same way as we have said for the bone of the hand; and these breakages are not hidden from him who sets his study and use upon them, and attends my book. For the breakage signifies the right path to restoration in many dispositions: understand this then.
In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's gizzard and put it in the penis; then wrap bandages around it, and let it be for three days or so: and it will be healed quickly.
from breaking with wound
It is necessary for one who has breaking with wound, whether it be great like the bone of the box or of the shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the wounds we have said bear witness to it.
And if the wound heals, then apply vinegar to it, if you have nothing else; and then begin again to restore the breakage at the same hour or on the next day, unless gangrene comes.
And if the abscess is calm, then leave its restoration until the ninth day, so that the abscess may be appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring a bad accident.
And if the broken bone appears above the skin uncovered, then it is necessary that you set it slightly to your hands in small extension.
And if the extension is not suitable for setting equal to your hands, then reset it with this instrument of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches in length, and its width according to the size of the wound; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take 3 or 4, according to his need in each treatment of breaking; and be strong and a little thick, so that it does not bend under compression on the member at your work, and be curved forward, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche", for which it is necessary that the curved bone be placed on top of the apparent bone; and fill it once, until it returns, and be even one against the other. And if the breakage is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then you must file down the top of the bone, until the instruments have possession.
And if you cannot bring the bone back as we said, then file it down with a suitable instrument, such as a chisel or gouge, to your ability; and then remove what remains in the bone from roughness and small splinters.
And when the bone is restored and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. So do as much as you can to get it back into place, then soak one cloth in black stiptic vinegar and properly apply it; and do not put cerote or any other ointment on the wound if there is oil, lest it bring infection and corruption; then administer these when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and file down the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound does not become constricted with the breakage; and many times this has been done by foolish doctors, and they have brought death or corruption upon the patient sometimes; and the bandages should be softer and more gentle than for other breaks.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents may not come, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it is not necessary to put on these; but wrap around hard cloths instead of these, and tie them. And when you see after one day or two days a boil forming on the wound, then remove what you have placed on top of everything with wine, and apply healing ointment for wounds, such as tetra-pharmacum ointment and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you bind the member twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is bound up and healed.
And it is necessary that the members be aligned in such a way that the boil runs down smoothly.
And if many days pass and it cannot heal but instead returns to boil, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which it is necessary that you carefully clean the wound with a tent, and remove all these unnecessary fragments that bring back that pain.
And if an abscess or other corruption comes to the site, you must treat it according to what is written in this chapter before. And when the bone is broken and appears on the member, just like the bones of the hip or shoulder, and similar ones from the great members, do not move it at all, for many times death ensues, but leave it until it has purged; perhaps it will fall away after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
of boils that come on the swelling
We often see many times after the healing of the breakage, even when it is near the joint, and it is a bad thing to see the shape of the member; and by chance the member cannot perform its natural actions.
Therefore, take care if you have fresh ones: administer stiptic medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acaica, and similar others, in the same way that you take any of these things or all together, and mix them with black vinegar or with abundant egg white or with oil; and put it on the night in cauldrons, and tighten it well, and do not release it for many days; then release it, and start another one, until the swellings are removed; or you strain it on a piece of well-made linen; for the properties of linen are that they remove all swelling from members; and if the swelling has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then file it down, and make the excess apparent; or you give it to any scraper until it is removed, and cure it until it is healed.
When the bone breakage is restored and remains after the member weak and subtle, it happens for many reasons: one of which is that it was tied too tightly, and not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many ties, and could not come to the nourishment of the member; or because of excessive inflammation; or because of too great movements, nor in its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat and keep the body soft, until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths, and give him joy and comfort; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice draws towards great nourishment, and often washes with lukewarm water, until the nourishment runs to the member; and revives it to its natural figure.
of the twisted member after healing
When the member is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone appears, and the shape of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the member anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and great evils come from it, and by chance death ensues; however, if the swellings and torture are fresh, then it is necessary to rise them with hot water, or herbs that soften, such as vervain leaves, roots, and mellilot, and similar things; and make a softening plaster, such as dyaquilon well made, and take the mucilage of vervain, and mix it with hen fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on it; or you take fatty figs, and grind them with colon flour, and similar medicines that reduce inflammation.
And at times, the swelling is removed due to constant and continuous stroking with wet hands. And there should be gentle movement in each member every hour.
And if the curvature is hardened and indurated, like stone, and needs to be cut away with iron, then it must be covered just up to the bone, incised slightly by a subtle instrument; and attention and study should be placed in the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and great injury.
When dislocation comes to someone, then it must be immediately brought back into place without delay.
For if one delays, the swelling will increase, and by chance, if it is reset with points on the swelling; therefore it is not good to move it at all until it has subsided: many times spasms and other pains ensue;
However, when this occurs, make the patient well first, then leave him alone until the abscess is pacified; then arise the member with warm water and oil, then move it slightly, and treat each member as the treatment comes into its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations to the end of this book.
of jaws
It often happens that the jaws are dislocated downwards, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: or they are a little pulled out of their place, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and surrounds his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns through a few gentle movements.
And if she is complete and accomplished, then you must immediately set her back in place without delay;
and in such a way that the assistants hold the patient's head, and insert the mirror's pouch of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and with the other two hands be at the side to make equal; and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them all around.
And the mirror sets it even, until it returns to its place.
And if setting it back is difficult, especially if the two jaws are together, then rise them with warm water and oil, until they can be moved slightly; nor delay in setting it back, as we have said.
And when they are returned to their evenness, and the patient's mouth closes well with some softening, then place moist cloths on them in a poultice made of rose oil and wax, then bind them lightly with soft linen.
and the patient sleeps on their back, and their hands are placed between two pillows, so that they do not move to the right or left, nor do they make any effort to lift, but take light food until the pains are gone, and the jaws are numb.
and then ease off a little as they wish, and do not trouble themselves with opening their mouth to eat or drink, until the jaw is well numb and healed.
And if the two jaws cannot be brought back to their point within an hour, and are not converted to their place, then fever and accustomed sweating come, and by chance, belly trouble, and by chance, vomiting of pure gall.
And when you see this, then know that it is a judgment; and many times the person who has it dies within eight days.
of the shoulder
The shoulder cannot dislocate from the side towards the back of the body and the chest, and is dislocated sometimes to the front, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, stretches out their arms; and then presses the shoulder strongly with your palm, and it will return; then place a poultice and bandage it, and bind.
and the head which is towards the back cannot dislocate; if not, and if it does dislocate once, then set it back in its place, as we have said; then place a poultice and bandage it, and bind, and instruct the patient to rest until they are well.
and in the same way, bring back the shoulder of the spine when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one of which is when it dislocates at the part of the arm bone below; and the second is at the part of the chest; and by chance, dislocates at the part above, and this happens rarely.
and does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor does it dislocate inwardly for the nerves; and many times dislocates downward towards the arm bone, especially in those who have little flesh, for in them it jumps out quickly; in those who have enough flesh, it jumps out a little and returns a little.
And by chance it happens to some men that they are percussed or crushed, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
It therefore behooves you to examine it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that the dislocation when it is downward towards the arm bone, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them the diversity manifest. and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the arm bone to the toucher the top of the shoulder, as if it were an ox; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their neck, nor move with any movements.
and also, if it is dislocated above, then it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the touch.
and this way of dislocation is not good to set back when it is new or if the patient is ill.
And the way is that the assistants lift the patient's hand up high, then place their poultices below the arm bone, and lift the jointure to its place by force above; and the assistants lift the hand, and stretch it up high, then put it back down; so it will come quickly.
And if it doesn't come as we said within three days after, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and the assistant should anoint with gentle and soothing oil, such as a decoction of althea, fenugreek, and melilotus in water, and bring it to them.
Then instruct the patient to sit on their back, and put a woolen pad of equal thickness under them, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the mirror at the patient's heel on the pad, and lift the shoulder vertebrae properly, and guide the patient's hand.
and another assistant holds the patient's head, so that it does not move downward; now the shoulder returns immediately, and if you see that it resets in this manner:
and it is that you make someone who is one head taller than the patient to be present, standing on the side, and pushes the patient's shoulder under their own armpit, and lifts the arm up, so that the patient hangs in the air. and another assistant guides the patient's hand downward towards their belly. And if the patient is too light, then let them carry something heavy with him, and the dislocation returns now.
And one resets it in another way: and is that one places a long iron rod in the ground, whose head is as round as a pistol, and neither too big nor too small; then place it under the patient, but so that he has stretched out soft cloth on top, and the patient's arm is still of the length of wood; then extend his hand downward from the other side in this way, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not return despite all that we have said, then perform this cure: take a rod of two arms length and three fists width, which has the head rounded so as to enter easily into the armpit under the arm, according to this shape:
then wrap it with soft cloth on top of the wooden head, so that the wood does not hurt the patient, then place it under the arm of the patient; and extend your arm over the rod's length, and tie the assistant's hand to the rod, and the arm at the shoulder of the hand, then put the arm on one side of an eschillon from a large sieve, and let the hands hang down, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is so, however it may be, then it is necessary that you put under the armpit an equal woolen sphere, then place the ointment around the armpit with powder from the mill, with incense and hen's egg yolk, on all of the shoulder and around, then hold it under the armpit in a way, and turn the bandage around the ointment, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he mends little by little, until the members are comforted, for it will heal sooner; and then mend more after five days or seven, and move him; and if it is firm and has not become softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come in, or for another reason, then it is necessary that you administer cauterizations at three punctures, as is written before the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this and after seven days it does not hold, and the joint is not held, nor can he lift his arm above, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the breast, or the shoulders, or behind, is made by thrusting and stretching with hands, and another treatment is administered; and heal until it is healed.
And if after healing comes stiffness in the member and tardiness of movement, then the patient should take many baths until that stiffness is alleviated, and returns to its original nature.
of the shoulder dislocation
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated in points, and returns to those points; and if it is dislocated from all sides, and especially before and behind, and the dislocation is not returned, because one sees well and feels well; and reset according to each figure. And when you join the sick shoulder with the healthy one, then it is apparent to see. For the joint is distorted, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it in such a way that the abscess does not come to life, for if the abscess comes to life, then it would be grievous to reposition; and by chance it cannot be completely repositioned from all sides, especially when it is behind; it is worse than other dislocations, and brings more pain, and by chance there comes death.
And the restoration is this: when it is such that one can reset it, you stretch his hand to your two hands; and his arms are spread out, and his hands of the mirror according to the shoulder around, above, and below, and bring the joint to its roots together, or to the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and brings the joint to the root of the palm that is out of place.
And if it does not return to its place, administer strong extension; and know that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it tight with their hands, so that it does not move at all; then turn the arm on each side, after you have wrapped a double-length and wide cloth.
and when the mirror has joined the joint to its hand, it anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, then presses the joint firmly until it returns.
and when it is back in place, apply dry ointment with hen's egg yolk to it, and hold it firmly, and let the arm rest at the patient's neck for some days, then release it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then release the bandage, and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then reapply the ointment and the bandage, and let it be thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
And if he feels stiffness after the repositioning of the joint, and it swells, then bathe him and rub him gently, and press until he is relieved; or you put a sheep's fat snow on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath. and when he sweats, then gently rub the joint, then put the snow back on, and then enter the bath; and thus do it two or three times, until he is healed; and if you see that, then put a moist marshmallow warmed with butter on top, and apply it; and it will return to its natural state.
The dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand is undone, and the swelling is slight, more than in other joints Nevertheless, it ought to be brought back into place quickly, in the same moment as it is dislocated, so that the swelling does not increase or an abscess forms hotly.
And the bringing back is that you put the ailing hand on a table, and stretch out the fingers of the hand, and place the arm straight, so that it puts its palm on the appearance of the joint, and push until it recovers.
Nevertheless, you should look to see if it is well in place; then put the patient's back of their hand on a table for stretching and bringing back. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the patient's back of their hand on the table, and place your hand on that appearance of the joint. If it comes back now, it's good.
If not, then strain emplastrums soothing abscesses hot, and leave it thus without re-starting.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, the joint will remain twisted.
and nothing else harms the patient except that his hand is swollen and he cannot grasp anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut or the arteries; if there is no other remedy except to strain through cauterization in the case, and by chance it may be of no use.
And when the hand is back in place, put on the emplastrum that we have said, then strain and leave it for 5 days, then release and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well and there is any stiffness, then bathe it in hot water and rub it until it is healed.
The dislocation of the fingers of the hand
At times the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, at times at the back of the palm or in the belly.
Then straighten the fingers and push the dislocation back into place as far as it recovers, then support the tip of the finger and bend it towards the part where it is disconnected.
and leave it for 2 days, and then put it back in place on that day; and tie the nut, as we have said, and release it each day, and make it move, and tie the nut again; and do this often until it is tight.
and do the same thing if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before until it is healed; and do the same thing when it is dislocated on the other side.
of the dislocation of the hip of the back
When the hip of the back or of the neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no remedy, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that evacuations shoot forth without will, nor can it be held, and many times some member becomes softened, or both thighs, or one arm.
And often the hip moves to four parts; that which moves at the back is called "herniation".
The cure is that you reward if the herniation has come from childhood: if there is no remedy nor healing of the whole thing.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cure say it is done with great words, but there is little benefit in all.
but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have fashioned instruments in various ways.
I say that in the herniation that comes forward at the breast, there is no remedy nor healing.
and similarly that which comes straight down in two sides, and one can only cure the one that properly comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient should be stretched out on their back in one place equal, and have strain below them, so they do not get hurt.
then drive one stake into the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and bind a cord around the joints of the patient, and one at the hips, and knees, and ankles.
and two servants know the cords, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes.
and be well closed, the stakes as we have said, and the physician put their palms on the spine firmly, until it recovers.
And if it does not recover by this cure, then take a board three feet long, and hollow out the bottom part, and the patient should be on their side, and push the head of the board onto the back part, then put the middle of the board on the spine. and the physician put their feet on the other head of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, then do it at the turn that turns towards the hand.
And it is that you drive two stakes at the head of the patient, one arm's length apart, and towards the feet, two others, and between each stake, a palm's width away.
and have in each stake one hole, where the turn goes, and let the stakes be firmly driven into the ground, so that they do not move; and between each pair of stakes, have a third stake turning, above which the cord turns, and have two small stakes, one arm's length apart, to help turn the turn.
and then bind the cord that is between the joints to the turn at the head, and another cord to the other turn at the feet, and each of the servants turns their turn all along the cord, and the master puts the spine in place as we have said.
And when it is even, then put on a drying emplastrum with an abundance of egg, and then bind with cloth, and then apply an ointment from a tablet three feet long that will fill the place of the hernia and the part of the spine to heal, then bind with a cord, as we have said, and use subtle nourishment on the patient until they are healed.
and if nothing comes in the end of healing, then it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines, with the ointment that we have said before; and sometimes one should give a piece of plover.
and sometimes the appearance comes in the back part of the spine of the back, and one thinks it is a dislocation; and this is the bone that opens up, for which one should not have any assumption: by chance it could bring death.
Dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder do not come apart except for dislocations alone, nor does it happen like with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated in four parts: inside and outside, and before and behind; and more so inside than outside, and less so before and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the afflicted leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and appears more prominent in the patient's knee than in the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee to the fire. and it is the lump that is below an inflamed abscess hot, because the head of the crotch comes loose.
And the sign of one to whom it happens in front is that this accident is contrary to those before.
And the sign of one to whom it happens in front is that his leg is well shaped according to its completion; however, he does not bend his knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot go forward, and retains his urine, and swells his ankle, and when he goes, it passes over the heel.
And the sign of one to whom it happens behind is that he cannot straighten his knee, nor bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the crotch is at the level below the ribs.
The remedies for this resemblance of dislocation are that you should wait if the dislocation is old and it remains according to its condition, so there is no need for care; and it does not behoove him to have presumptuousness.
And in the one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of three manners of dislocation, you should hasten to turn the joint, and stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; by chance it will return, and there will be no need for another cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, you should summon a strong servant and stretch the leg strongly to two hands, or to one strap that is tied above the knee; and another servant should extend his hand above in such a way that he places his hands under his armpits, then tightens the strap with a soft cord above the crotch; and another takes hold of the head of the strap.
and they should all stretch upwards and downwards at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at one time, and remains suspended.
This manner of stretching is common to three similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If not, it is necessary to set a cure for its similarity. When the dislocation is in the pubic region, you should place the patient on their healthy side, then put the strap above the root of the crotch, and the lump that is below the ankle, then stretch the strap up towards the ankle and towards the groin.
then take another servant's arms and wrap around the swollen lump of the afflicted crotch, and stretch it out to the back strongly: it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this manner as we have said, then you should bind the two legs of the patient together with a strong soft strap on the two heels and on the two knees, and the afflicted leg should be stretched one finger's breadth more than the other.
then let it hang on the head of a beam, and be above the ground two arms long; then command one servant to wrap around the chief of the crotch, and have another servant hanging with the patient, who wraps around the crotch strongly, for the joint is returning now quickly.
And when the dislocation is in the back, the patient lies down as we have said in one with gilbies, and stretches one strap properly on the afflicted leg and also on the hip.
then put two pokers, one at the head and one at the hips, then insert one poker between the patient's thighs in the form. and have damp cloths wrapped around him so that he does not hurt the patient, then stretch each servant towards him, and the physician places equal weight on his hand against the dislocation.
If it returns, that is good. If not, place him on the table and press him thus as we have said in the gilbies, and the patient lies down on their healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the afflicted leg quickly and according to what I have said; and place the physician's hand on top of the painful ankle, then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the back, it does not behoove to stretch the patient down or lift him up on the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip were dislocated in the back, as we have said about lying down on two hips. and be on his face, and the strap should be stretched as we have said before, and he must not press on the joint at the table.
and it will be at a point when the patient stretches his legs and they are equal; then bring the crotch together and put in an emplastrum, and strain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
and if he repose for three or four days, then loosen the bandage and put in an emplastrum; and if you see that they are equal, strain as before, and leave it. Three days; then loosen the bandage and let him go gently, until the limbs are comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate in front.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend their leg to their crotch, and if it does not straighten to its natural position, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and stretch their leg if they can, and place your back on their face, and put their foot on your feet.
then take their knee in your hands and draw it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee strongly; and have another servant stretch their foot until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that they straighten their leg slightly.
et put the poultice on, and make the leg fit to the socket, and bind them together strongly for .iii. days or iv., then loosen it; and do not bother the patient to walk until the limbs are comforted.
And if the limb is not straight, then administer stretching strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the sciatic nerve, until it is healed.
of the dislocation at the heel
The heel is sometimes swollen and sometimes completely drained out and empty.
And the signs are that the ankle is inflamed, and tender before the part where it is drained.
the return movements are lighter, and one should stretch them lightly with their hands when it is only swollen.
And when it is completely drained, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit straight, and have one servant hold him by the leg, above the ankle;
then bring the foot to you and hold it in your right hand, and then in your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and put the foot back up high;
and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, then restart the work, for it will return;
and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and place one piece of wood firmly in the earth between his thighs, and bind cloth around, so that he does not hurt the patient;
then hold the thigh with one servant, and have another servant stretch the foot to their hands or to a strap, which they bind on the calf of the foot; then stretch each servant equally, and the straps should be between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when you are stretching them;
then put the mirrors equally on the dislocation in their hands, and another servant holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is in place, then put the poultice and bandages on top, and bind strongly, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the strap is not too tight.
then leave it for two or three days, and if the strap loosens, then tighten it again; then release it on the third day or quarter, and advise the patient not to walk for four days; and if he walks before that term is reached, it is not certain that he will not drain again.
And if abscesses form and come, then it is necessary that you heal them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
knees
When the knees are drained, then it is necessary to stretch them gently without effort, and that is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any knot of the back of the foot, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on one level or on one table altogether straight, and put your foot on what appears to be these joints, then press with your foot strongly, until it returns.
and when it is equal and there is nothing apparent, then put a table under the sole of the foot two inches, and bind strongly, and leave it for three days, then release it; and make it rest, until it is healed.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often happens that the patient dies:
so do not be presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow, rather not hasty.
and use gentle things at first to soothe the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health. and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, just as the abscess is coming.
and when the limb is back in place, then administer soothing things to the abscess, and treat the wound as it should be, with dry ointments.
and if there is a break in the dislocation, and small bones are separated, then set them, and do what we have said about simple diseases.
and take care not to enter into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for this is worth it in accordance with your Creator, and for the wisdom of arming yourself and your body. Amen
